$1.25  per copy


CANADIAN
liTERATURE
N°·23





MODERN  CJINJIDIJIN POETS


Articles

BY A. W. PURDY, DONALD  STEPHENS, D. A. CAMERON, PETER STEVENS, JOHN ROBERT COLOMBO

Recollections

BY DOROTHY LIVESAY

Reviews

BY ROBIN  SKELTON, FRED  COGSWELL, LEN  ANDERSON,
RODERICK HAIG-BROWN, GEORGE  ROBERTSON, DAVID WATMOUGH, FRANCES M.  FRAZER, GEORGE  WOODCOCK, M. W. STEINBERG

Annual  Supplement
CANADIAN LITERATURE CHECKLIST,  1964



A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW









SURVEYORS AND NATURAL HISTORIANS




LITERATURE  IN   CANADA   has  become  like  a  land  rising  out  of the  sea,  over  which   the  surveyors  march   with  rod  and   chain,   recording their observations almost  before  the  soil has had  time  to dry  out.  Here  I do not  refer to such tasks as reviewing and  criticism, which are normal processes of any literary society,  but  rather to  the  vast  activity  which  takes  the  form  of assembling  and arranging information. This   publishing   season  in  particular  there  is  a  notable influx  of the  kind  of books  that  cultural surveyors  produce, books which  no one is  likely  to  read   for  entertainment, sthetic
which,  standing on  the  right  shelves, become  useful tools for critics and  scholars.
Two  such  compilations, fresh  from  the  press, are  on  my  desk as I write,  and more,  according to the  publishers' announcements, will shortly  arrive. Neither  of the  volumes  which  I now  mention will find  much  of a  market outside  the  uni­ versity  libraries,  and  both  have  been subsidized  by the  Canada Council  to make their  publication possible.  The first is entitled  The  Humanities in Canada  (Uni­ versity  of Toronto Press, $6.oo), and  has been  prepared by F. E. L. Priestley.  It is, by  confession,  a  restricted survey,  made,  as Dr.  Priestley  indicates, "without seeking  out  the  humanities in  the  larger  community." This  limitation-while no doubt  it may  have  some  justification  in difficulties of space -is a serious one, not only because  exceptionally fine work is being done in the humanities by insti­ tutions   and   individuals outside   the  universities,   but  also  because   the  kind  of encystment of the  universities and  of university scholarship which  such  a division promotes  is both  artificial and  unhealthy. It leads, inter  alia, to the  humourless over-valuation  of  academic trivia;  for  example,  articles  on  "Place  Names  of Kentucky Waterways and  Ponds,  with  a Note on  Bottomless  Pools"  and  on "An

3

EDITORIAL



Early Use of the Feminine Form of the Word  Heir"  are recorded in the Bibliog­ raphy  of Scholarly  Publication  which  takes up  two-thirds  of the  volume,  while important books by non-university scholars-such as John  Morgan  Gray's  re­ cent  biography  of Lord Selkirk-are not  mentioned.  Even  the coverage of the universities is incomplete;  on  a  first quick  glance  through  the  pages I  noticed the  absence  of  three  abundantly   published  Canadian  scholars  in  the  field  of English Studies alone.
Much more directly concerned with literature  per se than  Dr. Priestley's volume is a new biographical dictionary, Canadian Writers-Ecrivains Canadiens (Ryer­ son  Press,  $8.50), compiled  by Guy  Sylvestre,  Brandon   Conron  and  Carl  F. Klinck.  This  bilingual  volume  presents  the  essential  biographical  and  biblio­ graphical  facts  concerning  those 325 writers,  in  English  and  in  French,  whom the authors  of the  dictionary  regard  as the most significant in  our double  tradi­  tion. The  selection  of subjects is good;  almost  every one of  them  is justified by either  literary  quality  or historical interest.  However,  it  was  hardly  wise of the compilers to go beyond  the presentation  of factual  material if  all they can offer in  addition  is the  kind  of capsule  criticism  which  is  neither  epigrammatically  pointed  nor  gnomically  profound.  We are  not  much  better  informed  when  we read  of Daryl  Hine,  for example:  "An  academic  poet,  versatile in prosody and fluent in the language  of symbol and myth, Hine presents in his vivid and haunt­  ing  lyrics  disparate  aspects  of experience",  or,  of  Wilfred  Watson,  "Watson's sensitive awareness  of the tragedy  of existence  and  his warm  humanity  are evi­ dent  in  all his work."
Canadian  Writers is the forerunner  of that much  more massive work, prepared also under  Dr.  Klinck's  direction,  the  Literary  History  of  Canada,  which  may have appeared  under the University of Toronto imprint  by the time this editorial is actually  in print.  From what we have seen of the advance  proofs of this work, written  by a  considerable  team  of scholars, its  publication  will undoubtedly  be an  event  of  major  importance  in  the study  of letters  in  Canada; in  our  next issue we shall devote a special feature to considering the extent of its achievement.
While these native surveyors have been at their useful work, the plump, urbane figure of a famous literary natural  historian has appeared  on the same terrain  to observe its exotic  fauna.  The  American  critic  Edmund Wilson, still expressing hurt  dismay that  not everybody in Canada  agreed unquestioningly  with his judg­ ment  that  Morley  Callaghan  was in the same league  as Turgenev,  has  recently published  in the  New Yorker  a trio of long and  discursive essays entitled  collec­ tively:  "0 Canada: An American's  Notes on  Canadian  Culture."

4

EDITORIAL



Undoubtedly the  striking  aspect  of Wilson's  look at  Canada is the  fact  that, to this American litterateur with  strongly  social inclinations, the  most interesting part  of  our  country was  obviously  Quebec, and  the  most  interesting Canadian literature  that   written  in  French. The  second of  his  three essays  is  devoted entirely   to  a  study   of  French-Canadian  fiction;   the  third   to  an  enquiry into French-Canadian  nationalism and   separatism  in  their political rather than literary  aspec:ts. Even  the  first essay, which  has something to say about  English­ Canadian  writing,  is  heavily   overshadowed  by  Wilson's   great   preoccupation.
Canadian Literature and  A. J. M. Smith's Oxford  Book  of Canadian Verse  are
brought in  as  bilingual  publications, and  the  two  novelists  with  whom  Wilson deals lengthily-and well-in this essay are Hugh  MacLennan, with  particular reference  to his concern with  the national identity  of Canada and the two solitudes it  contains, and  John   Buell,  Montreal author of The   Pyx  and  Four  Days,  who thinks  of his own  work  as French in spirit  and  whom  Wilson describes as "a  good bridge   for  a  transition  to  French   Canada". In  considering Smith's  anthology, Wilson  deals  equally  with  French and  English  writers,  and  spends  as much  time
on  Emile  Nelligan  as he  does on  E. J. Pratt.
In  other  words,  Wilson  devotes  about  five-sixths of his space  and  attention to French Canada  and  one-sixth  to  English  Canada. Whether this is the  most  in­ formative  presentation  for  American  readers   I  cannot say,  but  it  is  certainly salutary  for   English-speaking Canadians to  see  the  whole   Quebec  question  through the  eyes of an  intelligent outsider,  and  also to read  a group  of  first-rate assessments  of  French-Canadian writers.  So far  I  have  come  across  no  English­  Canadian study  of the  fiction  of Anne  Hebert or  Marie-Claire Blais as sensitive and  penetrating as  Wilson's.
At  the  same   time   the   whole  Wilson  trio  raises  the  curious   question   of  the difference   between   the  internal and  the  external  views of a country's literature. In   continental  Europe,  for  instance,   Wilde,  Byron  and   Charles  Morgan  have been  taken  far  more  seriously  than  they ever were in  England, Poe was for long the great  American writer, and,  if one can  judge from the cheap popular editions, Mazo  de  Ia  Roche  is still  the  favourite Canadian author. In  the  same  way,  to Mr.   Wilson,   the   strange  morbidities of  French-Canadian  fiction   are,   for  the present  at  least,  more  piquant than  anything younger  English-Canadian writers have  to offer,  and  the  terrorists of Quebec are  more  interesting, evidently, than the  terrorists  of British  Columbia.
In  part,  of  course,  this  may  be  due  to  the  accidents  of  travel.   Most  of  Mr. Wilson's  journeys  have  led  him  to the  East,  where  Montreal has  understandably

5

EDITORIAL



been  more  congenial,   more  exotic  and  more  interesting to  him  than   Toronto. At  the  same  time  one  can  observe  French Canada, with  its inner  ferment and its  rebellion  against  the  real  or imagined tyranny of the  majority, taking  shape in his mind  as a North  American symbol of the  need-which he so passionately feels-to   rebel  against   the  creeping   uniformity that  is  afflicting  the  modern world.  In  fact,  he sees both  Canada in general, and  French Canada in particular, as examples,  at different  levels, of the resistance  to monolithic authority, and  ends in a cry of rebellious  brotherhood which  we may  welcome  even if we do not feel it  to  be  entirely  deserved:

And  all  power  in its recalcitrance  to that  still uncoordinated, unblended,  and indigestible  Canada   that  is obstructing  assimilation  not  only abroad  but  within itself! The  problem we all have to face is the defense of individual  identity against the centralized  official domination  that  can so easily become a faceless despotism.

Doubtless  if Mr.  Wilson were familiar  with  western  Canada he would  be show­ ing the same interest  in the Doukhobors as he now does in the French Canadians. What his views  may  teach  us in social  terms  is to  value,  despite  their  manifest  practical  inconvenience, those  elements   within   our   society   which  prevent   its congealing into  a coldly efficient State; what  they  may  teach  us in literary  terms is the  amount of fascinating and  original  writing that, for  most  Canadians, lies concealed   on  the  other  side  of  the  language barrier.  Few  English  Canadians, even  among  academics and  writers,  have  read  all  the  books  by Quebec writers which  Wilson  discusses so intelligently, and  this is an  excellent  ground for griev­ ance  on  the  part  of French Canadians. But  how  many  French Canadians, faced with  an  equal list  of  books  by  English-Canadian  writers,  would  make  a  better  showing?

















6




LEONARD COHEN

A Personal Look





A. W. Purdy













W.N LEONARD  COHEN  published  L" Us  Compa" Mythologies, first volume  of the  McGill  Poetry  Series, 1956,  his book was of such merit  as to invite  comparison with  Birney's  David  and  Irving  Layton's first book, published  in  1945.  Now,  a little  more  than  eight  years later,  he has a fairly sub­ stantial body of work behind  him: two more books of poetry and  a first novel. An assessment  of  his work  is long  overdue,  and  with  the  publication of  Flowers  for Hitler, 1964,  it  becomes  possible  to  take  a  look  at  the  contemporary writer  in relation  to the  past.
Cohen's first  two  books  of  poetry  were,  I think,  absolutely   conventional in metre  and  form. They  gained   distinction   from  other  people's  poems  through a heavy sensuality,  sometimes  almost cloying, integral in nearly  everything he wrote. As the  title  of  his first  book  implies,  comparative mythology,  coeval  social  habit and  mores were also included. Most avant-garde work south  of the border seemed to have escaped  his attention; or if it didn't, then  he paid little heed. And  English poetry  in this  day  and  age  apparently has nothing to teach  anyone.
For  the last few years in this country  there  has been strong  emphasis  placed  on such  things  as mythology and  "archetypal myths", and  whether it was  Humpty­ Dumpty who  fell  first  or  Adam. All  of  which  seems  rather a  literary  game  to anyone  who  has  to live in  the  world  of now, go to work  on a  streetcar, say, and

7

LEONARD COHEN



eat  jam  sandwiches for lunch  in a quiet  factory-corner away  from  the  machines.
But Cohen  makes use of the Bible and  fairy  tales in his myths, suburban neigh­ bours,  his own  grandparents, Jewish  popular customs,  almost  anything  that  will make   a  poem.  Insecurity is  a  prime  factor, and   much   of  his  work  conveys  a strong   feeling  that   the  world  as  presently  constituted is liable  to  fly  apart any moment:

If your neighbour disappears
0 if your neighbour disappears The quiet man who raked his lawn The girl who always took the sun

Never mention it to your wife Never say at dinnertime Whatever happened  to that man Who used to rake his lawn

Never say to your daughter
As you're walking home from church
Funny thing about that girl
I haven't seen her for a month


Which   is  perhaps modern   archetypal. Of  course  husbands have  always  dis­ appeared  occasionally, and  wives  too  have   taken  it  on  the  lam  for  the  quiet  boredom of  a  lover  in  another town  or  street.  Cohen   means  something a  good deal  more  mysterious  than   that.  By leaving  it  unnamed he  manages to  suggest the  secret  police,  subterranean monsters  and  the  lemmings' baptist  instinct. All with  a regular  metric  beat  that  blends  casual  after-dinner talk  with  the  happen­ chance of  human fatality.
As  well,  Cohen   writes  about   sex;  not  the  adolescent fumbling with  a  girl's
bra-strap behind   the  closet  door  type  either.   Cohen's is  a  knowledgeable  sex which  explores  the  gamey  musky-smelling  post-coital bedroom world.  No clinical nonsense  either. Nor  pregnancies. Romance rules  supreme, and  one  measure of his success is that  both  Cohen's first two  books sold  out  fairly  quickly.  But  they are also good poems.
You  could  say that  many  of them  expound the  philosophy of meaninglessness
very  convincingly: i.e., they  have  an  initial  concrete incident or  feeling,  which is expressed  so well that  its magic  drives  any  question  of such  things  as meaning right  out  of your  head.  Take  this passage:

8

LEONARD COHEN



My lover Peterson
He named me Goldenmouth
I changed  him to a bird
And he migrated  south

My lover Frederick
Wrote sonnets to my breast I changed  him to a horse And he galloped west

My lover Levite
He named me Bitterfeast
I changed  him to a serpent
And he wriggled east

It's  rather Sitwellish.  "The King  of China's Daughter", or something like that. In  other  words  it's  an  attitude and  way  of writing  a good  craftsman can  easily employ,  though perhaps not  quite  at  will. You  adopt, for  a  poem's  purposes,  a particular way  of  thinking or  feeling,  then  write  the  poem.  And  if you  believe this suspension  of  personal  identity and  belief is possible and .desirable,  then  the poet  is in  large  degree  an  actor  who  plays  many  parts; but  an  actor  so skilful you  can't  always  tell  the  difference  between   acting   and   fakery.   For  instance, "My   lover  Peterson". What does  it  mean?  Nothing. But  it's  magic.
Think  of  all  the  young   poets  who  burst  suddenly   on  the  not-so-astonished world.  Rimbaud, Chatterton, even  the  young  Dylan  Thomas. Is  Cohen   at  the age  of  30  one  of these?  I think  not.  Though very definitely  one  could  compare poems  in this  first  book  with  the  youthful  Yeatsian  romanticism of "I will arise and  go now  to Innisfree". Or  the  redolent  Swinburne who  wrote:

There lived a singer in France of old, By the tideless, dolorous midland sea. In a land of sand and ruin and gold
There  shone one woman, and none but she.

Which  is almost  Cohen  plus punctuation.
But  Cohen  has other  facets  too. In  one of them  he creates  his mythology from the   Auschwitz   furnaces,  imbuing  it  with   a  peculiar   and   grotesquely modern
sensitivity :
And at the hot ovens they
Cunningly  managed a brief


9

LEONARD COHEN



Kiss before the soldier came
To knock out her golden teeth.

And in the furnace itself
As the flames flamed higher,
He tried to kiss her burning breasts
As she burned in the fire.


At  this  point   I  am  aware  of something common to  much   modern verse  in Cohen. Not  just  disillusion  and  gamey  decadence, but  the  present  fact  that  all good  things  in  life are  done  and  past.  A longing  for  what  was,  the  sense of  in­ adequacy in  what  is. One  would  think  the  ten-year-old yearned  for  his  mother's breast,  the  adolescent  for  puberty, the stripling for  renewed  puppy  love, and  the only  common  denominator  we  all  have  is  return to  the  womb  fixations.  The  "fall" in  other  words.  Once  we were  happy, now  we are  not.  Rather ridiculous. Also completely ruinous  for  any  possible present  content.
Well,  what  does  the  reader  want  from  a  poem?  Rather, what  do  I  think  he
wants?   Primarily, I  suppose,  to  be entertained. And  that  involves  tuning in  on some  emotion  or feeling or discovery  that  is larger  and  more  permanent than  he is. Some  flashing  insight  that  adds  a new  perspective to living. Values  also. And that  is a great  deal.  Most of the  time it's  asking far  too much.
Will you find any of these things in Cohen? Realities shoved from  the periphery of your  mind  to forefront by the  author. Not  copy-book  maxims,  just real  things and  feelings.
Perhaps in  Cohen's world  the  things  he writes  about exist,  but  only  rarely  do
they  touch  on my personal  existence.  I admire the  poems tremendously; they  are the  work  of  a  master craftsman, who  must  simply  be living  in  another  time dimension than  my  own. I admire many  of them  as works  of art  I don't believe in.  His  figures  swim  dreamily   through  bedrooms, move  out  of  Eden  in  slow motion, loll  languorously on  beaches  of time.  Slowly  one  of  the  inhabitants of this world  lifts up,  and  says without much  emotion: "Return to the  past. Return to the  past." Then he sinks back without a human grunt from  the effort  required to speak.
But  that  is one-sided,  which  I  did  not  intend. There are  also  Cohen's  mag­ nificent  incantatory effects. You  can  read  many  of his poems  in your  mind,  and  have  the  same  bravura feeling  as in  Chesterton's "Lepanto".  Some  descriptions of unreal  things  are  so vivid  they  can  make  you  breathless with  delight.



10

LEONARD COHEN


WTH The  Spice-Box of  Earth,  Ig6I, Cohen   brought  to near  perfection the  techniques and  rhythms  of his first book.  The  "tone" seems
a  mixture of  the  Old  Testament and,  probably, other  Jewish  religious  writings.
But  I think  this  "tone" is important. Cohen  rarely  over-states or  exaggerates. His  emphasis is secured   by  under-emphasis, never  finding  it  necessary  to  raise his  voice.  There is  always  a  casual  offhand  prosody,  which  lends  even  his  re­ write  job on  the  Bible the  authority of someone  present  on  the scene,  and  prob­  ably  making  notes  behind   his fig leaf.

0 Solomon, call away your spies.
You remember the angels in that garden, After the man and woman had been expelled,
Lying under  the holy trees while their swords burnt out,
And Eve was in some distant branches
Calling for her lover, and doubled up in pain.


There is little  intensity in  this  passage,  or  any of Cohen  for  that  matter. The effect  is achieved   by  a  kind  of remote  sadness,  the  knowledge we all  have  that being  human has  pain  for  continuing counterpoint. Despite  the  instructions to Solomon,  no  positive  note  or  clear  meaning comes  out  of  the  poem.  Of  course you can  ring in "The Fall" ad nauseam. Lost innocence, lost happiness, exhausted vitality.  In  fact  this  decadent feeling the  poem  generates in a reader  is one of its attractions. And  for  Cohen   to  raise  his voice  in  a  shout,  or  to  possess carefree feelings of more  than  momentary happiness  would  be the complete non sequitur.
However, what  seem to be shortcomings in these poems are turned into  positive
virtues.  Using   the  same   tone  and   metre  Cohen  writes  love  poems  which   are probably   the  best  ever  written in  this  country. Image succeeds  image  in  a flow natural as birdsong:

Now
I know why many men have stopped and wept Half-way  between the loves they leave and seek, And wondered if travel leads them anywhere - Horizons keep the soft line of your cheek,
The  windy sky's a locket for your hair.


I think   those  last  two  lines  are  demonstrably perfect   and  inimitable. There are  many  others  almost  as good.  Cohen  subdues  everything to  his touch.  Even

I I

LEONARD COHEN



the  zest  and  exuberance  of,  "Layton,   when  we  dance  our  freilach"  becomes something  other  than  exuberance.  The  poem  ends  not  unexpectedly  on a quite different  note:   "we  who  dance  so  beautifully/though  we  know  that  freilachs end."
In another  poem there is this wonderful passage :

Is it the king
who lies beside you listening? Is it Solomon or David
or stuttering Charlemagne?
Is that his crown
in the suitcase beside your bed?

When  anyone  can  write like that,  it seems unjust  to complain  about  anything.
The  Favourite Game, a novel, appeared  in 1963. As first novels go (and  most of them don't  stay around  long),  it was a decided success. This one tells the story of Laurence  Breavman,  Montreal  poet, child voyeur, adolescent in a world with­ out fixed values. Breavman is a child when the novel opens, and a child still when it  closes -though by this time  he is presumably  permitted  to  vote. The  book traces  his sexual initiation  all the way from  Montreal  to New York. At the end Breavman  is  still  being  initiated  into  something  or  other.  If not,  then  sexual retardation lasts quite  a long time.
In  any formal  sense the novel has no plot. Time  passes, of course. Breavman becomes older,  his experiment  with  being alive more  complicated. He is passed like  a  basketball  from  girl  friend  to  girl  friend   (euphemisms   for  bedmates), arrives finally at his Great  Love, and predictably forsakes her in the end. For permanence  in anything is anathema  to our boy. Remember please, he is a writer.
If the  above seems to indicate  I disliked Cohen's  novel, then  appearances  are misleading. I read it first last year, and again for the purposes of this review. With­ out a plot, without  any "message" or insight into what  it's like to be an ordinary human  being  and  not  Laurence  Breavman,  the  book held  me interested,  if not spellbound,  on both  readings. The  reason:  reality seeps through somehow, with convincing detail and dialogue.
What   Cohen's   poetry  lacks is found  here  in  large  measure.  The   Favourite Game  is rich in  humour,  zest for living, the sort of febrile intensity a moth who lives less than  24 hours might have; also, the continual sense of Breavman watch­ ing  himself watching  himself, which is, I  think,  a characteristic of most  writers. From  every  comer  of the  room,  ceiling and  floor, Breavman  watches  himself,

12

LEONARD COHEN



because  he  wants   to  write  it  all  down  later.  He  wants  to say  what  it  was  like to be uniquely himself,  and  yet to be Everyman as well.
Coitus  interruptus and   a  handy   night  light.  In  the  case  of  women   writers,
a  ballpoint pen  that   writes  upside  down.  Sex for  the  sake  of love,  but  it  turns out  to  be  just sex.  (And  what's wrong  with  that?) Living  as an  experiment, an adventure, as  many  separate adventures without permanence. Breavman as  the iconoclast, searching for  a  Colossus  of  Rhodes  he  can't destroy.  For  if  he  can destroy  the  thing  or  the  emotion, then  it wasn't  real -it  never  happened. Well, what  did  happen? As it turns  out,  only what  was written down  on  paper.
Cohen   has,  in  this  book,  developed   the  technique which  will  enable  him  to write  other  and   better   novels. This  one  is not  a failure,  but  is badly  flawed  in that   it  seems  to  tail  off  at  the  end  without  saying  anything very  convincingly. Not  that  I mean  a  moral should  be  pointed  or  a tale  adorned. But  no  one  will care  very much  that Breavman will never  return to his Great  Love. He  becomes suddenly rather a cardboard figure. He  was created  in the  author's mind,  and  in some  important way  seems  to  be  there  still,  not  working  very  hard   at  getting out and  being  Laurence Breavman.
But The  Favourite Game  is an interesting novel, up to this point.  What it says about  being  alive is its own  parable, never stated  explicitly. Much of the dialogue sounds  like  tape-recorder stuff.  On  this evidence,  it  can  hardly  be doubted that Cohen  is a  novelist  possessing much  more  than  mere  "promise".
If Dylan  Thomas had  lived  longer  than  his 39 years  he would  have  found it necessary  to change. He  was at a dead  end,  with exaggeration piled on exaggera­ tion.  But Jeffers,  with  his nihilistic  view of mankind, lived long into his seventies  and  didn't change. Neither did  A. E. Housman and  his hopeless view of human
life.


WrrH Flowers   for Hitler   (McClelland & Stewart, cloth,
$4.50,  paper, $2.50)   Leonard Cohen  recognizes  the  necessity  to get  away  from
his sensuous  unrealistic parables and  flesh fantasies.  Cohen  does change.
But  the  change has  puzzled  me somewhat. I've  asked  everyone  I know  who's interested in poetry  what  they think  of Flowers  for Hitler, and  why. Some shared my  own  small  puzzlements. The  answers  I got  boiled  down  to  equal   approval and  dislike. None  thought the book outstanding, and  some thought it pretty undistinguished.

LEONARD COHEN



Cohen  quotes  Carlo  Levi  before  the  poems  begin: "If from  the inside  of the Lager,  a  message  could  have  seeped  out  to free  men,  it  would  have  been  this: Take   care  not  to  suffer  in  your  own  homes  what  is inflicted  on  us here." This presages  the  communal guilt  theme  of the  book.
But there  are other  motifs. Personal  dissatisfaction with  the world  Cohen  never made.  Guilt  plus erotica.  Obsession with  drugs. Two  Cuban poems, one of which suggests  the  future death  of Fidel  Castro  in chilling  fashion.
Several   themes.   But  none  come  through  as  over-riding strengths that   make the  book  a consistent  whole,  as Cohen  undoubtedly wished.  Not  that  they should necessarily;  for  life is a pot-pourri, a grab  bag of seemingly  unrelated things.  But lacking  thematic consistency,  the  poems  do  not  accurately portray reality  either. They  seem  playful  exercises, poems  for  the  sake  of poems.  Hitler  and  the  com­ munal guilt  ploy seem to me like the  talk of a good  conversationalist who had  to say something, whether it was real or not.
Here's what   Cohen  says  of  his  poems  on  the  cover:  "This book  moves  me
from  the  world  of the  golden-boy  poet into  the  dungpile of the front-line writer. I didn't plan  it  this  way.  I loved  the  tender  notices  Spice-Box got  but  they  em­ barrassed me  a little.  Hitler  won't  get  the same  hospitality from  the  papers. My sounds  are  too new,  therefore  people  will say:  this is derivative, this is slight,  his power  has  failed.  Well,  I say  there has  never been a  book  like  this,  prose  or poetry,  written in Canada. All I ask is that  you put  it in the  hands of my genera­ tion and it will be recognized."
Let's  assume that  the claims Cohen  makes for his new book are sincere, dubious
as  that  may  seem.  The  bit  about  the  "golden-boy poet" and  "dung pile of the front-line writer" I choose to ignore, for it seems gratuitous ego and sales come-on. But are  Cohen's sounds  new?  (By sounds  I take it he means  his idioms, tone, and contemporary speech  rhythms.)  In  other  words,  has  Cohen  effected  a revolution in  prosody,  written something so startling that  time  is required before  his innova­ tions are recognized? Has he done that?
No.
I agree there  has never been a book like Flowers  for Hitler published in Canada. Cohen   is  an  individual  poet,  possessing  his  own  strong   merit   and  equally  in­ dubitable weaknesses.  But  even  so  there  are  traces  of  other   people's  influence. Laurence Hope's  Indian   Love   Lyrics,  surprisingly enough. Some  of  the  Eliza­ bethans. Donne's "Sweetest  love I do not  go"-d. The Favourite  Game. Wal­  ler's  "On a Girdle". Swinburne with  arthritis. Dawson's "Cynara" even.
But  I'm  not  very fond  of that  favourite game.  Cohen  has come swimming out

LEONARD COHEN



of  all  such   traces  of  other   poets,  emerges  as  himself.  And  re.  the  dust   jacket blurb,  I don't want  to fall  into  the  trap  of treating an  author's ad  agency gab­ blings  as important. Only  poems  are.  And  pretentiousness aside,  there  are  a few things in Hitler  which  I value:

I once believed a single line
in a Chinese poem could change forever how blossoms fell
and that the moon itself climbed on the grief of concise weeping men
to journey over cups of wine
Of  course  that  is the  "old" Cohen. Here  is the guilty "new" Cohen: I do not know if the world has lied
I have lied
I do not know if the world has conspired against love
I have conspired against love
The atmosphere  of torture is no comfort
I have tortured
Even without  the mushroom cloud still I would have hated

And  so on.  He  ends  the  poem: "I wait/for each one of you to confess."  Well, he's gonna  have  to wait  a long  time.  Liars,  torturers and  conspirators don't con­ fess by reason  of such  poems as this one. And the life Cohen  portrays in his poems has to be unreal by my personal standards.
Sure,  I've  done  all  the  things  he says he's  done.  But  I'm   not  personally  pre­ occupied   with  guilt,  and  I think  few  people  are  or should  be.  Life  being  lived now,  and  personal change more  important than  morbid  preoccupation with  past imperfections, I feel  no  particular urge  to  confess anything; though in  a  sense I suppose  I have,  in the  first sentence  of this paragraph. What then  IS important in poetry and  life?
Well,  much   of the  time  being  alive  at  all has  puzzled  me.  What am  I going to do  with  my awareness, the  mixed  curse and  blessing of sentience? Yes, live­ it includes  things  I haven't even  thought of yet. It  also includes  the  various  dic­ tionary  emotions, including a negligible  amount of guilt. What then is important?
Perhaps to take  a new  and  searching look at people,  re-defining what  they are as against  what  they  were  previously  thought to be. Man  himself is the  unknown animal. We  know  more  about  nuclear  physics, crop  rotation and  fertilizers  than

LEONARD COHEN



we do  about  our  own nature and  potentialities. As well, we might  look for a new road  on  which  mankind can  travel.  The  one  he's on now  appears to be heading straight for  The  Bomb.  Science,  politics,  philosophy  and  something like religion are  all mixed  in with  the new  poetry.
Those   are  grandiose things  of course.  Has  Cohen   discovered any  new  roads, or should  I expect  him  to discover  them?  That question too is theatric, perhaps ill-considered. Well  then,  is he living  now,  asking  the  questions we all  ask  our­ selves, making  discoveries about  himself, explaining the scope  and  nature of  what  a human being might be? Sometimes he is.
But  I'm   no  longer  puzzled  about  Cohen. He  has changed, veered  at  a sharp angle  from  his  previous  work,  struck  off  in  another direction entirely.  For  the "now" poet  is an  exploding self, whom  critics  cannot predict, nor  can  the  poet himself.  Where   he  is going  he  does  not  know  exactly,  and   where  he  has  been he  can  only  remember imperfectly. He  inhabits language as  well  as the  world, infuses words with something of his own questioning stance, his own black depres­ sion and  joyous life.
One   can  only  guess where  Cohen  is going  now.  But  when  I see the  human confusion  and  uncertainty of his last book, I have  hope it may be terra  incognita where  he  is going.  With  a  ballpoint pen.  And  may  survive  there  and  map  the territory.







WIND, 	SUN	AND	DUST




Donald Stephens










TENTY-FOUR YEARS AGO  what  i< pedups the  best  Canadian novel  was  written: Sinclair Ross's  As  For Me  and  My  House. Up  to that  time the only writers who could be viewed with any assurance were Morley Callaghan, Frederick Philip  Grove,  and  probably Laura  Salverson; since then  only Mordecai Richler   and,   of  course,  Hugh  MacLennan, have  added   to  the  store  of  better Canadian novels.
In  his  novel  Ross  has  caught an  essential  part  of  the  Canadian scene:   the small  midwestern town.   But  it  is more  than   just the  place  that  Ross  captures; it  is the  time  of the  thirties, a  time  which  many  Canadians remember and  can­ not  forget.  It is a time,  too,  that  younger  Canadians constantly hear  about: the drought and  wind  and  dryness  of that  decade.  Ross has  recorded  that time,  and adds  a  dimension   to  the  memories  and  dreams  of people  who  cannot, and  will not,  forget  the  thirties.
Horizon, the  town  that  is the  setting  for the  novel, could  be any  place  on the
prairie  in  the  thirties; yet again, it  can  be anywhere  at  any  time.  It is bleak,  it is tired,  it  is horribly true; and  yet there  is an  element  of the  flower  blooming on  the  desert,  and  the  flying  of feeling  that  transcends all, that gives to  As For Me   and  My   House   a  prominent position  in  Canadian letters.  This  is a  novel which,  despite  its Puritanism, its grimness, its dustiness,  gives to the reader many of  the  elements   of  optimism  and  romanticism so  often  found in  Canadian literature.
Writes  Mr.  Ross, in  the  words  of his narrator, Mrs. Bentley:

They're  sad little  towns when a philosopher looks at them. Brave little mushroom heyday-new  town,   new  world -false fronts  and  future,   the  way  all  Main

17

WIND, SUN AND DUST



Streets  grow-and   then   prolonged  senility ... They're  poor,  tumbledown, shabby little  towns, but they persist. Even the dry years yield a little wheat;  even the little means livelihood for some. I know a town where once it rained all June, and  that  fall  the  grain  lay in  piles outside  full  granaries.  It's  an  old town  now, shabby and  decr(lpit like the others, but  it too persists. It  knows only two years: the year it rained all June, and next year.

This  is very good  writing; in fact, one is first captured by the writing  in the book. There is  an  exact   vividness,  pure  diction   choice,  observation that   is  accurate, and  a rhythm that  is controlled. Everything seems to move  at its own  pace,  and yet the  tension  of the characters renders  vividly  the  actual  setting:

It's  an  immense  night  out  there,  wheeling  and  windy. The  lights on  the  street and  in  the  houses are  helpless against  the  black  wetness, little  unilluminating glints that  might  be painted  on it. The  town seems huddled  lest it topple into the wind. Close to the parsonage is the church,  black even against the darkness, tower­ ing  ominously  up  through  the  night  and  merging  with  it. There's  a  soft  steady swish of rain  on  the roof, and  a gurgle of eave troughs  running  over. Above, in the  high  cold  night,  the  wind goes swinging  past,  indifferent,  liplessly mournful.

The   people  who  inhabit this  landscape are  described   to  the  reader  too,  and they  dissolve into  actual  highpoints  within  the  landscape. The  minister  is shown in  many  aspects,  an  individual in  every  respect,  yet typical  in his pursuit  to live on an inadequate salary  that  is never  paid  up. There is his wife, the main charac­ ter  and  narrator of the  novel,  a sensitive  woman who  is bothered  by  the  role of propriety that  she must  always play. There is the inevitable woman  who is presi­ dent  of every  organization that  she can get her  hands on, the perpetual president who  is "austere, beyond  reproach, a  little  grim  with  the  responsibilities of self­ assumed   leadership-inevitable as  broken   sidewalks  and  rickety  false  fronts". There is the  doctor's wife who  "simply  wasn't  meant"  for life in  a small  town,  and  the  spinster choir  leader  who likes the  old  hymns,  sung  slowly. Yet they  are not  types,  though they are  marked  by typical  characteristics; rather, each  has his own  special  and  very  real  reality.
Such  is  Ross's  artistry  that  no  doubt   any  but  the  most  shallow  of  readers  is affected  by  his portrayal of the  desolate  life in  a  prairie town.  His simplicity  of style  and   intricacy of  mood  create  a  prairie so immense that  it  virtually  stuns the  mind.   The   physical  limitations of  existence  in  Horizon  pummelled by  the visitations  of a cruel  God-though He  is never  blamed for  what  goes on-are clearly  etched   in  the  mind  by  the  almost   unbearable  monotony of  wind,  sun,

18

WIND, SUN  AND DUST



snow,  and   drought. It is  a  place  with  a  past  and   a  future, but  with  no  real present,  no  rock  into  which  to drive  a spike which sanity  can  grasp  to pull itself from  the  mire  of despondancy. Environment plays a strong  role in the  story, an environment that  is at  once  uncluttered and  cluttered. The  intellectual celibacy of the  townspeople is made  poignantly clear  in the light  of their  ceaseless, numb battle  against  the  overwhelming odds of the  climate.
The  sky and  the  earth fuse into  a huge  blur,  a haze  which  envelopes  the  town
and  its people  and  stills all but  the faintest  murmur of hope for the future. There is a  vivid  immobility that  lies stark  against  the  dullness  of the  endlessly  shifting dust.  The   theme is  of  the  prairies   during the  thirties-the unrewarded,  un­ remitting, sluggish  labour of men  coupled  with  the loneliness and  nameless terror of the  women -and  is the  only action  upon  the stage  that  Ross presents before his reader. There is a feeling  approaching claustrophobia, yet the  vastness soars over  the  people.  There is everywhere an  almost  unreasonable acquiescence in the inevitable, but  what  the  inevitable is no one can  foresee  with  any  accuracy, and so they never  really  ask what  it may be. Perhaps the new year will be better  than  the last, but  the  reader is led to wonder  if fulfillment  will come to those who wait.  Perhaps they  wait  endlessly. The  only  tie with  the  outside  world  is the  railway,  and  it, too,  is hidden by the  dust.  Perhaps these  people  do  not  care  for  the  out­ side  world,  yet  the  false  store  fronts  belie  their  unconcern with  what  is outside  their  immediate vision. These  people  are  not  hard  to imagine, but  they  are  very difficult  to  understand, and  consequently  difficult  to accept.
Roy  Daniells,   in  his introduction to  the  New  Canadian Library As  For  Me and  My  House  calls the  novel  an exposition  of the  Puritan conscience.  Indeed it is, for everywhere there  are  the  unmistakable signs of Puritanism: the standards are rigidly set;  the struggles,  the tenacity  of people in so bleak  a circumstance, the horror  of  hypocrisy  and  of sexual  sin. Jealousy, failure,  slow  realization of  for­ giveness,  possible  redemption and  reconciliation after  anguish   and  torment, all take  their  places  in  the  lives of these  tenacious people.  The  problem  of fighting  versus  flight,  and   the  all  powerful   will  of  God  remain  in  the  foreground; the nerves  of all the  people  of the town  remain  taut  to the breaking point.






INTO A TREACHERous   ATMOSPHERE like  this Ross introduces his main  characters. He  does not immerse  them  totally,  but  rather just dips them

19

WIND, SUN AND  DUST



into  this sheep-dip of futility  and  sets them  into  a comer to let the  bitter  juices seep into  their  absorbent beings. Perhaps he has not dipped them  for long enough, or  again,  too  much,  for  none  of the  characters seem  to  rise out  of  the  story  as individuals of  total   belief.  They   are  at  once  types  and   individuals, yet  never really  discernable as one  or  the  other.  Despite  this  vagueness, the  characters can be  analyzed; unfortunately, with  varying  degrees  of  accuracy.
Ross  chooses  a  woman's point  of view  for  this  novel,  and  obviously  has  tre­ mendous insight   into  a  woman's mind,   and   this  particular  woman's  troubles.  Before  a  reader   can  understand the  other  characters in  the  novel,  he  must  ex­ amine  Mrs.  Bentley. She is the  narrator, and  if the  reader  takes her at her literal  worth, then  all  the  characters become  exceptionally clear.  But she is a  paradox, and  there  becomes  the necessity to probe  beyond  what  she says superficially  and  to  make   conjectures as  to  her  real  meaning. Mrs.  Bentley-she has  no  first name  in  the  novel-is  the  main  character, for  it is through her  eyes and  sensi­ tivity  that  the  whole  story  is seen  and  felt;  and  she  is the  one  who  grows  with the  action.
She  becomes  through the  novel  an  epitome of a  type  of woman; she displays intelligence,  responds  to  situations with  courage and  sympathy, and  displays  a vague  hope for better  times  (typical  of prairie  women  of the period: clever, hard­ working,  hoping) . Yet she is individualistic in  that  she  rebels  against  the stifling pressures  of  propriety imposed  by the  town.  Though she  does  not  want  impro­ priety,  she  scoffs at  the  pretentious airs  that  the  citizens  of Horizon  so  capably put  on.  She  lives in  a semi-vacuum, drawing from  her  stored-up intellectual re­ sources  what  her  husband and  the  other  citizens  fail  to give  her.
However, she is not  as strong  a  person  as she  would  have  the  reader  believe. And  this is Ross's  point.  Assailed  by doubts  she seems  to hang  on  by sheer stub­ bornness.   Everything she  sees  before  her  is  thin,  disheartening, dull  and  bare. There is an  inert  and  chilly stillness to the  life she leads,  and  it becomes evident  in  her  thoughts. Yet, what  kind  of person  is she? She seems to be strong, if what  she says in  her  diary  is to  be taken  literally.  Her  strength, however,  comes from the  knowledge of the falseness and  the sham  of the life that  she and  her husband lead.  With  this strength comes  a certain  smugness.  She  is smug about  the  false­ ness of the store fronts,  and  she is certainly  smug  about her awareness that  Philip  is a hopeless failure, a compromise. She knows  the discrepancy between  the  man  and  the little  niche  that  holds him,  but  does she not also feel a trifle  too satisfied with  her  dominant position  in  the  family?  It  is,  after  all,  she  who  is forced  to make  excuses  for  her  husband's lapses.  It is  her  plan  to  move  to  the  bookstore

20

WIND, SUN AND DUST



in  the  city  and  her  decision  to  adopt  Judith's baby.  Though she  abides  by her husband, she is the  one  who  makes the  major  decisions, she is the  one who fights the  internal battles  for  both  of them,  and  it is because  of her  inner  strength that they  emerge  triumphant.
She,  like all the  characters in the  book, is hurt  too easily, yet she is too endur­ ing.  She  can  see all  things  clearly  and  objectively  because  she  is a  stranger and cannot fit into  the  town  and  share  its frustrations. This  is her  futility. Since  she is outside  of Horizon's influence, she can,  for the  most part, be cool, logical,  and even somewhat caustic  about its workings. Even at that  she finds it easier to main­  tain  face  with  the  people  of  Horizon   than   with  the  cowboys  at  the  ranch   in Alberta, where  they go for a brief holiday.
Her  relationship with  her  husband is very  unsatisfactory-to both  of them.
She  appears  to  be  constantly saying-"Poor  Philip", and by  virtue of  this negation, enhances her  own  virtuous  qualities  of wifehood. Her  theme  of "poor Philip" eventually grates  sharply upon  the reader's nerves.  She protests  too much his innocence, thereby  attempting to absolve  herself and  him  of blame  for  their torturous predicament. That she  possesses an  optimism  for  his future and  hence her own is often  negated  by her emphasis  on his moral  and  spiritual degradation.
She  does  not  reveal  enough to  the  reader  for  him  to  deduce anything other than  what  she  wishes him  to  deduce. She  plays her cards  too closely to her vest. When   Mr.   Downie, the  visiting  parson  is there,  she  says  that  she  "glanced at Philip,  and  wished  for  a moment that  I were the  artist  with  a pad  and  a pencil at  my  hand." She  does  not  tell  us, however,  how  Philip  looked; is he  rebelling against   the  grace,  has  he  made  a  momentary reconciliation with  his God,  or is he once  again  "white and  thin-lipped"? She whets the  curiosity,  then  proceeds  to another topic  totally  unrelated to  Philip's  appearance.
She  almost  envisions  herself  as a goddess, all-seeing, but  fearful to tell or show
the  reader   lest  he  recognize   yet  another flaw  in  either  herself  or  her  husband. Ross's stylistic brevity  does not  make sufficient amends  for  Mrs.  Bentley's  brevity; the  reader   can  make  only  his  own  hypothesis  concerning their  deeds,  motives, and  the  subsequent results.  She  says that  "there  is not  much  he keeps  me in the dark   about"-yet  she  does  not  know  about   the  affair   with  Judith-and  by chance finds  out  about  it.
Contrasted  to  these  ambiguities, she  exhibits   a  good   many   favourable and worthy  characteristics (if we are to take her account of her affairs as unassailable). She  is candid   and  receptive. She  has a capacity to see and  comprehend a whole situation; she  can  criticize,  objectify,  and  finally  accept,  even  if  her  acceptance

21

WIND, SUN AND DUST



is often  darkened with grave  doubts.  Perhaps her  major  redeeming feature is her earnest desire  for  reconciliation  with  her  husband, but  even  this  raises the ques­ tion  of whether she is secure in her faith  or merely  in a blind  alley with no other  way out.






QLIP NEVER REALLY EMERGES  as a character, but  then  may­ be that is his condition. He is contrived, far  too mechanical to be other than frag­  mentary; he  is a  moody,  frustrated baffied seeker  of  prestige,  either  intellectual, paternal, or sexual.  He is a failure,  a hypocrite caught in a web of his own weav­ ing. The  frustrations and  defeats  of his own  life etch  his mind  as the windblown sands  furrow   the  brows  of  toiling  farmers. He  flinches  from  any  contact with the  world,  and  a word from  his wife causes him to wince,  look at her, and  retreat to  his study.  His  only lifelines are  his pictures, and  they  only  reflect  his morbid  character. At  first,  sympathy   and   pity  can  be  extended to  Philip,   but  after  a time  irritation sets  in with  disbelief  hard  on  its heels.
Is  he the  frustrated artist?  Is he,  rather, a weak,  spineless  hypocrite who can­ not  face  what  life  puts before  him?  He  is neurotic-far more  than  his  wife­ but  do  we  know  "why" he is? It  is never  solved.  We  tire  of the statement that Philip   needs  only  the  opportunity to  prove  himself.  He  must  show,  eventually, that  he is, if not  deserving,  then  at least desirous  of this opportunity; he does not exhibit  this;  as a result he is shallow,  drab, partial -a skeleton  of an individual.
To  Philip, the  only part  of his life that  is real  is his pictures. From  the  rest of life  he  withdraws into  his study,  there  to  withdraw further within  himself.  Any flareup-real or  imagined-results in  his retirement to the study,  white-faced, thin-lipped and  haggard  from  a nameless exhaustion. He  continually responds  to an  overture with  a hurt,  flayed  look. So drab and  colourless  is his character that even  the  dog,  El Greco,  assumes more  reality.
Mrs.   Bentley  explains  his  faults  by  saying   that   he  expected  too  much,   and when  it was not forthcoming he was caught with  his moral and  intellectual fibres around his ankles. Surely in twelve years a man  can  make some attempt at pulling himself  out  or  else  reconcile  himself  to  his  fate.  If he  had  been  the  frustrated artist,  he would  have found  some relief, some compensation in his work.  If Philip has  found any  of this, he does not  reveal  it  to  his wife's  discerning eye. His  re­ lationship with  his wife is such  that  it pleads  the  question of whether he wants  a

22

WIND, SUN AND DUST



wife  or  a  friend. After   his  constant   rejection   of  her,  the  answer  is somewhat obvious.
He  is resentful   of  his  wife,  and  of  Paul; their  resourcefulness and   his blind
resentfulness and  the  guilt  of his own  hopeless inadequacy prompt him  to make the  accusation of  a  love  affair  between  Mrs.  Bentley  and  Paul  Kirby.  Beneath his futile  anger  lies a boy's emotion  seen in the many sulking  retreats  to the study. He  constantly shams  a  fit of pigue  and  sulks to cover  any  gesture  of generosity. He  is a puzzle,  never  to be solved.
Other characters serve  to  contrast   the  principals.  Paul  Kirby  serves as a  foil
for  both  Bentleys.  For  a  time  a love  interest  seems  to  be  developing, but  it  is foredoomed  to  oblivion   and   never  gets  under  way.  He  serves  Mrs.  Bentley  as relief  from   the   monotony  of  Philip  and   the  solidly  aligned   faces  of  Horizon. Nonetheless,   his  constant  philological   demonstrations  are  the  only  facet  really revealed.   He  is  perhaps the  least  faceted   and  least  successful  character in  the story.  He  seems  to  have  been  brought in  only  for  relief,  when  another page  of Philip's   sulkings  and   Mrs.  Bentley's  wanderings threaten  a  total  suspension   of belief.
Steve  is opportunely introduced. He  is the  hope  the  Bentleys have  been  seek­ ing;  his exit almost  extinguishes any hope  that  the reader and  the Bentleys share. He is the simplest  character in that  he is typical boyhood.  He is belligerent, sensi­ tive, and  frightened. His  temporary importance to the plot cannot  be overlooked; he  is the  image   for  what   the  Bentleys have  wanted, but  his worth  to  Philip  is threatened  by  his  growing disregard   of  him.  The   attachment  to  Mrs.  Bentley further drives  home  to  Philip  his own  inadequacies as a father  and  a man,  and eventually  sinks him  to a new  low of regard  for himself and  his wife.
Judith West is also shallowly  drawn. She lives in a vacuum, beautiful, different, somewhat  of  an  eternal  rebel.  She  displays  the  inner   torments that   also  rack Philip,  thus  giving  them   their  common   ground   on  which  to  create.  To  Philip she is the  rebel  with  whom  he can identify.  To  Mrs.  Bentley  she is the  potential and   then  the  real  "other woman" against  whom  she  must  pit  her  wiles. It is strange  that  Mrs.  Bentley,  with  all her astuteness,  cannot  sec the supposed  power of attraction between   Philip  and  Judith.
Sinclair   Ross  gives  variety   in  character; not  all  the  characters are  those  on
the  racks  of internal torture beaten  by the  overwhelming powers  of nature. For variety,  Ross  injects  the  potent  serum  of  Mrs.  Bird,  the  rebel  of  Horizon, and she  often  successfully  gives a  pause  to the  reader; she  represents  the  acceptance of Horizon  on her  own  terms; though  she fits into  the group,  she retains  her own individual and  special  verve.

WIND, SUN  AND DUST



In  general,  the  characters  are  made  subservient  to  the  environment  of  the story; the limitations of Ross's vehicle hamper  the full realization of these charac­ ters. The  only way the reader  can  realize the  portent  of all the characters  is to let his imagination  have full rein. Despite the shallowness of the characters,  they are interesting,  and  at an intense, rather  than  a cursory, examination.
It is, then,  the  characters  who make  As For Me  and  My  House. The  place belongs to the history of Canada,  the prairie  town that  is for the most part  gone from our midst;  no longer do people have to rely on the railway to communicate with  the  rest of civilization;  the isolation is gone, through  super  highways, and television. The  time, too, belongs to history; the thirties,  the depression, are only ugly dreams  which  man  hopes will not become  another  reality. But the  people remain  the same. We are all typed in some way, and  we all, too, hope that there is something  individualistic  about  us that separates  us from  the crowd. But only rarely  are we separated,  and  only rarely do Sinclair  Ross's people separate  from their  world. And  this is the way people are;  this is why the reality of Ross's fic­ tional  world elevates his novel to a lasting and  prominent  position.









24



THE MAKING OF JALNA

11 er.niniscence





Dorothy Livesay









W.Nr THINK about Mazo de la Roehe at Cla<kson, Ontario, I  cannot disassociate   her  from   my  own  adolescent   background.  My father, J. F.  B.  Livesay,  had  relatives  in  Cooksville  to  whom  he  was sent  as a
young  man,   all  the  way  from  the  Isle  of  Wight.  His  uncle  was  a  retired  naval officer whose  home  was  patterned on  English  county  life. My father was imme­ diately   taken   into   the  family   and  introduced to  more  distant  connections, the McGraths at  Erindale.  Mary   McGrath, of  Irish  descent,   had  married into  an Anglo-Indian family   and  settled  on  an  estate  called  Benares,  after  the  post  in India where  they  had  seen  military  service.  But the  countryside of Ontario must have  reminded them  not  of  India, but  of  England, with  its  rolling  fields,  deep pine  woods  alongside   oak,  maple   and  silver  birch,  and  its  potential orchards. It was  my father's love of this woodland that  led the  owner  at  the  time  to think of parcelling her share  of the  estate  into  a subdivision.  Our  house,  vVoodlot,  was the first  to  be built  on it; and  it must  have  been through the good  offices of an­  other  friend  of ours,  Grace Fairbairn, who ran  the local market and  knew  every­ body,  that  Mazo  de la Roche  and  her  cousin  Caroline Clements came  to hear  of our woods, and  to buy an adjoining lot.
The  first  wing  of  our  house  my father had  designed  himself,  to  be  used  as a
summer place  until  the  permanent house could be built; and  Mazo  de la Roche's cottage  was within  easy earshot. My father's description of those woods in autumn

THE  MAKING OF  J ALNA



might  be an  echo  of many  passages in Jalna. In  his diary  he wrote:

But  now that  the  leaves are going and  that  the sun is breaking  through  and  that again  branch  and  twig are  brittle,  and  vistas of white  birch,  as I  say, open  up across  the  little  ravine-vivid colour  of gold and  scarlet,  russet and  dun,  flame of the sumach  and  lemon yellow of sassafras-I am content.

Since  our  place  was  so close it  is  hard   to  explain   why,  in  her  autobiography Ringing the  Changes, Mazo  de  la  Roche  speaks  of being  isolated. At  any  time of the  day  or  night  she might  call on  my mother or ask advice  from  my father. As well as my parents' delight  in gathering mushrooms (the  Jalna books abound in  descriptions of  mushrooms!), their  knowledgeability about  wild  flowers  and local trees  was of keen interest  to the novelist. It was on our  property that "Fiddl­ ing  Jock",  mentioned in  the  Jalna saga,   had   built   his  cabin   and  planted  an apple   tree.  Another common   bond  between  the  two  households  was  Canadian writing. My  mother and  Mazo  belonged,  I  believe,  to the  Heliconian Club  and the  Canadian  Authors' Association.  Young   poets  who  came   to see  my  mother  when  she  was  preparing a  poetry  anthology, men  like  Robert Finch  and  Ray­  mond  Knister, also visited Mazo.  I remember, as a  young  girl,  my curiosity  and excitement in meeting  such a lost young  man  in our woods, and  directing him on to  Trail   Cottage. Truthfully though, in  those  early  days  before  she  was  well­ known, Mazo  de  la  Roche  was loath  to have  visitors and  seemed  indeed  always timid  about  meeting  strangers. Her  purpose  in  coming  to Clarkson was to find  a retreat where  she  could  write  undisturbed,  where  there  would  be  no  telephone and  no  interruptions.
Mazo  de  la  Roche  was really  very  hard-up at  that  time.  She  and  her  cousin (or  half-sister,  as she preferred  to call her)  Caroline Clement, lived frugally. Miss Clement,  whom   we  were  always  given  to  understand  was  related   to  Samuel Clemens (Mark Twain), commuted to her office job in Toronto, walking  through our  trail  early  in  the  morning on  her  way  to  the  train. Mazo,  left free  to write, did  so  quite   furiously  and   prodigiously.   Indeed, I  have  never  seen  such  self­ discipline   in  a  writer,  such  commitment. Only   for  a  brief  half-hour, at  mid­  morning, would  she saunter, milk-pail  in hand  with  her little blind  Scottie, Bunty, in tow, past our garden  to a farm  across the ravine. Then she would return, to do, I imagine, as little  housework as possible, and  get on with  her next chapter. In the evening, after  supper with  her  half-sister,  Mazo  would  read  aloud  what  she had written that  day.  If Miss Clement approved, the  chapter  was  allowed  to stay  in the  book.

THE  MAKING OF JALNA



Occasionally Mazo  would  drop  in at  our  cottage  for  a cup  of tea: and  I was usually somewhere in the  offing, pretending not to listen but  ears pricked  to catch any  item  of literary gossip.  I was  very sensitive  about  showing  anyone  my own poetry;  but   Mazo   had   begged  to  see some  of  it,  treating me  in  a  most  adult fashion, so my loyalty  was hers.  Mazo  de la Roche  rarely  talked  of her past or of her  personal  life  and   this  lent  her  an  air  of mystery  in  my  eyes.  How  could  a spinster  write  books  about passion?  As if to explain,  my mother did  once confide to  me  that   Mazo  had  had  a  love affair  with  a Scotsman, but  she  did  not  feel free  to  marry   him  as  she  was  tending an  invalid  mother, as  well  as  trying  to launch  herself  on  a  writing career.  Someone  from  the  Lake  Simcoe  area  had also told  my  mother that  there  was a good  deal  of romanticism in  Mazo's  hints at  an  aristocratic French  ancestry-"I knew  her  when  she  was  plain  Maizie Roche." This  is clarified, however,  in the  autobiographical account Ringing the Changes where  the author mentions, in passing, that  her grandfather de la Roche was hated  by the  Irish  family  he married into.

Everything  he did  was wrong. Even when he anglicized his name-even  though he allowed his children  to be christened  in the Protestant  church....

This  grandfather de la Roche, become Roche,  was evidently  a fascinating rogue­ even a rake.  He  left a legacy of classical books along with  a trunkful of  love letters which   might   well  fascinate  any  beginning  writer.  If there   was  any  stimulus  needed, therefore, to release  Mazo's  innate  romanticism, her own  past could give it.  Her  childhood, almost  in  a sense as lonely as that  of the  Bronte's, was fed  on tales  of  pioneer  eccentrics -English,  Irish  and  French.  Her  description, for  in­ stance,  of her  own  Irish  grandmother is very close to  that  of Adeline  Whiteoak,
in Jalna.  Here  it is, again  from  Ringing  the Changes:

This  Irish  great-grandmother was a remarkable  woman.  By her  charm,  her fiery temper,   her  demonstrative  affection,  her  dominating   nature,   she  overbore  her children  and  her  children's children.... My  father  adored  her.  It was  he  who carried  me, when  I was three,  to her on her death-bed.  It  is my first recollection of childhood.  The  tall  house  that  seemed so dim  and  somehow  forbidding,  the long stairway  thickly  carpeted,   the  bedroom  with  its fourposter  bed,  then-the sudden  dip  downwards,  as  though  my world  had  given  way  beneath  me-the two  long  arms  held  eagerly  upward   to  take  me -the  strong  old  voice,  with nothing  of  death  in  it-"My  little  darling-my  darling!" How  fearful  I was, in that  dark  embrace-I was three years old, she ninety-four!

To such  a background Mazo  added  the fire of her own desire to become  a writer.

THE MAKING OF  JALNA



The   characters that  she  created   or  re-created  became so intensely  alive  to  her that  they  dictated the development of the story.
Her   long  narrow face,  her  tawny  brown   eyes  which  even  behind  spectacles
gave one a sense of animal,  woodland  life; her gaunt, thin,  rather neuter  frame - these  trembled with  intensity  as she talked  about her  characters, seeking  to fore­ stall  the  local  gossip  which  would  identify   the  Jalna  characters with  those  of Benares.  And  as I look into  Jalna again  I would  agree  that  the characters of the book  were  certainly drawn  from  a  personal  source; but  I am  equally  convinced  that  the  objective  setting  for the novel lay between Clarkson  and  Erindale-the setting  of Benares.  Jalna, to us, meant  Benares: that  gracious, square brick house with  the  wide  front  porch  and  a long scullery  at  the  back  built of stone  (part of the  original   house  that  had  burned   down) -that  house  which  had  fascinated me  as  a  prairie child  when  my father  first  took  me  there  to visit relatives.  The  driveway  through pine  and  oak forest,  laden  in  spring  with  periwinkle  and  lily­ of-the-valley, the  old  coachhouse,  the short  curving  drive  around to the  front  of the  house  with  its  wide  view  of  pasture   and  apple  orchard; and  inside,  the "library" on  one  side  of  the  hall  where  the  grandmother always  sat  and   the drawing-room on  the  other,  with  its gilt  mirrors, family  portraits, delicate  Vic­ torian chairs  and  Indian rugs;  the  beautifully carved  stairway, and  below-stairs  servants' quarters and  kitchen -these remain vividly  in my memory.  As a child, they gave  me a sense of the past;  that  English  past  that  drew  me to my forebears. How  close, in detail  and atmosphere, is Mazo  de Ia Roche's creation of Jalna:

It was a square house of dark red brick, with a wide stone porch, a deep basement where the kitchens and servants' quarters were situated, an immense drawing-room, a library  (called so, but more properly a sitting-room,  since few books lived there) a  dining-room,  and  a  bedroom  on  the  ground  floor;  and  six large  bedrooms on the floor above, topped by a long, low attic  divided  into two bedrooms. The wain­ scoting and  doors were of walnut. From five fireplaces the smoke ascended through picturesque  chimneys that rose among the treetops.
In  a burst of romantic  feeling, Philip and  Adeline named  the place Jalna,  after the  military  station  where  they had first met ... Under  their  clustering  chimneys, in the midst of their unpretentious  park with its short, curving drive, with all their thousand  acres  spread  like a green  mantle  around   them,  the  Whiteoaks  were as happy  as the sons of man can be.

THE  MAKING OF JALNA


TEWRITING  AND  PUBLICATION of ]alna constituted the greatest literary  excitement of my  young  life. We knew,  in that  spring  of 1927,  that  the
book had  been  submitted to the Atlantic Monthly Novel Competition, that  Hugh Eayrs of Macmillans was also prepared to publish  it but  that  he, aware  of Mazo's financial need,  was holding back until the results of the $I o,ooo  competition were made  known   (in  those  days,  that  was a lot of money). Suddenly one day  Mazo told  my mother of the  possibility: she had  received a telephone call from  Boston informing her that  she was one of the runners-up for the prize. Her excitement, her
nervous  trembling, knew  no bounds.  She and Caroline went to Toronto, I believe, to  await  further news;   and  she  was  really  quite  nervously  ill by  the  time  the message  finally  came  through from  Editor  Edward Weeks:   the  judges  had  de­ cided in favour  of ]alna.
We all wept  for  joy. It was not merely that  a Canadian writer  had  been recog­ nized in the  United States,  it was not merely that  we felt that  Mazo  de la Roche's work  deserved  recognition, but  it was also the fact  that  she who had  been  really poor  would  now  be able  to write  without  the gnawing fear  of  poverty. From  that  day on, she never  turned back.
Mazo  did of course  return to Trail  Cottage from time to time to do undisturbed work,  but  a  certain restlessness  took  hold  of  her.  Fame   required  (or  seemed  to require)  that  she  make  public  appearances, which  she  nonetheless  dreaded, and that  she  engage  in  social  activity,  at  which  she sparkled. She  was  able  to travel back  and  forth  from  the Continent to England and  North America almost at will, seeking  more  material for  her  books and  a quiet  spot  in  which  to write.  What astonished  me, when  I myself returned to Europe after  the  War,  was to find that Mazo   de  la  Roche was  the  only  internationally-known Canadian  author,  her books translated into  many  languages. Indeed, some teachers I met in Dusseldorf told  me  that   during the  war  W hiteoaks  was  the  treasured, secret  possession of anti-fascist   intellectuals in  the  town.  Together with  the  BBC it  was  English; it reminded them   of  a  free  way  of  life. To  say  that  I had  lived  next  door  to  its author was to be given  free entry  into  people's  hearts; it loosened  tongues.
But  to go back  for  a moment to those early  years of the  thirties,  when  we saw
Mazo  from  time  to  time  at  Clarkson, I remember how,  on  her  return from  one European tour,  I begged  to prepare a luncheon  for the  half-sisters.  Mazo  strode in,  more  masculine and  assured  than  I  had  remembered her,  her  wit crackling, her musical  laugh  ringing. Beside her as always was Caroline Clement, the perfect foil:  pale, petite,  with  moon-coloured hair and wide blue eyes. When  I had  served

THE MAKING OF  JALNA



the  piece  de  resistance, a "Roman  Casserole", Mazo  charmed me by saying  she had  tasted  no better  dish in Italy.  I am sure,  even  had  the  meal  been  burned to a crisp, she would  have  been thoughtful of my youth  and  feelings.
From  that  time  on  Mazo  was  a  cosmopolitan, mixing  with  the  literary  great in  London  and   New  York,  living  in  delightful, out-of-the-way   houses.  Miss Clement had  a passion for  antiques of all kinds,  particularly Venetian glass, and as  the  Whiteoaks saga  developed  it  was possible  for  the  two  to live as finely as they chose. They  adopted dogs, and  two European children orphaned in an auto­ mobile  accident. Together with  animals,  children, nannies and  furnishings they moved  back  and  forth  until  the  war  put  an end  to travel.
I  used  to  wonder  how  all this rather  grand  life would  affect  Mazo's writing.
By  this  time  we  were,  in  Canada, deep  in  the  depression   and  heading for  the reverberations of the  Spanish  Civil War; and  I myself was absorbed  in the social and  political  implications of those events.  Mazo's consciousness,  although aware of larger  issues, did  not  reveal  outward concern. She  appeared to be immersed, if one  can  judge  by her  autobiography, with  every-day  family  doings  and  with the  ever-proliferating problems  of the  Whiteoaks clan.  In  the  writing  itself one saw  that  her  strong  gift  for  characterization remained, her  sense of drama and humour; but  it had  perhaps become sentimentalized. There was no  point  of view in her writing.
My  last  talk  with  Mazo  de la Roche  was a gentle  one,  on the  personal  family
level of the early  days. The  war  was over and  I had  a little girl of my own whom Mazo  and  her  half-sister  wanted to see. Miss Clement, alas,  was nearly  blind  by then,  and  Mazo  was the  one  who  must  read  to  her.  We  were  invited  to  tea  in their  charming Toronto house,  glittering throughout  with  coloured  glass. They spoke  with  particular affection   of  my  father, the  erratic "Squire of  Woodlot", and  of  the  thousands of daffodils  and  narcissi  he  had  planted under   the  white birches  at  Clarkson. But  by now  our  beloved  woodland had  been cut  up,  paved, made  into  suburbia; and  we  lamented together   the  old  days  in  Ontario when people  did  live as English  landed  gentry.



THE  ENCHANTED HOUSES

Leacock's Irony






D. A. Cameron











CRITICAL DISCUSSIONS  of  Stephen Leacock's Sun>him Sketches  of  a  Little  Town revolve  about   two  central   questions, upon   each  of which  the  critics  are sharply  divided. The  first of these deals  with  the  book's dis­ tinctive  flavour: is it sharply satiric,  or is it composed  of kind  and fundamentally affectionate comedy?   The   second   question   is  concerned   more  with  character­ ization   and  structure, and  with  the  mind  and  motives  of  Leacock  himself,  the issue being  whether or  not  the  book is a tentative, exploratory step  in the  direc­ tion  of  the  fully  articulated novel,  and  therefore  whether   Leacock  achieved  his full  potentialities as a writer.
Obviously, the  two  questions are  logically related.  The  first turns  on  Leacock's relation to  his  material, on  the  way in  which  he saw the  material and  the  way in  which   he  intended his  reader   to see it. So,  essentially,  does  the  second:  the novelist's  concern is with  plot  and  character treated  in  terms  of certain  conven­ tions  for  which   Professor   Ian   Watt   has  suggested  the  term   "formal  realism".' Those  who  feel that  Leacock  could  never  have  been  a novelist  commonly main­  tain  that  Leacock  did  not  see his characters, or their  actions, in terms  of formal  realism-which is another way of saying that  Leacock's approach to his material is incompatible with  the  novel  form.  A detailed  discussion of Leacock's work  in relation   to  the  novel  is hardly possible  here,  but  the  view  of  human character and  action  which  we shall see in  Leacock's best book does not seem substantially different  from  that  of such  a comic  novelist  as Fielding.

THE ENCHANTED HOUSES



Our concern, then,  is with  the  terms  in  which  Leacock  sees both  the  people who  inhabit his  book  and  their  actions.  We  may  call  this  his  vision.  What is the  characteristic quality  of this vision?
For  Desmond Pacey,  the  vision of Sunshine Sketches is fundamentally kindly; in  The   Unsolved Riddle  of Social  justice  ( 1920),  modern industrial civilization is criticized  from  the viewpoint  of a benevolent eighteenth-century country squire; and

In   his  greatest  book of  humour,  Sunshine  Sketches  of  a  Little   Town  (1912), Leacock  uses gentle  irony  to suggest the  same  general  outlook.  Here  he  creates an idyll of a small community....2

A little later  in the same essay, Professor  Pacey  refers to the book's "genial satire", and  he concludes,  "The satire  in Sunshine Sketches is ... very mild  and  gentle." Robertson Davies,  on  the  other  hand, sees the  book  as  "ferocious and  mor­
dant". He goes on:

What  it  says, if  we boil it down,  is that the  people of  Mariposa  were a  self­ important,  gullible,  only  moderately  honest  collection  of  provincial  folk;  they cooked  their  election,  they  burned  down  a  church   to  get  the  insurance,  they exaggerated  the  most trivial  incidents  into  magnificent  feats  of bravery;  the sun­ shine  in  which  the  little  town  is bathed  seems very often  to  be the glare  of the clinician's  lamp,  and the author's  pen is as sharp  as the clinician's  scalpel.3

A  third   position  is outlined   by  Malcolm Ross.  After  reviewing the  disagree­ ment  between   Davies  and  Pacey,  Ross makes  the  point  that  their  two  positions may  not  be such  uneasy  bedfellows  as it  might  at  first appear.  Leacock,  he sug­ gests, is not a satirist:

Because he loves what  he hates. And he is not bribed  into loving what he hates ... He  just can't  help it. To attack and  defend, to love and  hate in one breath,  is not the  genius  of satire  but  the genius of irony,  the subtler  art,  the  deeper  wisdom.4

For   all  this  difference  of  opinion   about   Leacock's vision,  no  one  has  so far offered  a close examination of specific passages  in  the  book  as a useful means  of approaching the  question.  That is the  approach I want  to  take  now.  What  we will  find  may  be  clearer  if  we  bear  in  mind   that   the  satirist   must  distinguish sharply between   himself  and  his characters, while  the  writer  of pathos,  in  con­ trast,  asks not  that  we observe  and  judge  his characters but  that  we understand them  and  identify  with them.  And  the ironist  feels both  things  at once. Seeing the

32

THE ENCHANTED HOUSES



character both  from  within  and  without,  the ironist simultaneously obsexves and forgives  his weaknesses;  he combines  the  viewpoints  of satire  and  pathos.
Moreover, the  ironist's view  of  character implies  an  awareness of  a  leading
fact  about  the  human condition: man  is at once both social and  individual. As a social being, he has a relationship with his fellows, and  the relationship carries responsibilities. When he fails to live up to those responsibilities, he is a legitimate object  of satire.  On  the other hand,  he is an individual; seen in terms  of his own makeup and  the  forces  acting upon  it, his failings in the social sphere  are under­ standable, and  he may even take on a kind of nobility. The ironic  view of  charac­ ter  provides  a  means  of  reflecting  in  literature the  full  complexity of  this  dual  condition.
I want  to suggest  that  although Leacock's  vision in Sunshine  Sketches appears
at  first  to  be satiric,  and  although a large  element  of the  book is in fact  satiric, its  overall  vision  is ironic,   and  in  its  best  passages  we  are  aware, however  im­ perfectly,  that  we are  in the  presence  of basic questions  about the nature of  truth and   the  nature of  man. Leacock   usually  begins  with  an  external view  of   his characters and  comes  gradually to suggest  their  inner  lives as well;  we  begin  in satire,  but we end in irony.
To  see how  this  change takes  place,  we may examine  several  passages in some
detail.   In   the  following   passage,  Leacock  is satirizing   the  romantic illusions  of
Zena  Pepperleigh:

With hands clasped she would sit there dreaming all the beautiful day-dreams of girlhood.  When  you  saw  that  far-away  look in  her  eyes, it  meant  that  she was dreaming   that  a  plumed  and  armoured  knight  was rescuing  her  from  the  em­ battled  keep  of a castle  beside the Danube.  At other  times she was being  borne away by an  Algerian  corsair  over the  blue waters of the  Mediterranean  and was reaching  out  her arms  towards  France  to say farewell to it.s

During several  more   paragraphs of  roughly  the  same  kind,  Leacock   broadens his satire  to include the  girls  of Mariposa in general: "... all the  girls in  Mari­ posa  were  just  like that." The edge  of the satire  is sharpened  by  contrasting the girls'  dreams with  their  actual situation -gently at  first  (we  see them  against  "a  background of  maple  trees  and  the green  grass of a  tennis court") and  then  more incisively:

And if you remember,  too, that  these are cultivated  girls who have all been to the Mariposa high school and can do decimal fractions, you will understand  that an Algerian  corsair  would  sharpen  his scimitar  at  the  very si§ht  of them.  (p.  169)


33

THE ENCHANTED HOUSES



We  are  seeing  these  girls from  the  outside,  and  we  continue to do so until  the last sentence of the  next  paragraph. Here  is the  paragraph:

Don't  think  either  that  they are all dying to get married; because they are not. I  don't  say they wouldn't  take an errant  knight,  or a buccaneer  or a Hungarian refugee, but for  the ordinary marriages of ordinary  people they feel nothing  but a pitying  disdain. So it is that  each one of them  in due  time marries an enchanted prince  and  goes to live in one of the little enchanted houses in the lower part  of the town.

Something has changed; the illusion has become  the  reality.  Leacock  has gone over to the girls'  point of view and  is looking at the  world  through their  eyes; the world  as they  find  it really is the  romantic place  they  thought it to be, and  they are  not  disappointed in  their  hopes.  When  we  were  laughing at  illusion,  more­ over,  we were  actually  laughing at  truth; the  laughter now  must  be at  our  own expense,  since  we  ourselves  seem  to  have  mistaken truth for  illusion. To  make it even  more  clear,  Leacock  continues:

I don't  know whether you know it, but you can  rent an enchanted  house in Mari­ posa for  eight  dollars a month,  and  some of the  most completely  enchanted  are the cheapest.  As for the enchanted  princes, they find them in the strangest  places, where  you never expected to see them, working-under a spell, you understand
-in  drug-stores  and  printing  offices, and  even selling things in shops. But  to be
able  to find  them  you have first to read  ever so many  novels about  Sir Galahad and  the  Errant Quest  and  that  sort of thing.  (pp.  169-70)

Clearly,  Leacock  is giving us an  inside view of the  girls'  world; from  their view­ point,  what  we  have  considered  to be appearance has  become  reality. But  there  is a further twist  of the  irony  here.  So far,  Leacock  has  been  saying,  essentially, that  there  is no  way  to  say  that  one  view of  the  girls'  dreams is  truer  than   the other; it is a purely  subjective  question.  But we may  recall  that  the passage began by discussing Zena  Pepperleigh in particular, and  as the story unfolds  we discover that  her  dream of marrying an  enchanted prince  is literally  true,  if on a limited scale;   Pupkin, the  man  she  does  eventually marry, is  working   as  a  bank  clerk more  or  less incognito. His  father, one  of the  wealthiest men  in  the  Maritimes and  a former  Attorney General, is a financier who "blew companies like bubbles" and  who owns Tidal Transportation Company, Fundy Fisheries Corporation and  the  Paspebiac Pulp  and  Paper Unlimited. Pupkin, the only son and  heir apparent, who  has been sent  into the world  to make  his own  name and  fortune, is in actual  fact a merchant prince.6

34

THE ENCHANTED HOUSES



The  motif  of the  enchanted houses reappears as we leave that  part  of the  book which  centres  around Pupkin and  Zena:

So Pupkin  and  Zena  in  due  course of time were married,  and  went  to live in one of the  enchanted houses on the hillside in the newer part  of the town, where you may find them to this day.
You may see Pupkin  there  at any time cutting enchanted grass on a little lawn
in as gaudy a blazer as ever.
But if you step  up to speak to him or walk with him into the enchanted house, pray modulate  your voice a little-musical though it is-for  there  is said to be an  enchanted  baby  on  the  premises whose sleep must  not  lightly  be  disturbed. (p.211)

It is still funny:  Pupkin is still essentially  a comic character, and  once  again  the reader  himself  is partially the object  of the fun.  But the  passage is irradiated with Leacock's  feeling  for both  the outside of the house, which  is comic, and  the inside, the  wonder  and  joy of marriage and  family. The  humour is based on a paradox: the  lover  as seen  by  other  men  is absurdly foolish  and  richly  comic,  but  at  the same  time  he  inhabits a  world  which  for  him  is utterly  transformed into some­ thing  fresh,  golden   and   magnificent. That  Leacock  did  see his lovers  this way, is confirmed  by a passage  in his own voice:

For you see, it is the illusion that  is the real reality. I think  that  there  are only two people  who see clearly  (at  least as to one another), and  these are two young lovers, newly fallen  in love. They  see one another  just as they really are, namely, a Knight  Errant and  a Fairy. But who realizes that  that  old feller shuffling along in spats is a  Knight  Errant, too, and  that  other  is a Fairy,  that  bent  old woman knitting in the comer.
This  illusion, greater  than  reality, we grasp easily in  the form of what  we call
art-our books, our plays.?





IF WE WERE to examine the  whole  book in detail, we would find  that  Leacock's development of character often  follows the  pattern we have
seen in  Pupkin. Pepperleigh, for instance, seems at first to be a simple  caricature of the  country judge: he is rabidly  Conservative, ill-tempered and  pompous, and his  judgements are  clearly  dictated by his private interests-he acquits his son of an  assault  charge, and  he forces  the  insurance company to pay  for  the  burnt

35

THE ENCHANTED HOUSES



church. Yet  when  his son  is killed  in  South  Africa,  Pepperleigh's pain  and  the support he derives  from  his wife display  a human being  within  the caricature.
Similarly, Josh  Smith  makes  dramatic changes  in  his  hotel  in  order  to  draw people  so  that  his  liquor  license  will  be  renewed by  popular  request; we know he  is cynically  manipulating his fellow citizens,  and  that  he intends  to close the Caff  and  the  Rats  Cooler  as soon as the  license is renewed. Yet the  kindly, sym­ pathetic side  of the  man  becomes  visible when,  at  the  crucial moment,  he  does not  close up,  because  to do so would  be petty  and  ungrateful.  Jeff  Thorpe like­ wise seems  to  be  a  selfish, acquisitive  little  man,  but  we  discover  he intends to use his wealth  for  the  poor  and  the  disabled- though Leacock  undercuts Jeff's  generous  spirit   by  making  his  arithmetic suspiciously  faulty   ( pp.  58-59). This  pattern is not  a formula, nor  is it  invariable-nothing of the  kind  happens in the  election  chapters, for  instance  -but  it  is pervasive  enough  to  suggest  that  it  represents  one  of Leacock's  chief  beliefs about his characters.
Even  minor   actions  in  the  book  often  owe  their  appeal to  this  ironic  vision. When   the  Mariposa Belle is sinking  in  less than  six feet  of  water,  part  of  the fun  turns  on  Leacock's  awareness  of  the  difference between   the  way  the  event looks  to  an  outsider-the reader-and  the  way  it  looks  if  you  are  on  the steamer:

Safe!  Oh,  yes!  Isn't  it  strange  how safe other  people's  adventures seem after they happen.  But you'd have been scared, too, if you'd  been there  just before the steamer sank, and seen them bringing up all the women on to the top deck. (p. 87)

Two   paragraphs later  the  narrator has forgotten what  he said  in  the  first  flush of excitement, and  now  he scorns  the  danger too:

Really,  it  made  one  positively laugh!  It sounded  so queer  and,  anyway, if a man has a sort of natural courage, danger makes him laugh. Danger? pshaw! fiddlesticks! everybody scouted  the  idea.  Why, it  is just  the  little  things like this that give zest to a day on the water.

Reversing his  usual  movement, Leacock  has  abandoned  his  position  beside  the narrator and  is now inviting  us to laugh  at  the latter's inconsistency.
Perhaps the  best  illustration of  Leacock's  irony  is afforded by  the  Reverend Rupert Drone, Dean  of the  Anglican Church. Dean  Drone  at first appears to be no  more  than  a  caricature of the  simple  country cleric.  His  name  suggests  this; so  does  his  first  appearance in  the  book,  just  after   Josh  Smith   has  begun  his flamboyant career  as proprietor of the  old Royal  Hotel:

THE ENCHANTED HOUSES



When  the Rev. Dean  Drone  led off with a sermon on the text "Lord  be merciful even  unto  this publican  Matthew  Six," it was generally  understood  as an invita­ tion to strike Mr. Smith  dead.  (p. 20)

Through the  first four  chapters, Dean  Drone  remains  a figure  who  appears only occasionally, and  then  for  satiric  purposes.  (He  goes on  the  Marine  Excursion of the Knights of Pythias, for instance, with "a  trolling line in case of maskinonge, and  a landing net in case of pickerel,  and  with his eldest daughter, Lillian  Drone, in case of young  men.") In  the fourth chapter he becomes somewhat individual­ ized;  we discover  that  he loves to read  Greek,  though  he refuses to translate any;  he cannot do mathematics; he is much impressed  by such mechanical contrivances as the  airplane. And  he has  had  his great  dream: the  building of a new church.
But  now  that  the  new  church has  been  built,  Dean  Drone  finds it difficult  to
pay for.  A series of attempts to raise money all result in comic  catastrophe. Some members  of  the  congregation begin  to  blame  Mr.  Drone, and  we discover  that he can  be  hurt. Leacock  records  the  incident with  a sympathy which,  though  it is flecked  with  humour, is remarkably unequivocal:

Once ... the  rector  heard  some one say:  "The  Church  would be all right if that old  mugwump  was out  of the  pulpit."  It  went to his heart  like a barbed  thorn, and stayed there.
You know, perhaps,  how a remark  of that  sort can stay and  rankle,  and  make
you wish you could  hear  it again  to make sure of it,  because perhaps  you didn't hear  it right,  and  it was a mistake after  all. Perhaps  no one said it, anyway. You ought to have written it down at the time. I have seen the Dean take down the encyclopeadia  in  the  rectory,  and  move his finger slowly down  the  pages of the letter  M,  looking for  mugwump.  But  it  wasn't  there.  I  have  known  him, in his little  study  upstairs,  tum   over  the  pages of  the  "Animals  of  Palestine,"  looking for  a  mugwump.  But  there  was none  there.  It  must have  been  unknown  in the greater days of Judea.  (p.I 14)

The  Dean's gentleness,  his respect  for scholarship and  his unworldliness all unite to  make  us  feel  his  pain,   and   Leacock's direct   reference  to  the  reader ("You know,  perhaps ...")  is an  appeal for sympathy. From  this point  on, Dean  Drone is never  again  the simple  figure  of fun  he once was.
When  the  term  "mugwump" comes up again,  its effect  is terrible. The climax of the  Church's fund-raising efforts is the Whirlwind Campaign, which  is another financial failure, and  Mullins, the  chairman of the Campaign, comes to give the Dean  one  hundred dollars  which  Mullins  has  himself contributed. Mullins  later reports  that  the  rector  has  been  very quiet:

37

THE ENCHANTED HOUSES



Indeed,   the  only  time  when  the  rector  seemed  animated   and  excited  in  the whole interview  was when  Mullins said that  the campaign  had  been ruined  by a lot of confounded  mugwumps. Straight  away the Dean  asked if those mugwumps had  really  prejudiced  the  outcome  of  the  campaign.   Mullins  said  there  was no doubt  of it,  and  the  Dean  enquired  if  the  presence  of mugwumps  was fatal  in matters  of endeavour,  and  Mullins said that  it was. Then  the rector asked if even one  mugwump   was, in  the  Christian   sense,  deleterious.  Mullins  said  that  one mugwump  would  kill anything.  After that  the Dean  hardly  spoke at all.  (p. I34)

The  serious  discussion  of mugwumps is comic,  but  we are  aware  that  something dreadful is happening to the  Dean.  Soon  he excuses  himself  on  the ground that he has some letters  to write,  but:

The  fact  is that  Dean  Drone  was not  trying  to write  letters, but  only one letter. He  was writing  a letter  of resignation. If you have  not done  that  for forty  years it is extremely  difficult to get the words.  (p. I 35)

The flat  simplicity  and  the  understatement of those sentences are  heartbreaking. They  are succeeded by a passage equally  heartbreaking, in which  Leacock's irony reaches  perhaps its peak in the whole  book;  only the  "Envoi" can  compare with it.  The   Dean's efforts  to write  the  letter  lead  him  into  some  hilarious  thickets  of syntax  and  meaning. The  sense of the  letter  keeps  changing; each  draft  contra­ dicts  the  previous  one, and  finally the letter  looks like this:

"There are  times, gentlemen,  in  the  life of a parish,  when  it comes to an epoch which  bring  it  to a moment  when it reaches  a point ... where  the circumstances of  the  moment  make  the  epoch  such  as  to focus  the  life of  the  parish  in  that time."  (pp. I 37-38)

Yet  the  context in  which  this comedy  occurs  is the  moment of final  defeat  for  a good  old  man  who  has  given  his whole  life  to  the  charge he is now  resigning; who  has  striven  to serve both  his gentle  God  and  the  community of which  he is a  devoted   member; who  has  tried,  in  his  humble, unworldly, rather  bumbling way  to leave  the  world  a better  place  than  he found  it.  Leacock  snaps  this essen­ tially  bitter  moment into  perspective  by showing  us that  the  Dean  has met defeat  even  on  the  ground of his pride  in his use of language. It has always been an  ill­ founded pride,  and  it has given  us considerable amusement; now the Dean,  too, sees  the  truth:

Then  the Dean saw that  he was beaten,  and  he knew that  he not only couldn't

THE ENCHANTED HOUSES



manage  the  parish  but  couldn't  say so in proper English, and  of the two the last was the bitterer  discovery. (p. 138)

concludes  the scene :

He raised his head, and  looked for a moment through  the window at the shadow of the church  against  the  night,  so outlined  that  you could  almost fancy that  the light  of the  New Jerusalem  was beyond it. Then  he  wrote,  and  this time  not to the world at large but only to Mullins:
"My dear Harry,  I want  to resign my charge. Will you come over and help me?"

In  that  last  passage,  the  irony  twists again.  First,  of course,  we  notice  that  the church is seen  through the  rector's  eyes:  "the light of the  New Jerusalem" is an example of  the  comically   elaborate religious  terms  and   images  through  which he  sees the  world.  But  the  deeper  irony  arises from  the  fact  that  there  really is a light  behind  the  church, though  it is not  the  light  of the  New Jerusalem. It is the  light  of flames: the church is burning at the hands  of an arsonist  who we are later  led  to  believe  is Josh  Smith.   In  order  to solve its  financial problems,  the congregation fires its church; and  the irony of this act  is complex.  It defeats  the
moral,  the  religious  and  the  unworldly  virtues  which  Dean  Drone  stands  for - and  for what? To  solve a problem  which  is financial  and  worldly: men,  Leacock seems  to  be  saying,  do  not  even  understand, let  alone  obey,  religious  codes of conduct. The   fire  destroys  all  the  Dean's illusions  about the  instruction he  has given  his flock  in  moral  and  ethical  matters. Not  only  does  the  fire destroy  the substance of the  Dean's achievement, however,  a substance which  was  rooted  in his  effectiveness  as  a  Christian leader,  but  also it  destroys  the  physical  church which  was  the  symbol  of  his achievement. By a further irony,  the  Dean  himself has  caused   the  fire,  however   inadvertently, through  his  own  mismanagement. And,  in a final ironic  thrust, we discover that  the destruction of this church, which is heavily  over-insured, will completely  finance  a new church. The  Dean's symbol is retained, but  the  fire  which  allows  Mariposa to retain  it obliterates its  mean­ ing and  spirit.
It seems the  Dean  realizes something of what  the burning of the church  implies
-or  perhaps his reaction is simply  one  of shock:

So stood  the  Dean,  and  as the  church  broke thus into  a  very beacon  kindled upon  a  hill-sank  forward   without  a  sign, his face  against  the  table,  stricken. (p. 139)8

The   Dean   recovers  from   his  stroke,  but  he  is never  fully  sane  again; still  a


39

THE ENCHANTED HOUSES



gentle  old  man, but  now  remote  from  the  world,  he suffers  from  hallucinations, and  Leacock  takes leave of him in a passage which,  though coloured  with humour, is suffused  with  compassion:

So you will understand  that  the Dean's  mind,  [sic]  is, if anything, even keener, and  his head  even clearer  than  before. And  if you want  proof of it,  notice  him there  beneath  the  plum  blossoms reading  in  the  Greek:   he  has told  me that  he finds he can  read, with the greatest ease, works in the Greek that seemed difficult before. Because his head is so clear now.
And  sometimes -when his head  is very  clear-as  he  sits there  reading  be­ neath  the  plum  blossoms, he can  hear  them  singing beyond, and  his wife's voice. (pp. 147-48)


Once  again  there  is direct  reference  to the  reader, too:  "you  will understand." Looking  back over  the passages we have examined, you are struck  by the number of  such  references, and  by  the  fact  that  there  are  two  extra  characters in  each scene:   the  narrator and  the  reader. As  we  have  seen,  neither is exempt   from Leacock's humourous scrutiny.  In  fact,  much  of the  humour of the  book is based on  the  interplay among  the  inhabitants of  Mariposa, the  narrator (who  is  evi­ dently  not  Leacock), and  the  reader.



LE NARRATOR is naive,  unsophisticated, baffled by such abstrac­
tions  as  election  issues;  a  Mariposan to  the  core,  he  is something of a  Booster
and  he  usually  seems  quite  unaware of moral  issues. Like  Gulliver  at  the  court of Brobdingnag, he often tells a true story which  he expects  will display the glories of  his  home,  but  which  instead  exposes  its  hypocrisy,  immorality and  pettiness. Such  a character is an ideal  vehicle of satire,  and  indeed  the  narrator does quite unconsciously  direct  a good  deal  of the  book's  satiric  thrust. But  he is balanced by the  reader, and  possession of the "real" truth constantly passes back  and  forth between  the  two.
This  reader-narrator interplay begins the  book: the  narrator, who knows what
Mariposa is "really" like, shows the reader  around the  town,  demonstrating that the surface  impression  is not the actual  truth. ("But this quiet  is mere appearance. In  reality,  and  to those who know  it, the  place  is a  perfect  hive of activity.") Is the  narrator right  in  this  and  in  his other  comments on  Mariposa? Perhaps-

THE ENCHANTED HOUSES



and  perhaps  not.  In  the  first and  last chapters,  Leacock's equivocating  irony  is brought  to bear  on both  the city and  the little town. Each  has virtues which  the other  cannot  share;  each  has shortcomings  to which  the other  is immune.  The wider  scope which  the city offers is necessarily accompanied  by cold imperson­ ality, while the small town, which provides warmth and community, lacks privacy and  tends to stifle initiative.  The  Mariposan  view of the city is instructive  here. The  town usually sees the city as treacherous and malign: for instance, Mullins re­ flects, after  the  Whirlwind  Campaign  has failed, that there are "so many skunks in Mariposa  that  a man might as well be in the Head Office in the city" ( p.I 3 I ) , and similar remarks  are made  throughout  the book. Yet, as Desmond  Pacey  has pointed out, Mariposa spends a great deal of energy in trying to become a metrop­ olis, and  the  narrator's comment  that  the town is "a  hive of activity" is further evidence of this desire. There  is irony, then, in  Mariposa's  view of  the  city, an irony  which  reflects the  town's  simultaneous  rejection  of, and  longing  for,  city values. The  overall  effect  of Sunshine   Sketches is to leave  us  with  a  similarly complex awareness of the way of life symbolized by Mariposa.
To  a considerable  extent, the relation between reader and narrator is responsi­
ble for this awareness. That  relation begins the book and it carries the same theme throughout. It emerges  most clearly in  the last  chapter,  where  once  again  the difference  between  the  outsider's  view  (this  time of  the  whole  town)   and  the insider's  view  forms  the  basis of an  ironic  coda  which  comments  on  a  whole rural  way of life.
Here the irony turns, to a considerable extent, on our new knowledge that  both the reader  and  the narrator are, like the rest of the members of the  Mausoleum Club,  originally  from  Mariposa,  and  on  their  inability  really  to  go  back:   we leave them, after our "mad  career" on the train to Mariposa, sitting in their arm­ chairs in their  club in the city. They have accepted sophisticated city values, and  they have done well there;  the reader owns a "vast palace of sandstone ... in the costlier part  of the city."  And  they can  never fully be part  of Mariposa  again; they notice such things as Mariposa's out-of-style clothing. Both reader and narra­ tor see the town from  the outside.
Yet as the  train  thunders  north  through  the woods, we come to identify  with
Mariposa,  with the way of life represented by the people on the train. The excite­ ment  of  homecoming   mounts;   the  train   becomes the  fastest,  finest  and  most sociable train  in the world;  and  finally we arrive at the station,  while  brakemen and  porters cry "MARIPOSA! MARIPOSA!"
At that  climactic  moment  Leacock ends the book by pulling us back again  to

THE ENCHANTED HOUSES



our  actual  positions,  outside  the  town,  smiling  at  it a little,  and  yet filled with  a sense of lost youth  and innocence. The  reader  and  the narrator have paid  a heavy price  for  their  success.  Though  Mariposa has  more  than its  share  of stupidity and  hypocrisy, it also has simplicity and vigour.
And  yet life in  Mariposa is more  complicated, more  equivocal than  it seems. The   narrator has  discovered  this  as he has  matured, and   the  ironic  vision  rests partly  on  his recognition both  that  Mariposa was a good  place  to be a child  and that  it would  be a bad  place  to be an adult. He  is nostalgic  for  Mariposa, but  he does  not  leave  the  Mausoleum Club.
This   recognition,  however,   seems  to  imply   a  contradiction in  the  narrator.
Throughout the  book, as we have seen, he has appeared to be a naive, rather un­ intelligent Mariposan. Yet in the ''Envoi" he is evidently  a city dweller of consider­  able  penetration and  insight.  Does this indicate a flaw in Leacock's conception of him?  Probably   not:   it is more  likely that  Leacock  conceived of  the narrator as an  intelligent man  feigning simplicity.  This  would  explain  a good deal: the speed with   which   the  narrator moves  from  cowardice to  courage  when  the  steamer sinks  for  instance, is more  credible  if the  narrator is only  pretending to  be un­  aware of the inconsistency.  Similarly,  the intellectual sparks which  glow here and there   through  the  book-the  sharp   quips  on  college  men  and  education, for instance, or  the  occasional   satire  on  jargon  and on  modem  business9 -have indicated  all  along  that   the  narrator's mind  was  more  sharply honed  than   he would   have  us  believe.  His  apparent  inconsistency, then,  supports the  view  of Mariposa we have  been suggesting: he  cannot go back  because  he cannot quite  fit into  the  Mariposan framework, however  hard  he tries;  he cannot accept  Mari­ posa's  people  and  events  at  their  face  value,  though   he  can  recognize  that   he may  have  been  happier when  he could.  The  same  recognition made  another boy from   Mariposa build  a  summer home  back  in  the  small  town  he  remembered with  such  affection;  but  the  larger  part  of  the  year  he  spent  as a  professor  at McGill.




ALL THIS should  give  us pause.  For  if the  narrator is not as simple  as he looks, what  of Leacock?  Is he suggesting  more  than  he is saying?
I think  he  is, or  more  accurately, I think  his book  is based  on  a view of the human  condition which  is profoundly ironic.  We  value  the  truth, but  we  can

42

THE ENCHANTED HOUSES



never  know  what  is true; Sunshine Sketches is, among  other  things,  a demonstra­ tion of the subjective way in which individuals are doomed  to see the world.  What is the difference  between  appearance and  reality? How may an individual, limited as his vision must  be, tell the difference  between  them?  What is truth, said  jesting Leacock,  and   could  not  supply  an  answer-because  he  could  see  none,  or  at least no way to recognize  one.
Similarly, though  we  value  our  fellow  men,  we can  never  really  know  them
either: if  we  are  all  condemned  to see the  world  through personal, individual spectacles,  then  we  cannot really  communicate with  each  other; isolation  is our fate,  and  we live and  die alone.  As E. M. Forster  puts it, "we  cannot understand each  other,  except  in  a rough  and  ready  way;  we cannot reveal  ourselves,  even when  we want  to;  what  we call intimacy is only a makeshift; perfect  knowledge is an  illusion." This  sense  of isolation  is common  enough in  modern literature; Ernest  Hemingway and  Forster's own fiction come immediately to mind. In Sun­ shine Sketches it is mainly  evident  in the ironic  treatment of character and in the demonstration  that   each   man   inhabits a  private  world.  It is  also  visible  in  a negative   way:   three   responses  which   attempt to  counteract  isolation   meet  in Sunshine   Sketches  and,   I suspect,   account for  part   of  its  appeal-laughter, romantic love, and  membership in a small community.
Leacock's attitude to  his  material, then,  is ironic  in  a way  that  is based  on  a deep  apprehension of  what   it  means  to  be  human, and  his  humour is both  a vehicle  for  this  apprehension  and  a  defence  against  the  pain  it  necessarily  in­ volves. One  always hesitates  to say that  humour is basically a very serious business, and  Leacock  himself  found  a good  deal of fun  in just that  concept.  Nevertheless,  he saw humour as a way of thinking seriously about  life; in  Humour: Its Theory  and Technique (1935),  he comments:

... humour  in its  highest  meaning  and  its furthest  reach ... does not  depend  on verbal  inconguities,  or on  tricks of sight and  hearing.  It finds its basis in  the in­ congruity of life itself, the contrast  between the fretting cares and the petty sorrows of the day and  the long mystery of the to-morrow. Here laughter  and  tears become one, and  humour  becomes the contemplation  and interpretation of our life. 10

The   contemplation  and  interpretation of  our  life.  At  its  best,  Leacock's irony leads  to no less than  that.






43

THE ENCHANTED HOUSES



FOOTNOTES

' The Rise of the Novel  (Berkeley and  Los Angeles, 1957), p. 32.
•  "Leacock as a Satirist," Queen's Quarterly 58  ( 1951), p. 213.
3  "On  Stephen Leacock" in  C. T.  Bissell, ed.,  Our  Living Tradition  (First  Series) (Toronto, 1957), p. I47·
4   Preface to  the  New  Canadian  Library edition of  Sunshine Sketches of a  Little
Town (Toronto, 1g6o), p. xi.
s  Stephen Leacock, Sunshine  Sketches of a Little  Town (John Lane, London, 1912), p.  167.  All  further references  to  Sunshine Sketches are  to  this  first  edition, and subsequent references  are inserted  in parentheses in the  text.
6   A further irony,  which I think  a little strained: Pupkin  has been sent to Mariposa at  the  suggestion  of a friend  of his father, a friend who  ignores  Pupkin  in Mari­ posa. The friend  turns  out  to be Judge Pepperleigh, Pupkin's future father-in-law, who has been a rather terrifying figure  to the young man.
7   Last Leaves  (Toronto, 1945), p. 89.
8   "A  very  beacon  kindled  on a hill"  is another case in which  a metaphor-i.e., an apparent unreality-becomes  the  literal   truth, just  as  the  metaphor of  the  en­ chanted prince  did.
9   On  education, see pp. 18, 42, 58, 79, 123, 126, 232; on  jargon, pp.  15, 81, 86, 88;
on business, pp. 39, 106.
10  Humour: Its Theory and Technzque, (New York,  1935), p. 17.











44



THE 0LD  FUTILITY OF ART

Knister's Poetry





Peter Stevens














MosT CRITICAL STATEMENTS about  Raymond  Knffiter's verse ms1st upon  the  vividness of  his  portrayal of Ontario farm  life and  the imagist nature  of many  of his poems. Early in his career Robert  Finch "thought highly  of these  bare  unmusical  imagist  verses" (Memoir   by Dorothy  Livesay) and  in Canadian  Literature  No. 6  (Autumn  1g6o)  Milton  Wilson presents him as a "writer  of pastorals  and  herald  of imagism". There  is no doubt  that  many of Knister's  poems comply with what the imagists decreed in their famous mani­ festo was the  best kind  of verse, "hard  and clear, never blurred  and  indefinite".  In  that  key  document   of  the  imagist  movement,  Speculations,  T.  E.  Hulme defined  the new classicism in  revolt against the sloppy romanticism  of  the verse of his day. This  new  verse had  to be "strictly  confined  to  the  earthly  and  the definite",  it had  to be a poetry of "the  light of ordinary  day, never the light that never was on land  or sea".  Knister  uses this hard  precise manner  in much  of his poetry,  which,  as  Leo  Kennedy   pointed  out  in  Canadian   Forum   (September
1932), is a  "bald  expression of events" achieving its effects "without benefit of spangles".  He  singled  out  "Feed" as a good  example;  other  poems  using this straightforward objective  imagist  manner  well are "The  Hawk", "In  The  Rain

45

THE  OLD FUTILITY OF ART


Sowing  Oats" and  this passage from "After Exile" : The com like drunken grenadiers
Topples tarnished
Whispering
At the hooting train.

Knister in  his  reviews  of  some  long-forgotten volumes  of  poetry  showed  his concern for  accuracy of observation  and  spare  lean  expression.  He  commended a poet for a "Spartan plainness  which  in itself is at least never a liability" (Poetry, October 1924), and  he  was suitably  amazed when  he  found  "nothing lush"  in some  poems  about  Hawaii   (Poetry, May  1925).
In  articles  for various  periodicals  in the  nineteen twenties  Knister  applied  these
ideas  about   poetry  to  some  Canadian poets.  He  shows  a  keen  appreciation of Lampman's poetry,  but  he complains that  he  (Lampman) did  not  always "keep his eye  accurately on the  object" (Dalhousie Review, October 1927). In  read­ ing  this  review,  one  can  sense how  Knister   must  have  felt  a  certain  affinity  to some  elements  in  Lampman's poetry.  In  particular, he insists on the importance of nature and  the  natural scene in  Lampman's work:

Man  was to turn  to nature  not because he was so much  man  that  he was kin to all creation,  but  because he was tired,  sick with  being man,  and  desirous of rest and  a  forgetting   within  a  serene  impersonality,  a  soothing  power  to  which  he could moreover assign his own tempers.

Although Knister  was not  really  a descriptive poet  of Lampman's kind,  there is a suggestion  that  Knister  feels in  the  other  poet  the  sense of a separation  be­ tween  man   and  nature. Knister's verse  itself often  suggests  this  lack  of  kinship  between   man  and  the  natural creation. Man  wrestles  with  the  seemingly  insur­  mountable  problems  set  by  nature, whereas   the  creatures of  nature are  undis­ mayed   and  unperturbed by  them.  This  is what  creates  the  tension  in  Knister's best poetry,  the  poems in which  he allows the  details  to speak for themselves,  not those  poems  in  which  he  brings  in  a  more  or  less  overt  moral  comment. It is a lack  of tension,  according to Knister, that  kept  Lampman from  greatness; there  was  "lack   of  tension   between   the  poet  and   his  environment". Thus, Knister  complains that, although Lampman intuitively felt  the  alienation of nature from man,   that   feeling   remained   external. The  conflict   is  between   rather  abstract concepts of  Man   and  Nature and  Lampman himself  never  becomes  a  part  of the tension.
In  an  article  in  Queen's  Quarterly (May 1924), Knister makes the same  kind

THE OLD  FUTILITY OF  ART



of statement about Wilfred  Campbell. Here  he complains of Campbell's  "reluc­ tance  to concern  himself  with  the  personal  and  the immediate". This reluctance, in  Knister's estimation, leads  to  a failure  of imagination, and  Campbell is cate­  gorized  as an  occasional poet  interested  in ornament and  not  truth:

We find Wilfred  Campbell,  unable to find a subject within himself, and compelled to take one from exterior  nature  and decorate it as best he might.

The   true  poet,  then,   according to  Knister,  looks into  himself.  As he  says in the  same  article, "the subject   is  already  within   him,  so  that   he  merely  allows this  or  that  external circumstance to  annotate it."




EaM THESE CRITICAL WRITINGS  we can  see that  the  element
Knister  admired in poetry,  the element  that  he would  try to reproduce in his own verse, was the  subject within  annotated by external circumstance, with  a tension, explicit  or  implied, holding the  poem  in equilibrium.
There is this  kind  of  felt  tension  in  Knister's best  poetry,  often  suggested  by the  conflict   between   man   and   nature. In  "Cross-bred Colt" the  colt  with  its "fierceness  of expression" faces  the  hired  boy who  "swung a clip  to its muzzle". The  poem  ends  with  a sudden tense  awareness:
It turned  away and stood awhile, Ears pricked,
Considering-the first contact with man­ Or was it pure surprise?

The   young  colt  in  "The Colt" has  more  freedom  and  grace  of movement than man,  and  the  farmer's comment at the end  of the poem,  "Idle Colts!  /Somehow nohow  of any  use!" emphasizes the world of difference  between  man  and  nature.
Horses  often  become  symbols  of the stoic pattern of nature. They  always show an  acceptance of their  lives;  there  is no effort  on their  parts  to change, but  they nearly  always emerge  with  character, as in the series of poems, "A Row of Stalls", and  with  a sense of victory,  as in "A  Road", where  in the deadness  of winter  all that  shows  above  the  ridges  is "the  breathmist of a horse", and  man's  dwellings are  reduced   to  something "infinitely  tiny,  inappraisably lonely".  Knister  applies the  word  "patient" to  the  horses in  "The Plowman" and  "Lake Harvest" and in  both  these  poems,  the  horse's  calm  acceptance is contrasted to man's  labour,

47

THE  OLD FUTILITY OF ART



which  often seems so futile in most of Knister's poetry.  The  horses seek no mean­
ing  beyond  themselves,  beyond  their own  existence :

We are not done with toil : Let rain work in these hours, Wind in night's hours,
We with the sun together
Tomorrow.
("Stable  Talk".)

Is  their  patience a  lesson for  man?  Must  man   merely  accept  his labour   and not  be  troubled  by  extraneous thought?  In  "In The Rain, Sowing  Oats" the horses accept  the  pain and  suffering of their labour without any comment, where­ as  the  man,  bothered by  the  bad  weather and  the  hard   work,  plagues  himself with  thoughts about  the  horses eating  too  much  grain  and  thoughts of his own supper.
This  implied  acceptance of life by the  horses does  not  mean  that  their  world is still,  calm   and  lifeless. Nature is constantly on  the  move  in  Knister's  verse. Indeed, this is one  of man's great  burdens: he can  never  fix nature, make some­ thing  permanent. Knister's vision of nature is one  of constant change;  man  has a very  precarious grasp  of the  world.  There is almost  an  element  of  the menace of natural objects  in many  of Knister's poems.  Mud  slithers,  trees wait expectant, winds  are  not  to be trusted  for they are gentle  and  strong, "erratically so steady" ("Night Walk"),  the  hawk  moves  "against a grimy  and  tattered/Sky" coming  from  "trembling tiny  forests/With the  steel  of your  wings".
By the  motion  and  menace  man  is almost  overwhelmed and  submerged. The
succession  of  bleak  details  of  continuance  in  "Reverie:  The   Orchard on  the Slope" suggests  no  place  for  man.  The   snow  in  "Snowfall" almost  obliterates the desire for  life, lulling  "the fever /with pale  bright  sleep", and  the succumbing to these  natural forces becomes  more explicit  in "October Stars".
So far,  much  of what  has  been  said  about  Knister could  be applied  to other poets  who  see  nature as being  alien  to man. Other poets  have  suggested  man's impermanence and  transitory stay  in  the  natural scheme. Poetry  has often  been used  to  suggest  man's  futile  attempts to  impose  order   on  a  constantly shifting landscape and   to  state  that   this  futility   arises  because   man   does  not  have  the patience or stoicism  to accept  the fact  that  he is working with,  trying  to arrange a  pattern in  his life with  recalcitrant material. Looked  at  in  this  way,  Knister's poetry   does  not  seem  very  individual, apart  from   an   occasional   exactness   of

THE OLD FUTILITY OF ART



observation.  Is  this  all there  is in  Knister's  meagre collected  poetry?  What  has happened  to "the  subject  within  himself"? Does Knister fail in his own poetry to apply the rigorous demands  he makes of Campbell, to make the external circum­ stances annotate  "the  subject  within himself"?
The  answer lies, I think,  in the poem, "Moments  When  I'm  Feeling Poems". In  this poem  there  is a  conflict  between  the  poet's vision and  the  inadequacy of language  to express that  vision. This is the "old futility of art."  Words always distort  the poet's  vision; the  people who accept this inadequacy  of language  are "the  ladies  and  the  lords/Of   life",  for  they  "feeljNo call  to  blight  that  sense with  words".
Doesn't  this lead  us back  to the essential problem of Imagism?  The  Imagists believed that  an  image  is, in  Pound's  definition, "that which  presents  an  intel­ lectual  and  emotional  complex in an  instant  of time".  This  dictum  led  to their insistence on  the short  poem  as the only valid kind of poetry.  A poem, in these terms,  is a short  but  weighty summary  of a compelling experience,  an  attempt to impose order  on a vast disorder of material.  Poets, whose concern  is with this kind of reduction  to essentials, are often too petrified to make the attempt. Imag­ ism lost its force almost as soon as imagistic poetry was committed  to paper. All those connected  with imagism who have continued  to write have left behind the rigorous demands  of the movement. Emily Dickinson, attempting much the same kind of crystallization  of experience in images, recognized the problem in one of her letters:  "What a hazard  an accent is! When I think of the hearts it has scuttled and  sunk,  I almost fear  to lift my hand  to so much as punctuation." She seems to  substantiate   what  Knister  is driving  at  in  "Moments When   I  am  Feeling Poems",  for,  if a  poet's  vision is to be  crystallized, it may  ultimately  mean  that silence is the  best poetry, or in Emily  Dickinson's words:

The words  the happy  say
Are paltry  melody
But  those the silent feel
Are beautiful.

Is poetry,  then,  "the  subject  within"  that  the external  circumstance  of nature and farming  annotates  in Knister's  poetry? Does Knister recognize within himself the  impossibility of communicating his vision? Are the  voices of nature  urging the  poet to  discover the  ultimate  language  or are they merely teasing  him with the limitations  of language?  In  "Reply  to August", the night speaks:

The  room does not know it has heard


49

THE  OLD FUTILITY OF ART



But I know,
My heart listening, wild with the word
Murmured  too low.


If he  had  the  freedom  of nature  (and  by  the  analogy  I  have  suggested) the real  freedom of  language, he  would  be  able  to sing  joyously, as he suggests  in "Wind's Way". In  "March Wind," a  poem  included as a  footnote  in  Dorothy Livesay's  memoir, it seems that  the  trees are crying  to be unchained by the wind. By analogy, although the  poem  is not a very good  one,  as Knister  himself  recog­ nized,  the  plea  is for an  unchaining of the  poetic  vision by the force of  language.
This  analogy  is further  emphasized by the  fact  that  all these  poems  are  much more  regular. There is rhyme  and  a much  more  consistent  metrical arrangement in  them. It is as  if  Knister  is  denying the   validity of  the  imagist  techniques and  has  had  to revert  to more  traditional forms  to express  his personal  vision of the  recalcitrant nature of language. It is also significant that  this group  of poems is  written from  the  personal  point  of  view.  They   are  all  in  the  first  person  in order  to emphasize that  this is the  real  "subject within" of his poetry.
Thus, in  the  poem,  "Boy  Remembers in  the  Field", there  is the  usual,  rather bleak  landscape. Here,  then,  is the  barrenness of language, but  its final treachery may  be  that  it seems to offer eventual success:

If any voice called, I would hear? It has been the same before.
Soil glistens, the furrow rolls, sleet shifts, brightens.

Again,  although there is no regular  metre,  the "I" intrudes again.  The  promise of  success  pushes  the  poet  on,  makes  him  continue his "scrabbling in  soil/And mean   sorrows  and  satisfactions."  ("A   Road").




0NLY  ONCE OR  TWICE  does Knister speak  explicitly  about the  problems  of poetic expression  and  the discrepancy between  the felt experience
and  what  eventually finds its way on to the  page.  He suggests in the foreword  he originally  intended for his selected  poems, Windfall for Cider, that  poetry  should attempt  to  set  the  world  before  people,  even  though the  poet  recognizes   the essential  separation between  emotion  and  actual expression:

so

THE  OLD FUTILITY OF ART



Birds and  flowers and  dreams  are real as sweating men and swilling pigs. But the feeling about  them  is not always so real, any more, when it gets into words.

He  suggests  this  idea  in  "After Exile".  The  comment comes  after  he  has  given an  objective   view  of  the  passing  landscape seen  from  a  train, and  it  is at  this point  that  the  "I" first occurs:

(It  is not at no cost I see it all, See a simple and quaint pattern Like the water-mark  in this paper, There if you like, or if you forget, Not there,

It is the same)

The   farmer imposing   order   on  his land  is the  poet  imposing order on  his materials, but  always  the  material is unwieldy.  It cannot be  expressed,  because language is inadequate. Yet the  farmer  continually cultivates, hoping  by  plough­ ing  to gain  new  growth from  his land  and  to bury  his old  unfulfilled  desires,  as Knister  implies  by the  metrical, rhymed,  first person  "Plowman's Song" :

Turn under,  plow
My trouble;
Turn under griefs
And stubble.

If my  analogy  is correct, "The  Plowman", like Pratt's "Seagulls", is a  poem about  the  poetic  process.  The  poet's  "unappeased" quest  is for  the expression  of reality,  for  the  complete harmony of felt experience  and  poetic  expression,  "the ultimate unflawed turning".  The  image  of the  plowman surely  is the  image  of the  poet,  always  returning, always  expectant, trying  something new,  never  look­ ing  backward.
Is this the  reason  that  ultimately  long before his death Knister  gave up poetry? Did  he believe  that  all his attempts at  poetry  would  necessarily  be flawed?  Does this  explain   the  concentration on  short  stories  and  novels  in  the  last  few  years of his life?
In  her  memoir   about Knister, Dorothy   Livesay  mentions that   just before  his death   Knister   was  reading Rilke  and  she quotes  one  of  Knister's favourite  pas­ sages from  that  poet:

Verses  are  not  sensations,  as  people  think-they  are  experiences.  For  the  sake

THE OLD  FUTILITY OF  ART



of a single verse one must see many  towns, men  and  things, one must know the animals, one must feel how the birds fly, and in what way the little flowers open in the morning.

Rilke  was  also  a  poet  who  was constantly aware  of the  limitations of language and   the  separation  of  the  external   circumstance  to  be  used  to  annotate "the subject   within". Knister,   I  feel  sure,  would  have  approved  wholeheartedly of another  passage  from  the  same  book  by  Rilke.  This  is Rilke's  description of  a poet's  work:

Then  you set about  that  unexampled  act  of violence;  your work, more  and  im­ patiently,  more and  more despairingly, sought  among visible things equivalent for the vision within.

It  is only  in  the  light  of this kind  of description and  in  the  parallels between poetry  and  farming that  I have  suggested  in  this  article  that  the  true  value  of Knister's poetry  can  be  appreciated. And  it  is  only  in  this  sense  that  Dorothy Livesay's   remark   about   Knister's  farm   country  and   his  intense   experience of it can  be understood. Poetry /farming is "the central column  of his thought".








chranicle



LETTER FROM  TORONTO

John Robert Colombo




ALTHOUGH THE FACT"""" me down  every time I '<ad some early Canadian history, I really don't  believe that  Toronto  was ever called Muddy  York.  As a  Torontonian of eight  years standing,  I find it only slightly more  credible  that  the synonym  for Toronto  in other  parts  of the  country  was Hogtown.  (In  Toronto the word is still used, but only to describe a specific run­ down section of the city.)  I realize Toronto  was not always a thriving metropolis with  nearly  two  million inhabitants, and  that  the old Torontonians  were  (and  are)  fairly priggish,  but  things are different today. Both Muddy  York  and  Hog­ town,  I  like  to  think,  hark  back  to  past   prejudices rather  than  present-day realities. To  me, more than  any other city in Canada,  Toronto  has more of every­ thing,  from  crime  to culture.  But I am ignoring  Montreal, possibly, when  I say this; in this letter  I will speak about  English Canada  only.
Toronto  is a  transitional  city, half Canadian and  half American.  There  is an internal  clash between  the Old  Torontonians (the natives)  and  the New Toron­ tonians  (those  who were dissatisfied with things in other  cities before  they came here). But both,  curiously,  are  in favour  of change.  The  spiritual  shape  of the new city will not  be difficult to surmise. Toronto  is prosperous because it is the importer  of things  American.  Any cultural  trends  that  Toronto sets will be set for Toronto  in that  city to the south, New York. Just as Toronto  is spearheading the  branch-plant mentality  into  Ontario's protectionist  business world,  so is the city introducing cost-accountancy  into the obscure operations  of playhouses and general-readership magazines. There  is something bloated about the city, like the column  (sixteen and one half inches in length)  in the Yellow Pages of the Toronto Telephone  Directory that  lists the Toronto  book publishers. Everyone knows there are  fewer  than   half  a  dozen  reputable  publishers in  Toronto; the  rest, about fifteen inches in fact, are agents in the book- and encyclop<edia-importing business.

53

LETTER FROM TORONTO



Art  has  always  been  a mixing  of the  amateur and  the  professional. The  New Torontonians, who  came  to Toronto to find  culture, now find  that  Toronto can­ not  create  the  kind  of  culture they  want.  Since  money  follows  mood,  it  is my opinion  that  we are  witnessing  the  death  of Toronto as a cultural unit;  nobody  wants   what   is  indigenous to  Toronto. The   New  City  Hall   in  Nathan  Philips Square will be its beautiful epitaph. Therefore, let the  mood  of cultural  despair  be the  mood  of this letter.  Let  me lighten  it somewhat with  the light-hearted use of  a  pompous  phrase: professional  conceit.  Let  me follow  the  mood  through to its monetary conclusion: cultural cramp. Let's  see this conceit and  its consequent cramp in  action  in  two specific areas,  theatre and  newspapers.






KILDARE DOBBS noted  (in  a recently  published  picture book Canada)  that  Toronto was both  "multicultural" and  "the hub  of English  Can­ ada". In  perhaps less-apt  terms,  this  means  internationalism and  cash,  both  of which  Toronto has.  One  would  expect  these  would  generate a  healthy  climate  for  the  most social of the  arts -theatre. But the  truth of the  matter is that  there is  no  professional  theatre   in  Toronto. There are,  however,   numerous  theatrical groups  like the  Red  Bam,  Canadian Players,  Coach House  Theatre, Hart House  and  Workshop  Productions. And  judging  by the  amount of  show-business  gossip in  the  three  Toronto dailies,  the  Toronto public  is vitally  concerned with  all the crises that  talented but out-of-work  performers face. For all the worry and  words, there  is simply  nowhere   for  the  playgoer  to  go  if  he  wants  to  see regular   and responsible  productions of  recent  or  classical  plays.  In  America the  neighbour­ hood  movie-house  is disappearing and  being  replaced  by the long-run  downtown houses;  in Toronto indigenous theatrical activity  is being smoked  out by a combi­  nation of its own  incompetence and  the slightly  superior fare  being  booked  into town  by  the  O'Keefe Centre   and  the  Royal  Alexandra Theatre. The  situation would  be salutary, in a perverse  way, if these houses  (they  are  not theatres: they have  no players)   were doing  well, but  the truth is both  are  doing  poorly.
When   I  listed  the  Toronto  theatres, I  purposely left  out  the  Crest  Theatre,
because  its plight  illustrates very  well my theme  of professional  conceit  resulting in cultural cramp. As I write  this  (the  second  week in January) the  Crest  is still alive,   having  mounted  an  indifferent  production  of  an   indifferent  play,  "A Severed  Head", by  Iris  Murdoch and  J. B. Priestley.  Unless  I am  mistaken-


54

LETTER FROM TORONTO



and   I  sincerely  hope  I  am-this  will be  the  Crest's  last  season,  and  the  Crest is the last permanent theatre in Toronto. Its demise will be followed  by a decade or so during which  no one  will dare  risk investing  capital  into  another playhouse.
The  Crest  Theatre Company was a grafting that  didn't take. From the first it
represented the  thinnest of White  Anglo-Saxon Protestant theatrical traditions in a  city  increasingly  Italian, Jewish,  Hungarian, German, Chinese  and  American. Yet for ten  years it muddled along.  It was started  in  I954  by a theatrical family, Murray and  Donald Davis  and  their  sister Barbara Chilcott, who  invested  their private   fortune into  the  venture. They   opened   their  doors  in  a  badly  located section  of  Toronto but  with  a  responsible  administrative staff.  During the  first season  the  Davises  actually made  money.  But  bad  box office, public  apathy,  un­ imaginative  promotion,  and   poor   productions  caught   up  with   them.   A  debt appeared and  doubled each  year.
When  the  Canada Council was formed,  and  the Province of Ontario Council for the Arts  came  along,  it looked  as if the Crest could meet  day-by-day expenses and  carry  its  debt  until  better   days.  But  late  in  September of  I 964,  the  hard­ pressed   Canada  Council rejected   an   application  for  an  operational  grant   of
$2o,ooo on  the   basis  of  the  books.  These  showed  an  accumulative  deficit  of
$I27,ooo, and  the  virtual absence  of sizeable contributions from  the  community. As  Blair  Frazer wrote  in  Maclean's  on  October g,  I 964: "The strongest  point against  the  Crest,  according to  people  in Ottawa who  have  some  acquaintance with  the Toronto theatre, was the very urgency and  desperation of its need." Apparently  citizens   of  Metropolitan  Toronto  contributed  only  $7,500   to  the Crest  last  year,  compared with  Greater Winnipeg's $2o,ooo   for  The Manitoba Theatre Centre.
After  a  heart-in-hand  campaign, the  Crest  barely  managed to  raise  $7o,ooo to continue into  I965  with  an  abbreviated season. The  fate  of the  Crest  will be the  fate  of  every  theatre  and  every  community in  Canada. The   national  sig­ nificance  of the  Crest's  problem can  be seen by the fact  that  theatrical  men  and  women  from  across  Canada came  when  an  emergency  summit meeting  "to  dis­ cuss the  Crest" was sponsored by Milton  S. Carman of the Provincial Arts Coun­ cil.  Even   the  establishment  was  stymied  when  it  carne  to  supporting-in the wealthiest  city in the  country-Canada's only professional,  year-round English­  language theatre.
The   professionals   must  have  reasoned  like  this:   "If the  establishment  backs
theatrical  productions in  Toronto,  minimum standards must   be  maintained." (This   is  the  professional   conceit.)  "We   want to  be  associated with  what  1s

55

LETTER FROM TORONTO



artistically excellent." But  has  there  ever  been  a  theatre in  Toronto that  could maintain the standards of, say, The  Stratford Shakespearian Festival?  "Spending mainly  public  funds,  the  Crest failed  to mount competent productions, therefore the  Crest  must  go." Therefore, to meet  the  alleged  demand for  professional pro­ ductions, Torontonians will go  to  see imported second-company road  shows  or first-company pre-New  York  try-outs.  The   non-sequitur here  is, of  course,  that  touring  companies have  no  stake  in  the  community, but  come  and  go.  Even more   important,  an  entire   generation  will  grow   up  knowing  only  uninspired amateur theatres and super-professional Broadway attractions. Finally,  actors  will emigrate to  New  York or starve,  and  local  playwrights who don't already write for  radio  will do so full time.  Healthy appreciation and  acceptance of theatre as a  civic  responsibility will  be  ploughed   back  into  the  Toronto earth. The   pro­ fessional  conceit  paralyzes  one  part  of the  public  that  might  some  day  support theatre-the  cultural cramp. I suppose  this  argument turns  the  Turks into  the Tories,  continentalists  into   nationalists,  professionals  into   amateurs.  But   who wants  to see Toronto, "the  hub  of  English  Canada," merely  another American city?
From  the foregoing,  one would think the professional-minded establishment was
not  concerned  with  theatre   in  Toronto. But  the  contrary  is true!  This  is the curious  corollary  to the cultural cramp. The  establishment wants  to be a winner, both   artistically  and   practically, so  it  finds  itself   constructing buildings for theatres rather than  subsidizing  repertoires. At  the  very moment the  Crest  began to fail,  an  over-lapping directorate had  conceived  and  catapulted into  being  (on paper at least)  the much-vaunted and long-awaited cultural complex for Toronto, the  St. Lawrence Centre  for the Arts. This  would  be a multi-million-dollar home for  cultural  organizations in  Toronto, with   the  Crest   as  the  resident   theatre, should  the  Crest  manage to survive  until  1g67, the  ideal  opening date.  No one on  the  board   of  the  Toronto Arts  Foundation was  concerned with  the  Crest's financial or  artistic  problems- just with  supplying suitable  quarters.
It is difficult  to deal  briefly or exactly  with  this  monumental project  because, like Proteus, it keeps squirming into new shapes and sizes to meet new emergencies. Examining a  pile of press clippings  and  various  official  reports,  I have  come  to the  conclusion  that   there  is  no  single  St.  Lawrence Centre,  but  a  Centre  for everyone   involved.   One  thing  is  certain:  the   site   chosen is  the  least  suitable triangular piece  of  land  in  a grim  area  of  the  city.  But  in  order to  start,  the Toronto Arts  Foundation will have  to  raise  $4,8oo,ooo by  public  subscription;

LETTER FROM TORONTO



this will then  be matched  by various other bodies and will go towards a "cultural focus" for Toronto.
In the  preliminary  stages, the plan  (or plans)  calls for a Festival Hall  and an Arts Building.  No money  will go towards  the Art Gallery of Toronto, which is cramped  and  miles away  from  the  proposed site for  the  Centre,  or to  Massey Hall,  which  is badly  in  need  of repairs.  So far  the  whole  project  might  have been sparked  by the building trade, for as far as I can see only the architects and the  construction  companies  will reap  any immediate  benefit.
The  cultural   cramp  dampens  spirits  as it  puts  the  damper on  public  and private  money.  I wonder  how Tom  Patterson  would  have  made  out  proposing a  Stratford  Festival  in  Toronto. A magazine  like Exchange  proved  it was  edi­ torially possible to publish a national  journal of intellectual calibre, but Exchange would  never have found  backers  (even for three issues) in Toronto; luckily the enterprising  editor,  Stephen  Vizinczey, lived in less-professional  Montreal  at the time.  Young  film-makers  like Don  Owen  have  to find  film  and equipment   in Montreal  to make  a feature  like Nobody  Waved  Goodbye  in Toronto. The  only Torontonian in the last few years to emerge as a positive  patron,  with a pocket­ book and  a sense of purpose, was Edwin  Mirvish.  Instead  of letting  the owners of the  Royal  Alexandra  Theatre tum  it into a  parking  lot,  Mr.  Mirvish  didn't  chair  a committee; he actually  parted  with  some cash. It was the  professionals who did nothing.  The  professional pose in Toronto  today is pseudo;  the critical,
a commonplace.


To MY    MIND,   the  cheap  professionalism  so  characteristic   of
Toronto comes out  more clearly in the rich newspaper  world rather  than  in the
thin  theatrical   productions  Toronto  generates.  Culture  is now part  of the  "con­ spicuous  consumption" newspaper  advertising  encourages.  The   three  Toronto dailies spend a fair amount  of money covering the arts, and I wish the publishers spent  more,  but  the  coverage is generally incompetent.
For  many  years the  Saturday  edition of The  Globe and  Mail  gave a stately, dignified  and  somewhat  detailed  national  coverage to the  arts  in Canada. Not only was William  Arthur Deacon in his day one of the few good book reviewers in the country,  but  a favourable  review on his weekly book page would actually sell a few copies of the  book. Pearl  McCarthy,  who at the  beginning  wrote her art  reviews for  next  to nothing-to  convince the  publishers  of the Globe  that

57

LETTER FROM TORONTO



readers  (and advertisers) would  be interested in informal comment on painting­ could  enhance a  reputation, and  her  column   was  read   religiously  by  many  in all walks of life. Mr.  Deacon  and  Miss McCarthy were, in their  own  way, high­  water  marks,  and  they  probably  did  much  to  create  a climate of acceptance (if not  cultivation)  of  the fine arts  in Canada today.  In  my  opinion  they  have  not been  matched, either   as  critical  successes or  commercial  endorsements, by  the brass-and-bash  columnists   writing   today.
Well-meaning as  they  were,  both  Mr.  Deacon   and   Miss  McCarthy failed  in one  major  respect.  They  were  unable  to legitimize  their  functions (so to speak) and  leave trained staffs behind  them.  The  result  is that  today  their successors are columnists  rather than  editors.  The  Entertainment Editor of the  Globe is some­ one mysterious,  behind  the scenes and  not -during the last few years at least­ an active  journalist.
By way of entrance into the bizarre weekend  sections of the three  Metro  dailies, here  is an  excursus  into  painting. Bear  in  mind  that  the  fine  arts  are  no longer fine-they  are  lively. One  of the  finest painters of all  time-but  certainly  not one  of  the  liveliest -is  Giovanni   Antonio   de  Canal, Canaletto, the  painter of watery  Venice.  Under its former  Curator Jean Sutherland Boggs, the Art  Gallery of Toronto mounted the  first major  showing  of Canaletto's drawings and  paint­ ings since the  artist's death  in  I 768, and  issued a superb catalogue to accompany the  show.  Everyone   (with  one  or  two  exceptions)  paid  homage  to  the  historic importance of the show,  but  when  it came  to accepting the  artistic achievements of  the  past  gracefully, as  untimely  as they  might   be,  the  future-oriented critics balked: this was asking too much.
Kay   Kritzwiser,  Miss   McCarthy's successor   on   the  Globe,  and   a  former
women's feature writer,  kept  her  eye on  the  social  festivities  that  accompanied the  opening. As well, she noted   (on  October I7,I g64)  :

The  Canaletto collection represents a long look back in  time, let the message fall where  it  may.  It  is important, obviously, because  it  is the  first time  Canalettos have  been assembled in such quantity  anywhere  in  the  world. And perhaps  even more important because Queen Elizabeth graciously sent two oils and  21  drawings from her collection at Windsor Castle.

On  the  same  day  the  urbane   and  competent Henry  Malcolmson, a non-staff columnist  for  the  Telegram, under  the  heading "Canaletto:  an  absorbing (but not stimulating) show," had  this to say:

But  he  never  overcame  the  deadening  effect of producing  much  the same scene

LETTER FROM TORONTO



over  and  over  again; he  produced a  set formula, so that  in  Canaletto's painting life, as reviewed  in  this  exhibition, there  is little  variety  and  few fresh  turns.

But  it  was  the   Star's  art   critic Arnold Rockman who  took  the  critical cake. On  the  same  day,  he too wrote:
This  exhibition, and  the  magnificent catalogue written  by Mr.  [W.  G.]  Constable and   designed   by  Frank Newfeld,  will  undoubtedly advance our  knowledge of  a minor  painter's work,  but  I doubt  whether it could fairly  be called  the  wisest way of spending the  limited  funds available  to  the  Art  Gallery  of Toronto. It is as if Stratford  decided to  present   all  the  plays  of  Thomas  Heywood, a  minor  con­ temporary of  Shakespeare, in  one  season.  It would  also  probably   be a  first.

This hubris   (not uncommon in  contemporary kitsch  criticism)  was  answered by  Miss  Boggs  herself, in  a letter to  the  editor of the  Star  on  October 29,  1964:

The assumption I  find  most  disturbing is  that   Canaletto is a  minor   painter. I should   be  curious   to  know   by  what   absolute   standards Mr.  Rockman  reached this  decision?   Canaletto has  always  been  considered  an  artist  of importance and one  who  has  given  a  lot  of pleasure  to a large  number of people.  (Even  his com­ mercial value  is high)  ... Since  he never  mentioned a single picture in  his  review I suspect  him  of being  more  concerned with  ideas than  with  works of art.

The Star  had   its  revenge,  however. Some   of  the   printers were   on  strike, and typographical  errors  were   proliferating right  and   left.  The  name beneath the letter appeared:  JEAN SUTHERLAND  BLOGGS.
This sort   of  unintelligent  criticism is  not   confined  to  the   dailies. Elizabeth Kilbourn is,  in  my  opinion, the  most  sensitive   critic  of  painting in  Canada.  A former  reviewer for  the   Star, on  October 25,  over  the   programme  "Views on Shows," Mrs.  Kilbourn had  this to say:

The  exhibition at  the  Art  Gallery  of Toronto seems almost  ludicrously irrelevant to  the  electronic age. The catalogue for  the show is a masterpiece of  antiquarian­ ism. Only  the  four  major canvases  from  the  National Gallery  of  Canada ... seem relevant  to twentieth-century  society.

(I am   quoting the   review   as  it  was  published in  the  December 1964, issue  of The  Canadian Forum   which  now   reprints the  occasional radio  talk   like  The Listener.) Newspaper  criticism must  be  contemporary-minded, I suppose, but  its weaknesses are   particularly apparent:  its  need   for  social   relevancy, its  cultiva­ tion  of the  avant-garde, its basic  exhibitionism, its playing up of  personality (both the  reviewer's and   the  reviewed's) -what a field  day  for  contemporary  artists, and  their  managers who  advertise !

59

LETTER FROM TORONTO



The  literary  side of things  is scarcely  better; indeed  it is worse,  because  book publishers advertise  less than  gallery owners. When  the Globe's William French­ the  journalist and   Nieman  Fellow  who  succeeded Mr.  Deacon-was  asked  to move  his book reviews from the newspaper proper and into The  Globe Magazine, a glossy weekend  supplement, it meant  a four-week  rather than a four-day dead­ line,  with  little  comment  on  recent  events  in  the  book  world  and,  subsequently, fewer  and  shorter reviews. Books are  now  assigned  to reviewers  who  are  usually young   academics, specialists  in  the  subject of  the  book.  There are  very  few cross-cultural reviews -studies  of  Canadian history  by novelists;  poetry  reviews by  historians rather than  professors  of English.  Here  is an  extreme example of the  Globe's  nitpicking. Is  it specialist  reviewing or special  pleading? Anyway  it was  written  by  Arthur  Hammond  (on  November  I 4,  I g64)   about   a  series of bad  juveniles:

The  very least the  publishers can  do before the  next batch  of books in the series is published  is bone up on the spelling of "okay"  (or  "O.K."), spelled "OKay", with  two  capitals,  throughout   all  four   books:  the  spelling  of  "come  on"  (or "c'mon"), spelt "common"  throughout; and  the use of the nominative  and accusa­
tive cases of the  personal pronoun  (e.g. not "gave  1ason and  I",  but "gave 1ason and  me"). The  correction  of  the  multitude of other  errors  might  prove  an  in­
teresting  exercise for  the  Longmans  school  book department.

Fair  enough, but  this takes up one-third of the  review.  Criticism of this kind  be­ longs  in  academic quarterlies, not  on  the  pages  of  the  leading  review  medium for books in Canada.
The   Toronto   Telegram's   Entertainment  Editor  is  Jeremy  Brown,   a   pipe­
smoking,   mumbling  ex-Vancouverite who  oversaw   the  appearance of   "Show­ case,"  the  tabloid-sized supplement which  consolidates the  Saturday art coverage  of the  Telegram. The  Tely is "Canada's most  quoted  paper" and  the newspaper "the  bright   ones  read." The   publisher   is  John Bassett.  The  Telegram's   book editor is Percy  Rowe,  a self-conscious  low-brow. In  one  of his assigned  reviews, Ann  Swann   has  this to say  (December 26,  I964):

The  Colour of  the Times  by Raymond  Souster,  because of his honest colloquial verse touches  every mood. His  unpretentious style reminds  me, in parts,  of Eliot and  in  others,  of Whitman.  Of  course we rarely  appreciate what  is on our  own doorstep,  but Souster is a further  proof of our burgeoning Canadian poetical talent.

John Robson, Assistant  Professor of English  at Trinity College,  also reviews books for  the  Telegram. He  writes what  is half-way  between  a personal column  and  a

6o

LETTER FROM TORONTO



critical  consideration, but  all  too often  he excuses his  real  reactions to the semi­ serious  titles  he  reviews  by playing  the  pedantic and  crotchety professor, an out­  dated stereotype surely.
The  Toronto   Star,  well  informed and  fairly  intellectual, uses the  services of
Robert Weaver   as a  bland   reviewer  who  enjoys  a good  mystery  story  now  and then,  and  the  talents of  the  amazing Robert  Fulford. Mr.  Fulford can  tum  his hand  to a feature, an  interview, a review, a "think" piece or a personal  column. There is no space  here  to go into  detail  about  his often  curious  views  (his cham­ pioning of  Time; his  praise  of  Pearson  but  condemnation of  Pearson's  Parlia­ ment) . Mr.  Fulford is an outstanding example  of the intelligent working  journal­ ist,  writing   a  flexible  and  forceful  prose,  who  finds  discussing  the  social  issues raised  by  authors and   artists  slightly  more  challenging than  literature and  art themselves:  the  book  reviewer   as  social  commentator.  Discussing  the  work  of Wyndham Lewis, on  December 5,  1964, Mr.  Fulford  writes  knowingly  and  ac­ curately, scoring  here  a  point  for  Lewis, there  a point against Toronto:

"I  feel,"  Lewis once  wrote  of life in Toronto,  "that someone is sitting on my chest."  If he came  here  now,  I  think  he would experience  a similar feeling. He might  notice  that  much  has changed.  But he would still be a stranger,  he would still  be alien  to our  central  beliefs in  progress and  democracy.  If he came  here now  his status  as  a  celebrity  would  be  recognized, as it  was not  in  1941,  but Toronto  would still have little real sympathy for a prickly and persistent Outsider.

With  Nathan Cohen, the  Entertainment Editor  of The  Toronto  Star, we come upon  a  writer  with  an  awkward style but  a thinker  with a sharp acidic tempera­ ment.   Maritime-born, Mr.  Cohen   is a  personality  in  his  own  right,  and  much better   known   to  his  readers than   the  Canadian actors  and  actresses  he  writes about. He  was  the  excellent  and  genial  moderator of  "Fighting Words," and  is a man  of much  charm and  competence. When  his daily column  discusses drama or  ballet,  it  shows  a  certain  sense  of  theatre  and  a  cultural  knowledgeability second  to none.  I haven't the space or the scope to show where  Mr.  Cohen  shines (when   discussing  his  pet  ideas,  group theatre,  the  incompetence of  the  Crest, internationalism,  continentalism, etc.)   or  where  he  sends  shivers  up  and  down my  spine   (like  his  firmly  held  opinion  that  Elizabeth Taylor Burton  is a great actress), but  for  the  suggestive  figure  he  cuts  in Toronto, the  interested reader  might   tum   to  the  slightly  oblique  character study  in  The   Incomparable   Atuk by Mordecai Richler.
But it is as an  editor  that  Mr.  Cohen  falters. He  runs  the entertainment  pages of  the  Star  personally, but  from  one  day  to  the  next  it  is impossible  to  predict

LETTER FROM TORONTO



what  the  Star  will cover, what  it will condemn or what  it feels it should  ignore. This  might  make  for good  journalism, but  the  coverage  is hardly  critical,  or in keeping  with  the  calibre  of  the  staff.  The  television,  movie,  music  reviewers  all write  well  but  hardly   memorably. Most  of  MacleanJs  staff  moved  to  the  Star, and  I  presume they  too will be turning out  the  same  kind  of stuff.  Here  is one instance. Joan Irwin's column  "This Week  in  Montreal" is potentially the  most informative and  challenging in the  three  Toronto papers. But there  is no budget to  send  Mrs.  Irwin  to  Montreal, so the  column   is compiled   from  the  pages  of the  French-language  Montreal newspapers. Again,  when  a  third  of a  page  (on December 26,  rg64)   is devoted  to informing the  reader that  this  year  Esquire is in  but  The   New  Yorker  is out;  Cavalier  is in,  Playboy  is out; Canada Month in,  MacleanJs  out; etc., something is seriously  wrong. Or,  nitpicking in  another way,  when  a  fine  piece on  Toronto by  Mordecai Richler  is reprinted verbatim from  The  New  Statesman with  two small factual errors  that  would  mean  nothing to a Londoner but  a lot to a Torontonian are left standing, then  it is the editorial ability,  the  informing intelligence,  that  is on  holiday.
If trying  to  piece together  an  entertainment policy for The Toronto Star fails, the  attempt wouldn't even be tried  with  the  other  two papers.  The  Globe  always seems  to  have  something else on  its  mind,  and  the  Telegram is too  busy  being "bright."  Journalism is by  nature fleeting,  and   perhaps it  is too  much   to  ask practising  newspapermen  to  acquire   taste.   During the  last  federal   election,   it surprised many  in Toronto to find  the  three  Toronto dailies  in total  agreement. Editorial policies as different  as Old  Conservative and  New Liberal were suddenly merged  to recommend "majority government." It suggests that, in professionalized Toronto, it  doesn't matter  any  more  what  is being  said  as long  as the  message is expediency.



review articles



THE PERSONAL HERESY
 




Robin Skelton



IRVING    LAYTON,     The  Laughing Rooster. McClelland &   Stewart.  $4.50   cloth,
$2.50  paper.


AT  THE CLOSE of an  interest­ ing  preface   to  his  new  collection Irving Layton   remarks that  it  is fun  to see

shocked  reviewers  point  out   my   weakness for plain  speech and  honest feeling to their innocent readers;  to  learn from   them   with the   publication  of  each   book  of  mine   how once again I have  offended their Victorian notions   of    decency  and  good    taste.    I wouldn't  miss   that  thrill  for   anything  in the   world.

This,   of  course,  is  calculated  to  enrage critics  into   announcing shrilly  their  ab­ solutely  undisturbed equanimity, or  into  ponderously  discussing   the  amorality  of Mr.   Layton's  viewpoint.  It   causes  me, however,  merely  to  feel  depressed  at  the childishness  of the  manreuvre and  at  the attitudes  towards poetry which underly it. These  attitudes  are  not  easy to define, but  can   perhaps  be  summed  up  under  the  heading of   "The  Personal Heresy"; by  this   phrase   I   mean   to  indicate  an egocentricity    which    assumes    that    the poet's  personality is more  important than  the  poems,  that   any  expression   of  per­ sonal   idiosyncracy  has   poetic   potential, and   that   self-dramatization  is  an   ade­
quate substitute for  structural control. There are  a  number of  such  heretics
about  today.  Many  of   the   so-called
 "Beat" poets  are  of  this  kind,  and  there appear to be a growing  number of young Canadian  poets   who   believe   that   sin­ cerity   is  essentially   formless,   and   that  egotism  is a  form  of  poetic  afflatus.  For this   Irving   Layton,   who   is   not   unin­  fluential, must   bear  some  responsibility. Too   often   in   this   book   he   appears  to confuse  nervous excitement with  inspira­ tion,   and   estimate  a   poem's   worth   in terms   of   the   feelings   which   caused   it rather   than   of  the  feelings   it  displays.
This   is  most  obvious  in  some  of  the
more   fragmentary  erotic   poems,   where the   reader,   if  excited   at   all,   must   be excited  by what  the poem refers  to rather than  by what  the  poem  embodies. Refer­ ences   to   breasts   and   penises   are   fre­ quently   productive of  a  kind  of  excite­ ment,   for   there   is  a  voyeur   lurking   in most   of  us,  and   few   male   readers,   at least, can  honestly  deny  that  they  remain  totally  unmoved  by descriptions of sexual athleticism.   Nevertheless,   this   kind    of excitement   is   often   destructive  of   the connotative  richnesses  that  can  be found  in  less  outspoken   work;  the  complexities of  human relationship are  denied  by the concentration  upon   sensual   simplicities, and  the  result  is degrading to both poetry

REVIEW ARTICLES



and   man.
On  the other  hand, Layton  has, in this collection    as   in   his   others,    expressed sexual  exuberance with  delightful direct­ ness; this candour itself is life-enhancing, and  sometimes  suggests an  almost  primal  innocence. Innocence may  seem  an  odd word  to use of such poems as The Worm, Portrait  of Nolady, Coal, or Wrong  End of a Telescope which  deal  with  promis­ cuity  and  lust  rather  than  love, and  are gross  in   both   imagination  and   expres­ sion;   nevertheless,  they   are   essentially simple-minded  poems  dealing  only  with the  most  basic  emotions,  and  their  gaze is  as  direct   and   unsophisticated  as  that of  a  Medieval Dance   of  Death or  por­ trait  of the  Seven  Deadly  Sins.
It is  the  contrast between  this  simple
vision and the language in which it is expressed   which   troubles   me.  The  lan­ guage  of these  poems is often  awkwardly "literary",  and   poetic  cliches  abound. I find  it hard  to accept  such fragments as: "they  shovelled  me into  the cold  earth", "the   brown  buds   hanging  from  the  bough", "to   feel  the  sun  in  his  bones" and   "I  shall  rejoice  when  you  are  cold dead  clay". There are often extraordinary lapses  of  diction,   as  in  Diversion:

Whenever I'm angry  with  her
and  hold  up my hand to slap  or hit
my  darling recites  some lines  I've writ.

The "or  hit"  is unnecessary  for the sense, and  "writ" is a very clumsy archaism. Rhythmically, too, many of these poems combine   flat   free-verse    rhythms    with dully  conventional iambic  cadences. Ab­ stractions are often  used in such a way as to  destroy  the   poem's  force,  as  in  Lust where  we  read:

Once the  arms that held  you
 held  glory,
held  love  and  delight;
now when I leave
your  embrace small   vipers
fall  from  my moist  armpits, vermin,
and  I am  sick  with hate.

The contrast between  worn-out  abstrac­ tions  and  vivid  (if crude)  imagery  could  have  worked  here  if the  images  had  not themselves    been    later    explained   into nullity.
All this  appears to deny  Layton's  Pre­ fatory   statement  that   "I have  as  much  respect  for  good  workmanship and  pain­ ful   revision    as   the   next   conscientious poet."  It also,  perhaps, like  the  Preface, points   to  a  lack  of   confidence; Layton cannot  trust   the  images  to  do  his  work for  him,  but  has to comment upon  them,  to  tell  us  what  he  is doing  rather than  simply  do  it.
The same  artistic clumsiness  is evident
in  many  poems  in  which  the  first  person

REVIEW ARTICLES



intrudes  unnecessarily.  In   The  Cactus the  first  three   words,   "I can   imagine", only serve to remove  immediacy from  the following  image; without these words  the poem   would   derive   much   more   drama from  the  personal  reference in the penul­ timate    line.   The  "Personal   Heresy"    is also   responsible    for    the    embarrassing nature  of  For  My   Former  Students in which  Layton indulges in  a  little  typical self-congratulation,   referring  to   his "words    so  fierce"   and   their    powerful  effect  upon  his  audience.
The  whole   book  is  marred  by  such defects  as  these,  and   while  there  are  a number of  almost  successful  poems,  and
 many  powerful  and passionate fragments, the  general  impression  is one  of slapdash egocentricity, fumbled  metaphors,  and sagging concentration. Perhaps the most astonishing,  and  most symptomatic, piece of  all is Success,  which  reads:

I've  always  wanted to  write
a poem
with  the  word
"zeugrna"
in it.

Now  I've  done  it!

You   haven't,  you   know,   you   haven't!







IMPRISONED GALAXIES

Fred Cogswell



PHYLLis  GOTLIEB,   Within the  Zodiac.  McClelland &  Stewart. Paper  $r.so,  cloth,
$4·50.


THE  TITLE,   Within the   Zo­ diac,   is  exasperatingly  effective   in   its combined  suggestiveness   and   vagueness. The  zodiac  is rich  in meaning  to astrolo­  gers,  who  see  in  it  a  visible  evidence of the  power  of an  all-pervading order  that  regulates the motion  of the universe  from  the  smallest  atom   to  the  largest  star.  To  the  devotee   of  oriental  religion   and  the orphic philosopher, the zodiac typifies the four  aspects of divinity and  the four stages in   the   unfolding  of    human  history - creation,   preservation,  destruction,  and renovation.   To   others   less  erudite,  the
 zodiac  (the  word  itself  means  "little animal") is the bestiary of the absurd folklore  of  the  heavens.
Stimulated by the  possibilities  inherent
in  its  title,  the  reader  opens  the  book  to discover  that  what  Phyllis  Gotlieb   really means  by the  phrase  "within the  zodiac" is the  interrelatedness of all  the  material things that  comprise  the  universe  in space and  time.  At least  half  the  poems  in  the volume  are devoted to the synthesizing  by mental  association  of scattered fragments of  the  physical  universe.   In   "Latitude" the unfolding of Mercator's map  is linked

REVIEW ARTICLES



to   the   development  of  an   embryo;   in "Small World" the  sparkle of  empty whisky  bottles  caught   in  a  net  bag  sug­ gests the gleam  of "imprisoned  galaxies".
In   her   poems   of  this   genre,   Phyllis
Gotlieb  does   not   rely  for   her   readers' interest upon  any previous structure of traditional  association   or  upon   the  tug and  pull  of feeling  that  a more meaning­ ful  human  situation might  involve.  She is  content  to  record  her  insights  in  free verse  lines  made   up  of  language   that  is hard  and   dry,   relying  upon   the  initial  pleasure of  the  surprised  recognition  of congruity in  the  midst  of incongruity for the  impact of  the  individual poem,  and upon  the  total impression  of a number of poems  for  the  development of  a  cumu­ lative  philosophy. This  philosophy,  I  be­ lieve,  is in  essence  that  expressed  in  the following  lines   of   Francis   Thompson's "In No Strange Land":
The drift of pinions, would  we harken, Beats  at  our  own  clay-shuttered doors.
As a  result  of  relative  failure  to  exploit other  resources   of  poetry,   these   poems are   almost   exclusively  cerebral,   and   at the  same  time  much  too clear.  They exhaust themselves at first reading. The meaning  they  convey  needs  to  be  sup­ ported  either   by  the   kind  of   rhythmic harmony that  makes Francis Thompson's poem   demonstrate the   beauty  it   pro­ claims,   or  by  the  addition  of  an  extra dimension of myth  or feeling.
There  are   rhythms in   Within  the
Zodiac, but  they  are mainly  visual.  An endless   experimenter  in   the   impact  of words   and   lines   upon   the   eye,  Phyllis Gotlieb in dealing  with sound-patterns seems mainly  intent upon  producing a "common smoothness". A notable excep­ tion,  however,  is "A  Bestiary of  the  Gar­  den   for   Children  Who   Should  Know

66
 Better." In  this poem, she exploits  the rhythmic possibilities of the language so effectively that it becomes one of the few poems in the volume to which the reader returns again  and  again.
In   a  few  poems,   Phyllis  Gotlieb   has added  a  dimension  of  myth,  either  tra­ dition   or   personal. Among  these   are notable: "Who Knows  One?", which cer­ tainly  gains  in  stature from  its  relation­ ship   to  the  Jewish   religious  symbolism;  "The Young   Dionysus",  which  makes the   death  of  a  Canadian  rabbit   corre­  spond  to  the  murder of the god  of vege­ tation and  of  creative imagination; and "Day  Falcon", a  poem  in  which  Phyllis Gotlieb  embodies  in   brilliant  and   ac­ curate  naturalistic  description her  own personal myth  of the nature of the energy which   underlies  and   sustains   the   uni­  verse.  "Day   Falcon" is one  of  the  most ambitious and  altogether  successful  short poems  ever  written by a  Canadian poet.
The poems in Within the Zodiac  which
deal   with  human  beings  attempt  to  do with   respect    to   time   what    the   other poems   do   with   respect   to  space.   They may  be  classified  into   two  groups.   The first involves  historical characters (Archi­ medes,  Pliny,  Da  Vinci, Brueghel, Rem­ brandt),  about   whom the  author comments with  the same  dry logic which she  applies  elsewhere to  bottles,  marbles,  hopscotch,   and    the   stars;    the   second group, dealing  with  Phyllis Gotlieb's  own personal  memories  ("This  One's  On Me",   "Lost   Unfound",  "Seventh Seal", "Late  Gothic", "Memento")  is,  in  my opinion, the  most  sustained and  satisfac­ tory  section  of  the  entire  book.  Here  the author's   intelligent  perception   of   con­ gruity   and   incongruity  is  supplemented to  the  fullest  extent by  personal involve­ ment.  Phyllis  Gotlieb  is  in  these  poems

REVIEW ARTICLES



as elsewhere  a god  dominating her  crea­ tive  universe,   but   she  is  no  longer  one who  dwells  on   remote,  but  hard, clear peaks  of  intellect; here   she  moves  and feels  no  less clearly  but  at  one  with  the creatures of  her  creation,  as  these  lines from  "Late  Gothic" will  demonstrate:

... and  we  smelled the  stench of   the    furs   the    old   man  had    made    his
shapeless coats of
and    went    down    the    narrow  walled    stair for   the   last   time
into   the  bright street  between the  wall  up­
flung







FAITHFUL OR BEAUTIFUL?
 against  the   howling  chimney  of  the   mad­
woman's throat on  the  one  side
and   the  redbrick rampart  of  shoddy stores
against the
reaching  blackened  arms   of  the   chimneys on   the   other

In  Phyllis Gotlieb's poetry  at  its best, not only is one continually conscious of the merging  of the  fragments of life towards unity;   one   is  haunted  by  the   memory that   just   behind    the   surface   of  one's mind  he has  experienced it  all  before.














Len Anderson



The  Poetical Works of Taras Shevchenko, C.  H. Andrusyshen and   Watson Kirk­
connell. University of Toronto, $8.oo.


"TRANSLATIONS   ARE  LIKE WOMEN", a   French  critic  once  said, "when   they   are   beautiful  they   are   not faithful, and  when  they  are  faithful  they are  not  beautiful." I cannot attest  to the fidelity  of the  translation of The  Poetical Works  of  Taras  Shevchenko  by  C.  H. Andrusyshen   and    Watson   Kirkconnell (my  Ukrainian  being  more  comprehen­ sible to my English-speaking friends  than  my  Ukrainian-speaking ones), but  I  will have  something to  say  about   its  beauty. The   occasion   for   the   appearance  of this  translation is  the   I 50th   celebration of  Taras  Shevchenko's birth.   The   Uk-
 rainian Canadian Committee approached Dr.  Kirkconnell in  Ig6I   and  asked  him to  produce a  complete translation of  all the  poetical  works  that  Shevchenko had written in  Ukrainian. He  reluctantly agreed   with   the  stipulation  that   he  be helped  by C. H.  Andrusyshen of the Uni­ versity  of Saskatchewan, a former  pupil.  Dr.  Andrusyshen was  "to  guarantee the  accuracy of  the  rendering  in  phrase  and  spirit"  and   Dr.  Kirkconnell's contribu­ tion  was  to  be,  as  he  himself  says, " a dexterity in  prosody  that   was  the  result of forty  years  of  practice and  four  thou­ sand   pages   of   published  verse."   Thus

REVIEW ARTICLES



Dr. Andrusyshen is responsible for the translation's  "fidelity"  and    Dr.   Kirk­ connell   for  its  "beauty".
Canadians as a whole must  by now be a   little   curious   about   Ukrainians  and their  passionate concern  over this little known  poet. Who,  precisely, are these people?   And  is this  Shevchenko as good as  they  say  he  is?  Neither  question  is at all easy to answer. For example, many western  scholars  refuse  to accept  the existence   of  the   Ukraine  as  a  separate entity   apart  from   Russia,   except   as  a kind of vague geographical area  in which the  inhabitants speak  an obscure  Russian dialect. Until  comparatively recently Uk­ rainians  were   known   as   Malorusy   or Little  Russians.  The word Ukraine means  borderland  and   this  sense  of  the  word remains  vestigially  even in  English  when we  talk  about   the  Ukraine in  much  the same  way  that   we  talk  about   the  Mari­ times.
Ukrainian scholars  of course  reject  this interpretation of history  with  a fury born of a deep frustration. The Ukraine they argue  is a nation  and  has  been one since the Dark  Ages. And if sometimes this irrefragable fact  has  been  obscured,  it  is only  because  the  Ukraine has  been  the envy of her rapacious neighbours who attempted  to,   pseudomorphically,   re­ create her in  their  own image,  the neigh­  bours   being   the   Poles,  Turks,  Russians and   Germans.
The point   of  contention is  really  the idea of nationhood, and its meaning. Nationalism  in   the   strict   sense  of  the term  is a western,  late eighteenth-century notion,   the   spark   being   kindled   in  the minds  of certain French and German philosophers, fanned  into  flames  by  the French Revolution and  spreading in  the nineteenth   century  like   a   prairie    fire

68
 throughout the  entire  western  world  and, in some cases, beyond.  Nationalism is a seductive, insidious, and debilitating disease   that    enervates  even   the   most serene   of  peoples,  but  when  it  is  intro­ duced   into   a  cultural,  political  and   re­ ligious  hotbed like the Ukraine the results are  maniacal. One  example should  make this clear: When  the  Nazis marched into  the  Ukraine in  1941  they  were  not  only welcomed    by   a   substantial   number  of Ukrainian   nationalists, but  some  of  the latter  actually joined  the  SS  to  help  the man   who   once   told   Martin  Bormann that   all   Ukrainian  children  who  could count  over  a  hundred were  to  be  liqui­ dated.
In   any   event   it  is  in  the  context   of
nationalism that   the  immense  popularity of Taras Shevchenko is to be understood. The cult  of  nationalism  demands  its  na­ tional  poet: England has its Shakespeare, Germany its Goethe and  Italy  its Dante. The  function  of   the   national  poet   is quite  specific;   he  is   (in  terms   of  this nationalist  mystique)   the   myth   maker. He   purifies   the  dialect  of  the  tribe  and  gives  it  a  vision;   he  redeems   a  hostile and   an   alien   world   and   makes   it   not only   habitable   but   human.   In    other  words  one  becomes  aware,  in  the  mirror of his poetry,  of  one's own psychic topog­  raphy.   He   not  only   tells  you  who  you are; he  also  tells  you  what  you  are.  But in  point   of  historical fact  the  great   na­  tional   poet  does  not  do  this  consciously. He   is  first   and   foremost   an  artist   who writes  because  he  must  write,  because  it is  an  indefinable  but   compulsive obses­ sion.  It is  for  later   generations to  turn  him   into   a   monument.  When   a   poet begins  to  write  with  the  express  purpose of  creating  a  national  consciousness   he is  not  a  national poet  but  a  nationalist

REVIEW ARTICLES



poet,  a polemic,  a propagandist, a didac­ tic   versifier.   And   this   unfortunately  is what  Taras Shevchenko is, one who hap­ pens  to use poetry  to grind  his own  axe;  one  who  uses art  as  an abrasive  to make keen  the  edge   of   his  own  idiosyncratic concerns.  Nikolai Gogol  is without doubt  a  great  writer  and  one  who  happens to be  Ukrainian,  but  he  is rejected by Uk­ rainian  nationalists  because  he  wrote  in Russian,  a  little like rejecting Sir Thomas More   as  an   English   literary  figure   be­ cause  he  wrote  his Utopia in Latin. It is no  criterion of Shevchenko's greatness  to say  that   his  poetry  moves  Ukrainians; I have  seen  people  weep  over  the  verse of Edgar   Guest.
A  truly  great   poet  has  no  nation;  he has a culture through which  he expresses his universality. The land  in  which  he is born  and   the  tongue   through which  he
 expresses himself, are mere  accidents and this   the  world   well  knows.  Dante is  a great   poet  who  happened  to  be  Italian but   he   is   not   great    because    he   was Italian.  Ukrainian  nationalists, it  seems to me, are a little like Madison Avenue hucksters  who are trying to sell a product in a highly competitive  market. But poetical  genius,  unlike  a  toothbrush, can be neither  bought  nor  sold.
Shevchenko's poetry  as  it  is  refracted
through  the  prism  of  Dr.   Kirkconnell's sensibility  and  Dr.  Andrusyshen's  erudi­ tion   is   dreadful  to   an   extreme.   The  poems  are  chiefly  narrative, and  can  be roughly   divided  into   two  main   groups,  those  dealing  with  love  and   those  deal­ ing  with  politics.  Of  the  first  group   we have  a  prototypal plot in which a maiden gives her heart  to a low-born  serf, usually a  bastard, the  parents oppose  the  match







THE  PROFESSION OF ENGLISH LETTERS
J. W. SAUNDERS


This history  of the  English  literary  tradition from  Chaucer to the   present   describes   the  evolution   of  a  literary  profession dedicated  to  providing a  service  as distinctive and  valuable as  that   provided by the  professions  of law and  medicine.

$5-75


1::1!1
UNIVERSITY  OF TORONTO  PRESS





6g

REVIEW ARTICLES



and  the youth leaves to earn his fortune invariably by joining the Cossacks, while she,  heavy  with   child,  faithfully   awaits his return. They  marry,  and  live happily etc.   The   second   group   is  made   up  of mainly historical poems dealing with the Ukraine's Cossack  past, which  is seen  as a  golden  age  contrasted  to  the  bondage of  the  present  day.
But   perhaps  I  should   let  the   poetry speak  for  itself  so  that   you  can  be  the
 I am  your  Sweetheart, Katie, see!
Why  do you spur your  steed?"
And  while  he  urged  his charger on
As if he knew  her  not -
"0 stay,  my darling!" still she  cried.
"I'll weep  no more, God  wot.
Do  you  not  know  me,  Ivan dear? Do  you  not  Katie know?
I swear  to God  I am  your Kate!" Quote he: "You fool let  go!
Come  pull  the  crazy  woman  off!"
-"Dear God! Ivan, my dear! And  would  you  now  abandon me?
Your love,  you  swore,  was sheer."











judge.  The   poem  "Katerina" deals  with an   innocent  young  Ukrainian  girl  who falls  in  love  with  a  callous  Russian soldier.  He makes  her  pregnant and  then leaves  for  war.  She  in  turn   is  cast  out by  her   parents and,  child  in  arms,  sets out  to  find  him  which  after  many  trials she  finally   does.  When   she  meets   him she  says:
 Perhaps  in  view  of  all  this  you  will allow   me   a  little   dogg,erel  of  my  own which,   if  somewhat  inelegant,  has   the virtue   of  sincerity   and  sums  up  at  least
one  Ukrainian's position  vis a vis "The
Ukrainian  national  poet".

Dostoevsky can  do  more  than Shevchenko can
To  justify God's Ways  to the  Ukrainian.



b""ks in  Yeview



ARTLESS CHRONICLE

M.   ALLERDALE   GRAINGER,    Woodsmen of  the
West. McClelland &  Stewart. $ 1.50.

THIS  BOOK  was  well  worth   re-printing, and   not  merely   for  its  historical  value. It is loose,  awkward, rambling and  dis­ organized. The  author has a poor ear for dialogue  and    seldom    gets   hold   of   a character in  a  very  convincing  way.  But he  is  telling   of  a  time   and   place   and  people  that  have been very little explored. In   doing   so  he   manages   considerably more  than  a  mere  historical  record  or  a superficial   account  of  surface detail; he has  preserved   at  least  some  of  the  ways of  hope  and  thought that   went  into  the life  of  the  small  upcoast   logging  camps  almost   sixty   years   ago.   Some   of  those ways are still recognizable today  and  per­  haps  will  be  in  British  Columbians two or  three  generations from  now.
Grainger  writes   chiefly   of  Carter,  a
small-time logging  operator,   a  dark, angry,   power-loving,  ruthless  man.   He seems  to  respect,  even  to  admire Carter, as an  able  and  successful  logger  in  good times,  yet he ends  up  hating and  despis­ ing  him  in  his failure in  bad  times.  The  fact   is  that   Carter, even   in   Grainger's account of him,  was never  a good  logger. He  had   picked  a  poor  logging  show,  in excessively  remote country for  that  time. He   ran  a  poor  camp   with   haywire   rig­ ging   and   broken-down  machinery  and  ran  it clumsily. His failure was inevitable
 and   excites   neither  surprise  nor   sym­ pathy,  merely  some  doubt as  to  whether  he  has  been  accurately  recorded.
Grainger  is  writing   of  what,   in   the
late  twenties,   we  used  to  call  the  "bad old days", before  the  I.W.W. brought decent   living  conditions into  the  camps after   the  first  world   war.   But  even  in those  days there were quiet, frugal, efficient  small  operators out in the islands and   inlets,  versatile  and   ingenious  men who nursed  their  simple  machinery, kept their   rigging  in  shape,  survived   the  de­ pressions and  made  money  in  the booms. There were  even  men  who  could  boast in later  years that  their camps had  never known  a  serious  accident and  that  their logging   methods   left   a  sound   crop   of second-growth   behind. It  seems  a  pity that  some  echo  of  them  did  not  find  its way  into  this  book,  if only  to set Carter in  proper  prespective.
But  it  remains important  that   Grain­
ger  was there,  a sensitive  and  reasonably articulate man.  He  has  recorded the feel of  the   country  when   it   was  new,  any man's,   and   when   any   and   every  man had  his  own  pet  money-making  scheme and  dream   that   made  him  sizeable  and significant.   He  is splendidly accurate  in describing  the  drains that  swallowed  the schemes and  drew  off the  dreams as well as  the   casual   courage  with   which   ill­ equipped  men   accepted  the   enormous hazards  of weather and  tide and country. Grainger is at  his  best  in  this.  His  first­ hand  experience   speaks   clearly  and simply   of   the   violent   wet-cold   of  the coast  in  a  way  that   gains  in  power  pre­  cisely  because   the   dramatic  values   are ignored.    The    fantastic  struggle    of   a seventy-mile  row  in  a  waterlogged boat in  the  depths  of  winter   comes  through with  compelling  power   because  its  real

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



hazards are  nowhere acknowledged; the awesome  business of guiding a rackety steamboat through a narrow,  tide-riven passage   is  breathless and   clear   because the  unspoken fear  is not of death, but of incompetence revealed.
In  these  and  many  other  scenes Grain­ ger's   artless   book   carries   a   weight   of conviction  that   is  beyond  the  reach   of fiction.  If  Grainger were  around  today he  would  find  many  things  changed, in degree  if not  in  kind. He  would  find  the small  operator still, in  all his shapes  and sizes.  Conceivably  he   might   even   find another  Carter,   hidden   somewhere among   the  inlets,  though   I  doubt   it.  I feel   there   was   both   more   and   less  to Carter  than   Grainger's skill  could   per­ ceive  or  convey.
RODERICK HAIG-BROWN


GUILT AND COUNTER-GUILT
HENRY  KREISEL,   The Betrayal.  McClelland  &
Stewart. $4.95.

"Now, WHEN    I    LOOK   BACK,   it   seems strange that   I  should  have  got  involved with   Theodore  Stappler  at   all."   Now read   on.... The  fact   is,  first  sentences have   a  way  of  telling   us  almost   more than   we  can   bear   to  know  of  a  novel, and  this  one,  with  its suggestion  of  car­ pentry  and  its deadly  accurate hint  of a wordy  and   pedestrian narrator,  sent  my anticipation  skidding.   Very  well,  I  said (making a mental note of a  possibly too­ hasty   judgement,)   this   book  will  not escape  us, crackling with  surprise,  it is a written book, it  has  a  pleasing  feeling  of a   promised   suspense.   We  know  that   a few  phrases  on  the  dust cover  ("what at first   appears  to   be   merely   a   thrilling
 suspense   story   of   one   man's   relentless search to avenge a wrong, a tale that culminates in dramatic events  in Edmon­ ton   and   a   haunting   epilogue   in   the Canadian  north,  becomes  a  penetrating study   of  guilt   in  our   society")    suggest the  application of  the  modern adventure story  to a  universal  moral  dilemma. And universal   moral    dilemmas,  seen   in   a Canadian   landscape,  are   something  we could  use  more  of. Short of the first-best (and   the  confidence-trick  one  hoped   to catch  a  hint  of in the opening sentences)  such   an   adventure,  a  search,   a  chase, promised  to  be a  very  good  second-best. And   therein,  as   I   read   on,  came   my second  disappointment.
For  The Betrayal   does  not  quite   live
up  to its promise,  and  the  reason  for  this seems  to  lie  in  Mr.   Kreisel's  unwilling­ ness   to   seize  his   story   and   its   ironies directly   by  the  throat. The  complexities of  the  moral  issue  lie  wrapped in specu­ lation    and   conversation:  they   are   too much  talked  about. The physical  action,  which   alone    gives   a   skeleton    to   the theme,  is  surprisingly  unexciting.  Meet­ ings,  partings, long  anguished  conversa­ tions  take  the  place  of  what  might  have been  the  inexorable tracking  down  of  a prey  and  its  aftermath.
The story  is thus: the  narrator, a pro­
fessor  of  history   at  a  university   in  Ed­ monton, takes  note  of  an  attractive  girl student  when   she  begins  to  slip  behind  in  her   work.   The   girl  has met   a  man from  her  father's past,  a  man  whom  her father dislikes-and  she  is attracted to him.  The  narrator  is  introduced  to  the man,  Stappler, and  before  long, Stappler is pouring out  the story of his long search for  the  enemy  who betrayed  him  in  the Europe of   I939,  the  man  who,  it  is ap­  parent    long   before    it   dawns    on   the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



narrator, is the  girl's  father. The  author has  chosen  not  to  prolong  this  mystery: that  particular  revelation comes  about  a fifth  of the  way  through the  book. What remains  is first  of all  a detailed account of  the  original  betrayal,  seen  at  third­ hand  and  through Stappler's  telling  and the  professor's  description of  that  telling and   his  own   reactions   to   it;   and   the worrying  and  teasing  of the  moral  prob­  lems  involved   in   that   betrayal   and   its effect   on   Stappler.   Here  the   narrative is  too   oblique,    and   encumbered  with exaggerated  emphasis  on  the  emotional postures   of   the    two   characters:  "I thought at  first  I  had   not  heard   right,  and  though  I  was too surprised,  stunned even,  to say  anything...."  "All  at  once, the  tension  between   us eased...."  "The tension   in  the   room  had   become  palp­  able...."  "The silence  became  ominous and  impressive...." "Now  an odd thing happened. I felt  suddenly  a  sense of  re­ lief,  a  slackening of  a nearly  unbearable tension...."  "I closed  my  eyes and  felt the  room  swaying  before  me.  I tried  to understand him,  tried  to  grasp  the  tan­  gled  web  of  his  motives...."  A little  of this  goes  a  long  way,  and  it  is hard   to escape   the   conclusion  that   the   author is trying  to  build  his emotional tempera­ ture  into  the  narrative by talking  about  it  rather  than   by creating it.
The  novel is two-thirds over before it regains  a  forward momentum, and  it  is here  that  it seems  to me Mr.  Kreisel  has lost the opportunity to resolve the conun­ drums    of   the   past   with   a   conclusion worthy  of  the  central  issue.  The  ironies never   seem  to  be  achieved,  and   mean­  while  the  narrator,  pedantic  and  boring both  as a character  and,  I'm  afraid, as a narrator,  begins   to  claim   some  part   of the  story  for  himself,  and   the  epilogue

74
 seems futile rather than movmg and significant, as  it  ought   to  have  been.
This  is a pity, because  the central issue of  guilt   and   counter-guilt, which   I  am sure  was  the  original   seed  of  the  novel, is a fascinating one, and one which  Mr. Kreisel  is worthy  of  exploring. I  under­ stand  this  novel  was a long  time in writ­  ing:   early  references to  the  Korean war and   an   epilogue   dated   rg6o  and   rg64 attest   to   this.  Could   it   be  that   as  the story  unfolded, the characters diminished in  size,  became  duller   and  more  real­ and   yet  less  true   to  the  implications of the  story  Mr.  Kreisel  wanted to  tell?
GEORGE ROBERTSON

HUMOUR  IN AFFLICTION
AUSTIN     C.    CLARKE,    The  Survivors of    the
Crossing. McClelland  &  Stewart. $s.oo.

IN   HIS   FIRST  NOVEL, The Survivors  of the  Crossing, the  West  Indian writer Austin   C.   Clarke  has   provided  himself with  some  high  standards of  a  technical nature,  and    some   severe   problems    in terms   of  communication. For  this  nove.! is  set,  moreover,  amongst  the  poverty­ haunted villagers  whose fate it is to labour  amongst the  sugar  canes for an exploiting plantation   owner.  And   thus,  from   the outset, the   author  has  to  win  and   hold our  attention as he  tells a  tale  of a very simple   people,   many   of  whom  are  illi­ terate, including the  book's hero, and  for most   of   whom   this   gruelling  existence  amid    appalling   rural   poverty    suggests all  that   life  can  possibly  offer.
One   enormous  advantage,  and    one
which  Clarke indulges to  the  hilt,  is the mid-century freedom of expression  that fiction    has   won   for   itself.   This  book would  have  been  intolerable had  it  been

BOOKS IN REVIEW



written with the niceties of another era informing  both   the   speech   of  its   pro­ tagonists   and   concealing their  attitudes and  gestures.  As it  is, we are  able  to see how  sex alleviates boredom, mitigates  the burdens  of   the   indigent   and   provides solace for  yesterday, comfort tonight  and hope    for   tomorrow -when   there   are hardly   enough  alternative experiences these  villagers  can   afford.
There is  then   a  quality of realism  in­
jected  into   the   narrative that   allows  us to enter  fully and  with  sympathy into a situation:  a   situation  with   social,  eco­ nomic,   even   political  overtones;  one, moreover,   that is radical in  temper  and  has  strikes  and  labor  unrest  as its  terms of  reference.
But  that  is only  the  beginning. The Survivors  of  the   Crossing  is  a  novel­ not  a  piece  of  well-documented  socialist reporting from  the  British   West  Indies.  How,  then,  has  Clarke made the  transi­  tion   from   one   to   the   other   and   with what  measure  of  success?
Very  largely,  I  think,   he  has  brought off  on  his  own  terms   precisely  what  he set  out   to  accomplish.  He   tells  a  tragi­ comic  story  of  Rufus, the  ageing  parti­ san  of  socialist  progress,  his  friends  and his  foes  as  he  sets  about   organizing   a strike  against   the  managers  of  the  sugar cane  plantation.
Drawing  freely   on   a  dialect   resplen­
dent  with vivid images, many of them riotously  improper, the  author is able  to provide  us with  characterization that is rounded and seemingly instinct with authenticity.
The portraits of the  people  of this village-from  labourers and Rufus's cuckolder,  the   rum   store  owner,   to  the priest  and  school  teacher -all have me­ morable  traits.   And    such    women    as
 





Rufus's    common-law  wife,   Stella,   and the  fundamentalist preacher, Clementina, bring  a further distinction to these pages.
It is  true,   I  think,   that   the  author's
gift  for  a  tell-tale   expression,   or  a  tiny but   accurate  detail,   sometimes   is   pur­ chased   at  the  expense   of   personal  pro­  fundity. Indeed, this novel is not  a depth analysis   of   people.   No   character,  not even  that  of  Rufus,  suggests  an  inform­ ing  psychology  in  its creation.  And  per­  haps   this   gives   a   rather  old-fashioned flavour  to The  Survivors of the  Crossing.
But  if  so,  that   is  equally   part   of  its charm; that  and  the  undoubted humour that  irrepressibly  bursts  through the  nar­ rative   every  now  and   then.   This  is  the humour  of   a   people   in   affliction,   for whom  to laugh  is a vital  safety  valve. It is  also  the  humour of   the  author, who sees the  sacred  and  profane, the  highest  ideals   and   the   most   lowly   whims,   in­  extricably  cohabiting in  such  a milieu  as he  depicts  for  us.
As part  of that  "new" literature of the
English   speaking   world   that   the   post­ war   period   has   vouchsafed   us,   Austin  Clarke's novel  has  its own  special  niche.

75

BOOKS IN REVIEW



It is not  as polished  as some of the  West Indian fiction  to  have  appeared, though it  is  free  of  the  sort  of  Hindu  prudery that sometimes  blemishes V. S. Naipaul's novels.
Personally   I should  like  to see Clarke
writing  in  a little  more  heightened  prose (if  he  wishes to address  a  readership for whom    the   Caribbean  is  an   unknown book, climatically as well as socially and politically).  A  little   poetry  of  place,  in other  words, would  not have come amiss. And  a  "situation" novel  such  as  this,  is no sure  indicator of the novels that might or  might  not  issue from  the same  pen.
But if the honesty  and  the often  rueful
humour continue to  walk  hand  in  hand with  the Negro experience that  forms the burden   of   this   book,   the   future  can hardly  prove less than  interesting. The Survivors  of  the   Crossing  already   sug­ gests  the  preoccupations of  a  man  who is a novelist first, with all the other things a  subordinate and  artistically  viable second.
DAVID WATMOUGH



ORANGE BLOSSOM HONEY

ANNE   MONTROSE,   The  Winter  Flower    and
Other  Fairy  Stories. Macmillan. $3.75.

JAMES  MCNEILL,  The Double   Knights: More
Tales   from Round  the  World.  Oxford.
$3-50.


ONCE  UPON A   TIME,  surely,  there   must have  been  a  splendid collection  of  fairy tales  without a  single  pettish  step-sister, or  a  king  offering  his daughter and  half his  kingdom   for  a  completely impossible
 feat  (executioner on call;  no triflers need apply),  or   a   single   sentence   of   inten­ tional  edification. What a  relief  it  must have   been.  But  then   I  suppose  huffing, puffing   parents and   teachers  discovered that   this  was  not  at  all  the  sort of  thing they    had    read    as   children.   So   they banished  it. Off  to  moulder on  the dusty top   shelf   went   the   book,  and   children have   been   putting  up  with   the   beastly step-sisters,   the  obsessed  kings,  and   the presumptuous "improvement" ever after.
Well,   maybe   not.   Perhaps  they   like them.   According  to  stock   beliefs,   they like  repetition, love  to recognize  a  situa­ tion,  and  absorb  "morals"  unconsciously if  they  don't  consciously  approve them.  But   if,   as   I  sometimes   fear,   they   are simply  more  polite  and  resigned  than  we think,  and  keep  on  listening  and  reading in  the  valiant  hope  that   the  old  collec­ tion  will   reappear  in  some  form,  Anne Montrose's The Winter Flower  will  be a mild   disappointment  to   them.   For   al­
though the  book has decided  streng,ths -
its style is graceful, its dialogue is  plenti­ ful and  unstilted, and  its descriptive pas­ sages  are   evocative  and   pretty   without often   being   trite,  the  castles  and   woods are  full of familiar situations and  charac­ ters. In  thirteen  stories no less than  seven royal  hands are  offered  to  the  enterpris­ ing   (only  three,  it  is true,  by impulsive  papas),  and the  boudoirs   and  drawing­ rooms  of  three   stories  boast  six  doomed  but  gamely   nasty  step-sisters.  "... I like being  horrid!" says one of them,  "smiling wickedly."  Fortunately   there    are    also some   redeemingly  vital   minor   charac­ ters, like the  gloriously  bad-tempered but frivolous   Grand  Dame  of  the  Kitchens, who produces an unrelieved diet of burnt porridge for  her  impoverished  employer and  hurls  pots,  when  she  isn't  off at  the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



fair   enjoying  herself   on   the   merry-go­ round    and    swings.   And   some   of   the kings' dilemmas are whimsically original: Princess  Magnolia  is  available to anyone  who   can   revive   the   fire   of   the   royal dragon, guardian  of  the  realm; Princess Mirabel must  marry   the  tailor   who  can contrive a  supremely  elegant  waistcoat, decides   her    sybaritic    parent,   gorging secretly   on   orange-blossom  honey   and chocolate peppermint cake with his Grand  Marshall;  and   Princess   Ambro­ sine is conceded to a brash  young  pedlar  on   condition  that   he   imprison  an   ob­ noxious   cuckoo   for   her  bird-and-clock­ loving  sire.
The  edification is here  too,  lightly handled but unmistakably present. Where it concerns sympathetic characters, it is perfectly  orthodox; they are consistently rewarded for  being  virtuous. Concerning the  undeserving it  is more   subtle.  Prin­ cess  Mirabel's  father  gets  his   exquisite  waistcoat   and   wears  it  to  his  rash  wed­ ding  with  a  queen   whose  twelve  hungry  daughters put  finis to private gorges. Un­  like  Cinderella's   tormentors,  Princess Linnet's three selfish step-sisters  get  what they  want  and  learn   to  lament it.  But only  two  of   the  three   stories  free  from conventional messages  are  seriously  wise in   a  refreshing  way.  Both   "A   Tale   of Two   Mandarins" and   "The  Eagle  and the   Lark" are   cool,  appealing  parables on  the  theme  that  sometimes  the  beauti­ ful   and   the   civilized   survive   only   by virtue  of a precarious balance of  amoral­ ities.
Mircea  Vasilu's  quirky,  curlicued
black-and-white drawings match Anne Montrose's stories.  They  are  delicate, lively, and  cleverly  pretty.
Beside  Miss  Montrose, James  McNeill
is  a  rather  pedestrian writer.   But  what
 his Double Knights lacks of The Winter Flower's  surface originality and vivacious, artful narration it makes  up for in varied incidents   and   strange settings and  con­ ventions.   For   this   book,   like   Mr.   Mc­ Neill's   earlier    The  Sunken   City,  is  a collection   of  folk  tales  from   round   the world,   and   some  of  the   seventeen   are very  powerful.  The   book  does  contain a couple  of the  old  "fail  and  you lose your head" monarchs, and  several  stories  are national  variants  of   universally  known tales,  but  at  least  half  of  them  are  new­ comers   to   North   America's  common stock.   And   even   the  variants  of  well­ known   stories   differ   enough  from   the popular  versions  to command some  star­  tled   attention.  For   instance,  unlike   the seven   dancing  princesses   who  wear   out their  slippers  in  many  a  book  cavorting with decorous partners,  Portugal's naughty  princess  goes through seven  sets of iron  soles a night with a ghastly crew of ghostly pirates sporting  broken necks or gaping    wounds,    and    "strange   hollow eyes." And  whereas  the fastidious heroine of  "The  Princess   and   the   Pea"   simply proves herself royal by being shockingly pernickety,  Hungary's student hero, simi­ larly   tested,   passes  by  accident   and   is taken  for  a  prince  by mistake.
If The   Double   Knights  version  of  a
Russian tale,  "The  Seven  Simeons Simeonovich",  is  representative  of  Mr. McNeill's way  with  a  story,  some  of  the folk tales here  may be short  a bit of their old  intricacy   and   fun.   For  Boris  Artzy­ basheff's  version  of  this  tale,  admittedly much   longer,  is  funnier,  more  exciting,  and  better  integrated.  Mr.  McNeill   is a lucid,  economical  story-teller rather than  a  creative   one.  However,  the   bones  of the  stories  are  here,  and   they  are  good bones.  Theo  Dimson's   bold,  strong-lined

77

BOOKS IN REVIEW



drawings,  formalized  yet  lively,  contri­
bute  some  of the  articulation.
As for  moralizing, The Double Knights is  blessedly   lacking   in   it.   An   upstart French shepherd wins a king's suitor con­ test  with  magic  and  some blatant  black­ mail.   Finland's Ollie,  though  not  canni­ balistic   like  his  troll  enemy,  is  scarcely more  virtuous  than  the troll;  he robs him blind,  roasts his wife, tricks him  to death, and   lives happily,  with  his  relatives  and friends, on  the  poor  monster's  treasure. Irish  John Shea spends  a frustrating old age  trying  to  repeat a  coup  that  should have  won  him  riches  but  didn't, while  a German   thief   becomes  a  duke   and   fi­ nance   minister    for   proving    himself   a peerless  second-storey man.

Never    again  did   any   of   the   King's   sub­ jects    grumble  about  their    taxes,   for   the clever   thief  took  their money  with  so much  skill   that  they   scarcely   knew   it   was  gone.

How  appaiiing. And what  a pleasant change.
F. M. FRAZER



SUEZ AND EAST

JAMES  EAYRS, The  Commonwealth and  Suez.
Oxford. $I I .50.

TERENCE  ROBERTSON, Crisis: The  Inside  Story of the  Suez  Conspiracy.  McClelland &  Ste­ wart,  $7.50.

MICHAEL  BRECHER,  The   New  States  of  Asia.
Oxford.

ISABEL WILSON,  Indian  Excursion.  Longmans.
$5-50.

ONE  OF  THE  SIGNS of growing  maturity in a nation is the  tendency  for  its people to  think   less of  themselves  and  more  of
 the  world  outside. The  self-consciousness of  youth   begins   to  diminish;  the   basic tasks of establishing a  viable  economy,  a working  political  system, have  been  com­ pleted.   The stage  of self-assertion  which followed  dependence is coming to an end,  and  now  the  need  to explore  and  estab­ lish relations with  other  nations  and  cul­ tures,  to  find  an  equilibrium in  a  world where  distance  is  politically  meaningless, becomes  gradually  paramount.
In  Canada this process has been shown particularly  in   a   steadily   increased   in­ terest   in  countries where   we  have  little immediate political  or economic concern. The  United States,   Britain   and  France, and  in  another sense  Russia  and  China, perhaps inevitably still inhabit  the centre  of  our  international  vision,  but  over  the last  decade we have  been  demonstrating a growing  concern  over  countries east of Suez.
Suez  itself,  of  course,  marks   a  boun­
dary in historical  as well as geographical terms.  The Suez  crisis  of  I956 may  well have  been  the  last  foray  of  the  old  im­ perialist   powers  of  western  Europe,  but it  also showed  Canada  playing  a sharply  independent role  in  the  Commonwealth and  the  United  Nations, and  taking  the initiative  towards   the   effective   solution of  an  extraordinarily  perilous   situation. Perhaps  because   up   to  the  present   this feat  has  not  been  repeated, it  remains  in the   minds    of   many   Canadians  as   an isolated  peak of achievement in positive diplomacy, and  the  kind  of fascination it holds for historians is shown in the appearance, eight   years  after   the  event, of two Canadian books dealing with the crisis.
The first is a documentary survey com­
piled  by  James Eayrs  and   entitled The
Commonwealth  and  Suez.  Dividing the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



incident into  five phases,  beginning with the  nationalization by Egypt  of the  Suez Canal  Company,  and   ending  with   the "Reckonings" when  the  crisis  was safely over,   Mr.  Eayrs   presents   extracts from political   speeches   and   documents  illus­ trating the  attitudes of  Britain,  Canada and   the  other   Commonwealth  countries  towards   the   rapidly   changing  situation. Like  all  compilations  which  draw  copi­ ously   on   the   words   of   politicians  and civil  servants   in  moments  of  crisis,  The Commonwealth  and  Suez   combines   un­ doubted  usefulness  to students of history with  an  impenetrability-so far  as  the more  general reader  is  concerned­ which  is compounded partly  of an exces­ sive  repetitive schematization and  partly  of  the  very  nature of  the  material  pre­ sented.   For,  now  that   the  false  glow  of crisis  has  long  faded, one  is  appalled by the   bad   logic  and   the  intellectual  and moral   dishonesty   displayed   by  so  many of  the  world's  leaders on  this  occasion, not  to  mention  their  concerted mayhem  of  English  as a  language of  effective  or graceful  communication. Fortunately, Dr.  Eayrs  has  prefaced each  of  his five sections  of  extracts  with   a  lucid  intro­ duction, and  one  hopes  that  some day he will expand and  unite  these passages into  a   more   attractive  book   in   which   the verbal    atrocities  of   politicians  will   be thoroughly controlled  within   the  narra­ tive.
Mr.  Terence Robertson, a writer  of contemporary  history   who   in   the   past has  specialized  in  incidents of  war,  now takes   up   the   semi-war  of  Suez   in   his Crisis:  the  Inside  Story  of the  Suez Con­ spiracy,  and  complements the  documen­ tary  collection of Dr.  Eayrs with  a highly readable and   well-researched  narrative. Mr.  Robertson   had   interviewed  almost
 all the  surv1vmg political  leaders and officials  in  France,  Israel,   Canada and the  United  States  who  played  important parts  in  the  crisis. Those  of  Britain  and Egypt  appear to have  been  pointedly reticent,  but  Mr. Robertson has made judicious  use of secondary  sources  where the  primary   were  not  available to  him, and he presents a clear and reasonable account   whose  basic  accuracy one  can­ not  doubt.
One   of  the  most  distinguished  Cana­ dian  experts  on  Asian  affairs  is  Michael Brecher,  author of an  able  biography  of Nehru.  Professor   Brecher's   latest   book, The  New   States   of  Asia,  is  a  series  of essays  on   the   political   development  of the  nations  which  emerged   in  Asia  as  a result   of   the   breakup  of   the   British, French  and Dutch empires.  It is a rather abstract  study,  lacking   the  kind  of  per­  sonal  content  which  made  the Nehru  bio­ graphy  so interesting, and  presenting the problems of Asia in a curiously cold and dehumanized way. Informative without being attractive, it is a book mainly of interest  to the  political  specialist.
Indian  Excursion by  Isabel   Wilson  is
the reverse of specialist  in any  way what­ ever.  Mrs.  Wilson   went   to  India  for  a month    with   her   geophysicist   husband. They  travelled  widely  over  the  country, but   were  fairly   strictly   confined   within  an  itinerary   based  on  a  series  of  those widely   scattered  conferences  to   which Indians  have  become  extraordinarily ad­  dicted  since  liberation. Mrs.  Wilson  has a  sharp  eye for  the  detail  of  scenery,  a descriptive flair  which  she  does  not  use sufficiently,   and    an   ear   for   turns    of speech   that    reveal   character,  but   the very nature of  her  journey  insulated her from  Indian life  and  tempted her  to fill long,   long   stretches  of   her   book   with

79

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



chat  about  the   conferences and  the people   she  met   at   them.  There  might have been material here for a couple of interesting articles  on the  Indian impres­ sions of an  academic's wife,  but  there  is certainly  not  enough   for  a  book.  It re­ minds  one  of  the  fluttery  silver  leaf  that  is  beaten    out   in   Indian   bazaars  for covering  sweetmeats; bright,   but  extra­ ordinarily thin.
GEORGE WOODCOCK


JEWISH
CANADIANA

DAVID   ROME,  A  Selected  Bibliography of  Jew­ ish   Canadiana.  Canadian  Jewish  Congress and   the  Jewish Public Library.

DAVID    ROME,   Jews    in   Canadian  Literature: A  Bibliography. The Canadian Jewish  Con­ gress  and   the  Jewish  Public  Library.

THESE TWO  MIMEOGRAPHED VOLUMES, the   product  of  many   years  of  devoted labour   by David   Rome,  the  Director   of
the  Jewish   Public   Library   in  Montreal,
and  Curator of the  Bronfman Collection of  Jewish   Canadiana,  constitute a  sig­ nificant  contribution to Canadian letters. Research  tools  such  as  these  specialized bibliographies are  almost essential for the serious   student  who  is   concerned  with the  nature of Jewish  experience in  Can­  ada,   with   the  scope  and  quality   of  the achievements of  Jews in nearly  all phases of  Canadian   life,  and   with   the  varied responses   of   non-Jews  to   the   Jews   in their  midst.
The Selected   Bibliography  of  Jewish







8o
 Canadiana, which  was  published  on  the occasion  of the  bicentenary of Canadian Jewry,   lists  major  books  and   pamphlets in  various  fields of effort,  but  it does not list periodical articles-an unfortunate omission,   as  much   scholarly   material  is to   be   found    here.    The    bibliographer might   well  have  been  more  selective  re­ garding  the   material  he   does   present.  One    questions,  for   example,   the  per­  tinence of such  a listing as " 'Grace after  meals'   Montreal,  Epstein's   restaurant", or    the    presence  of    books   by   non­ Canadians, Jewish   or  otherwise,   simply because  they  were  re-printed in Canada.
The second  volume,  Jews in Canadian Literature:  a  Bibliography,  which   de­ velops  substantially the  section  on  litera­ ture  in  the  earlier  book, lists the  literary works of Canadian Jews and  the writings  of  non-Jewish Canadians  which  refer  to Jews.   Mr.   Rome   has  increased  the  use­ fulness  of  this  compilation by  summariz­ ing  many  of the  major  items of criticism  and   by   providing  some   brief   editorial commentary  on  the  literary   works  and  the  criticism. It  is  regrettable that   both bibliographies should be marred by many misspellings  and   other   minor   errors.   A task   that    is   so  well   worth   doing   and  which indeed was so carefully  carried out in  most  respects,  should  not  suffer  from these avoidable defects. This  criticism, however,  should  not detract unduly  from Mr.  Rome's achievement, for  these  bibli­ ographies will undoubtedly prompt much  research  and  make  easier  the  task  of the scholar   and   critic.
M. W. STEINBERG


CJlNJlDIJlN 	LITERJlTURE - 1964
















]I CHECKLIST  EDITED  BY RIT]I BUTTERFIELD


ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE
compiled  by Rita  Butterfield












COLLECTIONS

Family Herald, Canada's  National  Farm Magazine. Stories to  read  again, edited  by H.  Gordon Green. Fredericton, N.B.  Bruns­ wick  Press   [I964, CI965]. 255  p.
PENNER, PHILIP and   MCGECHAEN,  JOHN, eds.
Canadian  reflections: an  anthology of  Can­ adian    prose.  Toronto,  Macmillan  of   Can­ ada   [ci964]. 329  p.
STAFFORD, ELLEN, ed.  Flamboyant Canadians,
with    illustrations  by   Wallace  Speck.   To­
ronto, Baxter  Publishing,  I964.   360  p. SYLVESTRE, GUY,   CONRON, BRANDON, and
KLINCK,  CARL    F.,   eds.   Canadian  writers,
Ecrivains   canadiens,   a   biographical    dic­ tionary, un   dictionnaire   biographique.  To­  ronto, Ryerson   Press  [I964]. I63  p.
WILSON, MILTON, ed.   Poetry   of  mid-century,
1940-1960. Toronto,  Montreal, McClelland
&  Stewart, I 964.  2 56  p.  (Poets of  Canada, vol.  3).


FICTION

ALLEN, RALPH. The high  white  forest,  a novel about   the  Battle   of the  Bulge. Garden City, N.Y.,  Doubleday,  I964.   376  p.
BERGREN,  MYRTLE.  A  bough  of needles, eleven
Canadian  short   stories.   Toronto,   Progress
Books,   I964.   98  p.
BODSWORTH,  FRED. The  atonement of  Ashley
Morden.  New   York,   Dodd,   Mead,   1964.
468   p.
BOYLE, HARRY JOSEPH.   A   summer  burning.
 Garden City,  N.Y.,  Doubleday, 1964.  261  p. BURKE,  JAMES.  Flee   seven    ways.    [London, New  Authors, 1963]. 222  p.  (New  Authors,
no.  41 ).
CARMICHAEL, HARRY. See: OGNALL, LEOPOLD HORACE.
CLARK, GREGORY.   Gregory  Clark   war   stories.
Toronto,  Ryerson Press,   1964.   I 7 I  p. CLARKE,  AUSTIN c. The survivors   of the  cros­
sing.    Toronto,  Montreal,  McClelland &
Stewart,  1964.   202   p.
COSTAIN, THOMAS  BERTRAM.   The  last   love.
Garden City,  N.Y.,  Doubleday, I964. 434  p. CUOMO,  GEORGE.  Bright  day,  dark   runner; a novel. Garden City,  N.Y.,  Doubleday,  1964.
42I    p.
FINDLAY,   DAVID  KILPATRICK.    Northern  affair.
Toronto,  McClelland  &   Stewart [cr964].
224  p.
FRANKLIN, JUNE.  Catch me  if  you  can.   (To­ ronto, Canada  National Book  Club,  Cana­ diana, CI964]. 288  p.
GALLANT,   MAVIS. My   heart   is  broken;  eight
stories   and   a  short  novel. New  York,  Ran­
dom   House [I964].  273  p.
GIBBONS,  MAURICE. The  predicaments of  Eus­ tace    Prim.   Toronto,   Musson   Book    Co.  [c1964].  134   p.
GILMER, ANN.  See:  ROSS,  WILLIAM EDWARD
DANIEL.
GRAINGER,  MARTIN ALLERDALE.   Woodsmen  of the   west. Introduction  [by]   Rupert  Schie­ der. 	[Toronto]   McClelland &     Stewart [I964].   I52    p.    (New    Canadian   Library, no.  42).

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



GRANTMYRE,     BARBARA    (Lucas).  A    rose   for Minnie Mullet: a collection of short  stories. Fredericton, N.B.,  Brunswick Press  [crg64].
157  p.
HAYCRAFT, MARY    (Costain).   The  reluctant queen  [by]   Molly   Costain  Haycraft.  Lon­ don,   F.   Muller  [rg64].  255   p.   (rst   pub­ lished   Philadelphia, Lippincott,   r g62).
HILLIARD,  JAN. Morgan's castle. London, New York,    Toronto,  Abelard-Schuman  [rg64]. r88  p.
HINE,  DARYL. The  prince   of  darkness &  co. London,   New     York,     Toronto,    Abelard­ Schuman [rg6r].  rgo  p.
HOOD, HUGH  JOHN  BLAGDON.   White   figure, white   ground.    Toronto,    Ryerson   Press, rg64.   251   p.
HOWARD, HARTLEY. See:  OGNALL, LEOPOLD
HORACE.
IRWIN,  GRACE   LILLIAN. Servant   of  slaves;    a biographical  novel   of  John    Newton.  Lon­ don,   Oliphants  [ r g63].  437   p.   ( r st   pub­  lished     Toronto,   McClelland  &    Stewart, rg6r  ).
JACKSON, JAMES !VOR. To the   edge  of  morn­ ing.  Toronto, New  York,   Baxter  Publishing [rg64]. 187   p.
KREISEL,  HENRY.  The  betrayal.  Toronto,
Montreal,   McClelland   &   Stewart,   r g64.
2!8  p.
LAURENCE,   ELSIE  (Fry). Bright   Wings.   [To­
ronto] Longmans [crg64].  240  p. LAURENCE, JEAN  MARGARET    (Wemyss). The
stone  angel.  Toronto, Montreal, McClelland
&  Stewart [Cig64]. 308  p.
-. The  tomorrow-tamer; short    stories.   To­
ronto,   McClelland   &     Stewart    [ c r g63].
244  p.
LEPAN,  DOUGLAS. The  deserter. Toronto, Montreal,  McClelland &  Stewart  [ rg64].
298   p.
MCAULEY,  MRS. J ACQUEL!N ROLLIT. The cloud. New  York, Exposition Press  [crg64]. r 18 p. (An   Exposition Banner Book).
MACBETH, MADGE    HAMILTON (Lyons).   Vol­ cano:    a   novel    of   the   Ecuadorean   Andes. Philadelphia, Dorrance  [crg63],  244  p.
MCCOURT,   EDWARD  ALEXANDER.  The  Ettinger affair.  London,   Macdonald,   rg63.     (Also published as  Fasting   Friar.  Toronto, rg63). MACKENZIE,   DONALD.  Double  exposure.  Lon­ don.    Published   for    the    Crime   Club    by
 Collins   [Cig63]. 192  p.
MARLYN, JOHN.    Under   the    ribs   of   death. Introduction   [by]    Eli   W.   Mandel.    [To­ ronto]  McClelland   &   Stewart    [crg64].
220   p.   (New  Canadian  Library,  no.   41). MIRVISH, ROBERT   F.  Holy   Loch.  New   York,
William   Sloane  Associates,  rg64.  345   p.
-. There  you   are,  but   where   are   you?  To­ ronto,   Clarke,   Irwin,   rg64.   Also:    New York,  E.  P.  Dutton,  rg64.   253  p.
MITCHELL,   WILLIAM  ORMAND. The   black   bon­
spiel  of  Wullie MacCrimmon.  [Calgary, Alta.,  Frontiers Unlimited, rg64?]. 55 p. (Frontier  Book   no.   r o) .
MONSARRAT,    NICHOLAS. A   fair    day's    work.
London, Cassell   [crg64]. r65  p.
MOORE, BRIAN. Judith  Hearne.  Introduction [by]    John  Stedmond.  [Toronto]   McClel­ land    &    Stewart  [Ig64].   r85    p.    (New  Canadian  Library,  no.   39).
MUMFORD, ALICE  HERRICK.  One   cubit, a novel. Fredericton,  N.B.,   Brunswick  Press    [ r g64, crg65].  159  P·
MURDOCH, B.    J.    The   Murphys  come    in.
[Fredericton, N.B.]   Brunswick  Press  [rg64, crg65]. 255  p.
o'BRIEN,  VINCENT. The    white    cockade;   an
historical    novel.  London,  New   York,   To­ ronto,  Abelard-Schuman  [crg65].   316   p. OGNALL, LEOPOLD HORACE. Safe    secret,   by Harry  Carmichael  [pseud.]  London,   pub­ lished    for    the    Crime    Club    by    Collins
[crg64].  192   p.
-. The  Stretton  case,   by   Hartley   Howard
[pseud.]  London,  Collins,  r g63. O'GRADY,   ROHAN. See:  SKINNER,  JUNE
(O'Grady).
o'HAGAN, HOWARD. The  woman who   got  on at   Jasper   Station, and   other   stories.  Den­ ver,    Colo.,    A.   Swallow   [ c r g63].  r r 2     p. (A  Swallow   Paperback, 53).
OSTERGARD,   RAY. The  vernal    equinoX.   [To­ ronto, Canada  National Book   Club,  Cana­ diana,  CI964].  235  P·
PARKER, WILLIAM WILDER MCKINLEY.  Bush
homestead  girl,·  or,  Myrtle's  blueberry  kiss.
[Edmonton,  Alta.,   rg64].  g6   p.
PETER, JOHN.  Along   that   coast.  Garden  City, N.Y.,   Doubleday,   rg64.   275   p.
PREVOST,  ARTHUR. The  French and   Langlais quarrel.  Montreal,   Editions   Princeps [crg62].  124   p.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



ROBERT, MARIKA.  A  stranger   and   afraid.  To­
ronto,  McClelland   &   Stewart   [c1964].
326  p.
ROSS, WILLIAM   EDWARD DANIEL.  The  fog  and the    stars,   by   Ann    Gilmer    [pseud.]   New York, T. Bouregy [cr963]. 191  p.  (Avalon Books).
-. Out    of   the    night,  by   Dan    Ross.   New
York, T. Bouregy   [c1963]. 191  p.  (Avalon
 BROWN, WILLIAM GIBSON. Prairie   philosophy. Radisson, Sask.,  Comet Printers and  Pub!. [cr964].  Unpaged.
CARON, GLADYS M.   Verses.  [Lachute,   P.Q.,
printed  by  Giles  Publishing House, c1 963].
97   p.
COHEN, LEONARD  NORMAN.  Flowers   for Hitler.
Toronto,   McClelland   &     Stewart,    1964.
128 p.

Books).
RULE, JANE. The desert  of the  heart. Toronto, Macmillan  of  Canada,  I 964.   255   p.
 COUPE¥, PIERRE. Bring Montreal, I964. 67 series,  no.  7).
 forth     the    cowards.
p.     (McGill   poetry

SANDERSON,   DOUGLAS.  Lamb  to   slaughter.
London, R.   Hale  [1964].  192  p.
SHIPLEY,  NAN. Return to  the   river.  Toronto, Ryerson Press,  1964.   r86  p.
SKINNER, JUNE (O'Grady). L'Houlihan's jest,
by   Rohan  L'Grady   [pseud.]  London,  V. Gollancz, I961.  192  p.
-. Let's   kill    uncle,  by   Rohan  O'Grady
[pseud.]  New   York, Macmillan  [c1963].
246   p.
STERNE,  EDWARD. The  green    earth.   Phila­
delphia,  Dorrance  [cr962].  356   p. WALKER, DAVID.  Winter of  madness, a  novel.
Boston, Houghton,  Miffiin  [c1964]. 272  p. Also:    London,  Collins,    1964.   255   p.
WILSON, LAWRENCE   MAURICE.  The  bomb   ex­
pert;   a  short  story.  Montreal, 1963.   [6]   p. WUORIO, EVA-LIS.  The  woman   with   the   Por­ tuguese  basket. London, D.  Robson  [ 1963,
cr961].  191  p.
YOUNG, PHILLIS  BRETT. Undine. Toronto, Longmans Canada,  1 g64.  256  p.


POETRY
ANDREWS, WILLIAM GEORGE.   My   wanderlust, by  William Wordsmith [pseud.]. Illustrated by  Amelia Olsen. [Vancouver, Cameo  Pub­ lications]  c1964.   40   p.
ANGUS, ANN MARGARET   (Anderson). Where  I
have    been.  Vancouver, privately printed,
1963.   [37]  p.  (roo  copies).
BIRNEY,  EARLE. Near  False  Creek   mouth. To­ ronto, McClelland &  Stewart  [1964].  35  p. BOURINOT, ARTHUR  STANLEY. fohn    Donne
was   right;  poems,  1964.    [Ottawa, cr964].
33  p.   (200   copies).
BOWERING, GEORGE H.   Points    on   the    grid.
Toronto, Contact Press  [cr964]. 67  p.
 DAVEY,  FRANKLIN. City   of  the   gulls  and  sea;
poems.    [Victoria, B.C.]    I964. 34  p.
DAVIS,  GILBERT  G. The  poet  yet  speaks.  I!fra­ combe, Devon, A. H. Stockwell, I962.  rS  p. DESBARATS,  PETER. Halibut York. The   night  the    city    sang.    Montreal,  Montreal    Star,
1964.   Unpaged.
EDWARDS,   GEORGE   F.  Random  rhymes.  (n.p.,
1964?]. [Io]  I.
GILBERT, GERRY. White  Lunch.   Vancouver, Periwinkle  Press   [cr964].  [31]  p.
GLAssco,    JOHN.   A   point    of   sky.   Toronto, Oxford  University  Press,   1964.   So  p.
GOODGER-HILL, TREVOR. God    is   my    flesh; poems. Brush  drawings by Marie Koehler. Montreal,  1963.   S2  p.
GOTL!EB, PHYLLIS.  Within  the   Zodiac.   To­ ronto,  McClelland  &  Stewart,  I 964.   S7   p. GRENVILLE,  R. H. The  fountain on  the  square.
Birmingham, Ala.,   Banner  Press   Publishers
[ci963]. 77  p.
HAWKINS, WILLIAM. Shoot low  sheriff, they're riding  Shetland ponies,· poems, by William Hawkins  [and]   Roy   MacSkimming.    [To­ ronto, c1964]. 23,  24  p.
HAWS,  MARY   FRANCES. A   handful  of  hours. Toronto,  New   York, London,  Baxter   Pub­ lishing [1964].  102   p.
HEDGEs, DORIS (Ryde). For  this  I live; poems.
New  York, Exposition Press  [ci963]. So  p. HINE, DARYL. The devil's picture  book;  poems.
London,   New    York,   Toronto,    Abelard­
Schuman  [I961,  C196o]. 32  p.
HOPKINS, RONALD RUSSELL.  Random thoughts in   verse.   [Victoria,  Author,  1962?].  75  p. KIYOOKA,  ROY. Kyoto  airs.  Vancouver,   Peri­
winkle Press  [CI964]. [3I]  p.
KIRKCONNELL,  WATSON. The  flying  bull   and other    tales.    Toronto,  Vancouver,  Clarke,

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



Irwin   [ 1964].  154   p.    (paperback  reprint of   1940   edition).
LAYTON, IRVING. The   laughing   rooster.   To­
ronto,   Montreal,   McClelland   &    Stewart
[1964].  112  p.
LIVESAY,  DOROTHY.  See:  MAC NAIR, DOROTHY (Livesay).
LOCKHEAD,  DOUGLAS GRANT.  Shepherds  before kings. [Toronto, Three  Fathom Press, crg63]. [4] p.  (roo copies).
MAC NAIR,  DOROTHY   (Livesay). The  colour  of
God's    face,    by    Dorothy   Livesay.    [Van­
couver?, 1964 ?].   [ r 2]  p.
MCNAMARA,  EUGENE. Equinox;  twelve  poems. Montage design  by  Evelyn  McLean.  [Wind­ sor,   Ont.,  University  of    Windsor,    rg63]. [14]  p.
MANDEL,  ELI. Black   and  secret  man. Toronto,
Ryerson  Press   [ 1964].  33  p.
MARTEN, PAUL.  Kennedy   requiem.  Toronto, Weller   Publishing [cr963].  Unpaged.
MAYNE, SEYMOUR. That  motorcycle the  moon; poems. Montreal [printed by Jewish Public Library, crg64]. [r4]  I.
MERRILL, OLGA    BEATRICE. Five    poems.    To­
ronto, Aliquando Press   [cr964]. [r4]  p. MEYERS,  LEONARD WILLIAM.  When words  col­
lide.    San  Antonio,   Texas,  Naylor  Co. [1960]. 48  p.
NAPORA,  PAUL EDWARD. The cresset.  San  An­
tonio,   Texas, Naylor  Co.   [c1963]. 26  p. NEWLOVE,  JOHN.    Elephants,   mothers   and
others.   Vancouver,    Periwinkle   Press
[cr963l.  [31]  p.
NICHOLSON, LEMUEL HEATH. Greetings   from the  "Latch".  [Sidney, B.C.,   n.d.]  64  p.
-. Greetings  from  the  "Niche". Sidney, B.C., n.d.   41   p.
PARSONS,  RICHARD  AUGUSTUS.  Sea     room. [Illustrated  by   Paul  Parsons]  St.   John's, Newfoundland Arts  Centre [ci963].  127  p. PETERSEN,    AMELIA  FORRESTER.   Random thoughts and  single  verse.  Toronto, Thomas
Allen   [1964].  I28   p.
PREWETT, FRANK. Collected  poems   of  Frank Prewett.  London,  Cassell    [I 964]. 63  p. REANEY,  JAMES. The dance   of  death at  Lon­
don, Ontario;  poems.   Drawings  [by]   Jack
Chambers. London [Ont.],  Alphabet  Press, I 963.   32   p.
RICHMAN,  SHARON  LEA.   Quiet     winds,    by
Sharon  Lea   Richman   [and]   Paul  William
 Stooshnoff.  [Calgary, 1964]. [66] I.
ROSENBLATT,   JOSEPH.   Voyage  of  the   mood.
Don    Mills,    Ont.,   Heinrich   Heine   Press,
1963.   [r6] p.  (2oo   copies).
scoTT,    FRANCIS REGINALD.   Signature.   Van­
couver,   Klanak  Press,   1964.   56   p.
SELLE, LEONARD  SAVILLE  GEORGE.  Lines  and lyrics. North Bay, Ont., Northland Printers, CI964.  67  p.
SILKA, HELEN  JULIA.  Gems  of   peace.   llfra­
combe,   Devon,  A.   H.  Stockwell [I 963].
156   p.
SMITH, STEPHEN SAMUEL. God's kaleidoscope,
edited by Louis   Dudek. [Montreal, cr g64].
42  p.   (McGill  Poetry Series no.  8). sousTER, RAYMOND.  At  Split Rock   Falls. Nor­
wich,    Vermont,   American   Letters   Press,
1963.   2  p.
-. The colour  of the  times;  collected  poems.
[Toronto]  Ryerson  Press    [cr964].  I2I   p.
-. 12 new   poems.   [Lanham,  Md., Goosetree
Press,  c1g64]. [5]  p.
WALSH, LILLIAN  CREWE. Greetings  from  Cape Breton, the   pride   of  the   Maritimes; a  col­ lection   of   verse.    [Glace Bay,  N.S.,  printed by  Brodie  Printing   Service,  r 962].   79  p.
WEVILL,   DAVID. Birth   of  a  shark; poems.  To­
ronto,  Macmillan  of  Canada,  I 964.   55   p. WORDSWORTH, WILLIAM. See: ANDREWS,  WIL­
LIAM  GEORGE.
WRIGHT, LAURA GERTRUDE (Moore).   Cam­ paigns  of  Napoleon, Vive  l'Empereur.  New York,  Vantage  Press  [cr963]. 44  p.


DRAMA

DAKIN, LAURENCE BRADFORD.   A   Promethian triology. Toronto,   J.  M.   Dent   (Canada)
[cig62]. roB  p.
DECOTEAU,  L. The  hiders, a one-act   play.  n.p. [ci963]. [I9]  p.
KIRKCONNELL, WATSON. The primordial Church of  Horton.  Wolfville, N.S.    [1963]. [8]   p.


ESSAYS

BURNFORD, SHEILA   (Every).  The  fields    of noon.  Illustrated by  Cecile Curtis. Toronto, Montreal,  McClelland  &   Stewart  [1964].
159  p.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



FINEBERG,   ABRAHAM  L.  Storm the  gates   of Jericho.  Toronto,   McClelland  &   Stewart, rg64.   344  p.
GRANT, MAGGIE. See: MACEWAN, M. K.
HODGSON, PHYLLIS  MAE.  Autumn leaves.  Gib­
sons,  B.C.,   printed  by  Coast   News   [ rg63].
52   p.
LINTON,   LAURA.  Of  days  and   driftwood.  De­ troit,  Michigan,  HarJo   Press,   rg64.   95   p. MACEWAN,   M.  K.   The many   lives  of  Maggie Grant, by Maggie Grant [pseud.].  Toronto,
Clarke,  Irwin,  rg64. 159  p.
MAC TAVISH,    NEWTON.    Newton  MacTavish's Canada;  selected    essays  by   Newton   Mac­ Tavish. With   illustrations  by  Richard  Tay­ lor.   Edited  with   an   introduction  by  Ellen  Stafford.  Toronto,   Baxter   Publishing [crg63].  176  p.
WISEMAN,    ADELE.   Old   markets,  new   world.
Drawn   by    Joe    Rosenthal,    described    by Adele  Wisemen. Toronto, Macmillan of Canada,  rg64.   72  p.


HUMOUR

BAIN,  GEORGE.  I've   been   around   and   around and   around   and   around  ... Toronto,  Van­ couver, Clarke,  Irwin,  rg64.   200  p.
EVANs,  ART. Second offence, a collection of columns and  cartoons reprinted from the Edmonton journal. By Evans  and Jones. [Edmonton, Edmonton  Journal,    rg63].
63   p.
GARNER, HUGH.  Author, author! Toronto, Ryerson  Press   [CI964].  r 57  p.
HUSTON,    MERVYN  JAMES.   The great   Cana­ dian    lover,  and    other   commentaries  and conceits. [Toronto,   Musson   Book,   crg64].
144   p.
LAUTENS,     GARRY.   Laughing with    Lautens.
Toronto,  Ryerson Press,   rg64.    163  p.
LEACOCK,   STEPHEN.    Moonbeams   from     the larger   lunacy. Toronto,  Montreal,  McClel­ land &  Stewart,  rg64.   142  p.   (New   Cana­ dian  Library,  no.   43).
NICOL,   ERIC   PATRICK.   Space    age,   go   home!
Toronto,  Ryerson Press   [rg64]. 140  p.
-, Say, uncle; a  completely  uncalled-for  his­ tory   of  the   U.S., by  Eric   Nicol   and  Peter Whalley. London, V.  Gollancz,  rg63.  g6  p. o'HEARN,   WALTER.  The member   from    Pas-

86
 quobit.  Illustrated   by   Ed.    McNally.   To­ ronto,   Montreal,  McClelland  &    Stewart [rg64l·  !58 p.
PHELAN, FRANCIS J.  How   to   found   your  own
religion,  and    other    stories.    Illustrated   by Robert E.  Rambusch. Montreal, Palm  Pub­ lishing:  Baltimore, Md.,  Helicon    [crg63]. r  rg   p.
SCHRADER,  EDWARD UDO. Ted  Schrader's scrapbook. [Midland, Ont., Free  Press Herald, c r g62-63]. 40  p.
WARD,   NORMAN.   The  fully   processed   cheese.
Toronto,  Longmans, rg64.  192  p.


BIOGRAPHY

ALLAN,   GLADYS  LILLIAN    (Lamb). Dew   upon the  grass, by Billie  Lamb Allan. Saskatoon, Sask.,   Modern  Press   [rg63].  140   p.
AUDAIN, JAMES.  Alex   Dunsmuir's dilema. Vic­
toria,  B.C.,   Sunnylane Publishing [ rg64].
133   p.
ANDERSON,  PATRICK.  The character ball; chap­ ters  of  autobiography. London,  Chatto and  Windus,  rg63.  221   p.
BEAVERBROOK, WILLIAM  MAXWELL AITKEN, baron. My   early  life, by  Lord Beaverbrook. Fredericton, N.B.,  Brunswick Press  [rg64, crg65]. rgg  p.  (An Atlantic Advocate Book).
CASWELL,     MARYANNE.   Pioneer     girl;    letters from    Maryanne   Caswell,  1887-1888.   To­ ronto,  McGraw-Hill,  rg64.    [r28]  p.
COOK,   ROBERT  H.   Cha-Ske at  the  ball, includ­ ing   a  bag  of  memories, by  Robert   (Kilty) Cook   [n.p., crg63].  [7r]  p.
FOX,   SHERWOOD.  Sherwood  Fox   of  Western. Don   Mills,   Ont.,  Burns   and   MacEachern, rg64.  250   p.
GALBRAITH,  JOHN     KENNETH.    The   Scotch.
With  illustrations by Samuel H. Bryant. Toronto,  Macmillan   of   Canada,   rg64.
r 45   p.   Published  also   as:    Made   to   last.
London, Hamish Hamilton  [rg64].  144  p. HARRIS,    CYRIL.   Northern exposure; a  Nova Scotia   boyhood.   Illustrated    by    Leonard Nosburgh.   New    York,     W.    W.    Northon
[crg63]. 234  p.
HOOD,    DORA.   Davidson Black, a   biography.
Toronto, University of Toronto Press,  rg64.
145  p.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



LEGATE,  ROBERT  MOORHEAD  DE CONLAY. The wandering Canadian; adventures of an engineer. Fredericton, N.B.,  Brunswick Press [c1964].  290   p.
MCCLUNG,  NELLIE.   Clearing   in    the    West.
Toronto, T. Allan    [1964].  378  p.
MC KERVILL, HUGH  W.  Darby   of  Bella   Bella. Toronto,   Ryerson  Press    [c1964].  IS9   p. PATTERSON,   RAYMOND  MURRAY.  Far   pastures. Sidney,   B.C.,    Gray's   Publishing   [ 1963].
290   p.
SISSONS, CHARLES BRUCE. Nil   Alienum;  the memoirs  of  C. B.  Sissons.  [Toronto]  Uni­ versity    of   Toronto  Press    [CI964].  260   p. THOMSON,   GEORGINA HELEN.    Crocus    and meadowlark   country;    recollections   of    a happy childhood and  youth   on  a homestead
in   southern Alberta.  Edmonton,  Institute of  Applied  Art   [1963].  277   p.
WILSON, HELEN.  Tales  from   Barrett's   Land­ ing, a  childhood  in  Nova Scotia.  Drawings by  Grant  Munro.  Toronto,   McClelland  & Stewart,  1964.   ISS  p.


JUVENILE

ALLAN, IRIS CONSTANCE  (Sommerville). John Rowand, fur  trader; a story  of  the  old Northwest. [Drawings by Doug Sneyd] Toronto,  W.  J. Gage    [c1963].  20S  p.
BARCLAY,   ISABEL. 0  Canada! Illustrated by Cecile   Gagnon.  Toronto,  Doubleday   Can­ ada    [c1964]. 9S  p.
BASSETT, JOHN  M.  The canal   builders, the building  of   the   first    Welland  Canal.  To­ ronto,  T.   Allen     [CI964].  99   p.    (Young adventurers  series,   no.   1 ) .
BERTON,  LAURA BEATRICE and     WOODWARD, LUCY BERTON. Johnny  in   the   Klondike. Illustrated  by  J. Lazare. Toronto,  McClel­ land   &  Stewart  [ 1 964]. 1 12  p.
CARLSON,   NATALIE  SAVAGE.  The  letter on  the tree.   New   York,    Harper  and    Row,    1964. I16   p.
CATHERALL, ARTHUR.  Lost     off    the    Grand Banks,  by   Dan   Corby   [pseud.]   London, M.   Parrish [c1961].  144  p.
COOMBES,  MRS.  ELIZABETH ERNA. How   gold came  to Henry in a booming mining camp. [Rossland, B.C.].  Printed  by  Miner  Print­ ing   Co.,   1963.   4S  p.
 CORBY,   DAN. See:  CATHERALL,  ARTHUR. DENNIS,  JUNE,   Pseud. TV   career   girl.   To­
ronto, Ryerson Press  [c1964]. 168 p.  (Cana­
dian   careers library).
DOWDS,  MRS. GERTRUDE. The mysterious round tower. Toronto,  McClelland &  Stewart [1964]. ISI   p.
FIDLER, KATHLEEN.  The   desparate  journey.
London,  Lutterworth   Press,    1964.   IS7   p. GLENN, MRS. NANETTE.  Tony's day  at  Upper Canada  Village.  [Kingston,  Ont.  Printed with   permission  of  the  St.  Lawrence Parks Commission by Jackson Press,  C1964].  72  p. GOODSPEED,  D. J. The good   soldier, the   story of   Isaac    Brock.   Toronto,   Macmillan   of Canada,   I 964.    I s6  p.    (Great  Stories    of
Canada, 29).
GOVAN,  MARGARET  KILGOUR   LIVINGSTON.   The trial  of the  red  canoe. With  illustrations  by Margot  Lovejoy.  [London]  Dent    [1963]. I 79  p.  (Pennant  books,  no.  22).
GREY  OWL. A  book  of Grey   Owl; pages  from
the   writings  of  Wa-Sha-Quon-Asin. Edited by   E.   E.   Reynolds.   With    a   preface   by Lovat Dickson. Toronto, Macmillan of Canada,  1964.   272   p.
GUEST, JACK  A.  Lake    of   the   yellow    water.
Toronto, T.  Allen,   1964.   IS2  p.
-. Other  men's  gold.   Illustrated  by  Robert Nichol.   Toronto, T.  Allen    [1964].  166   p. HARRIS, CHRISTIE LUCY  (Irwin).  You  have
to   draw   the   line   somewhere.  Drawings  by
Moira     Johnston.   New    York,     Atheneum,
1964.   249  p.
HOLT, STEPHEN. See:  THOMPSON, HARLAN. KILLEN,  TOM. Free-lance   photographer.   To­
ronto,  Ryerson   Press,  1964.   144  p.   (Cana­
dian   Careers Library).
LEITCH,  ADELAIDE. Lukey Paul   from  Labrador. Illustrated by Joe  Rosenthal. Toronto,  Mac­ millan  of  Canada, 1964.    1 16  p.  (Buckskin Books,  no.  10) .
MCNEILL, JAMES. The  double knights, (more tales   from  round   the   world). Illustrated by Thea  Dimson. Toronto,  Oxford  University Press,   1964.   r 28  p.
MCKIM,  AUDREY. That   summer  with    Lexy. Illustrated by Charles Geer. New  York, Abingdon Press   [c r 964].  I 44  p.
MAITLAND,  HUGH. Brad   Forrest's  Calgary  ad­
venture. Toronto,  Longmans,  I 964.   rs8   p.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



Brad    Forrest's   Hong    Kong    adventure.
Toronto,  Longmans, 1964.   157  p.
-. Brad    Forrest's   Los    Angeles    adventure.
Toronto,  Longmans,  r964.    158  p.
-. Brad  Forrest's  Madagascar adventure. To­
ronto, Longmans,  1964.   157  p.
MARTEL, SUZANNE. The  city   under    ground. Toronto,  Macmillan of Canada, 1964.  157 p. MARTIN,  PHILIP  L.  Sol   Labonte  at   Pugwash Lookout,  an   extravaganza   for  older   chil­ dren   and   younger   grandparents. Illustrated
by  the  author. Fredericton, N.B.,  Brunswick
Press   [r964, crg6s]. 85  p.
MASON, GEORGE F.   Ranch   in   the    Rockies.
New   York,   W.   Morrow,  rg64.   95   p. MONTGOMERY,  L.  M.  Anne   of  Green   Gables;
de  luxe  anniversary edition. Toronto,  Ryer­
son  Press,   r 964.  329   p.
MURPHY, ROBERT  WILLIAM.  The   Pond.  Illus­ trated  by  Teco   Slagboom. New  York,  Dut­ ton   [cr964]. 254  P·
Nunny Bag 3; stories   for six  to  nine-year-olds.
Illustrated   by   John  A.   Hall.     [Toronto] W.   J. Gage,   r 964.   r so   p.
PEGIS, JESSIE CORRIGAN. Best  friends;  a  Cana­ dian  story.  New  York,  Hastings  House  Pub­ lishing,  r g64.   r 28  p.
PHARIS, ROBERT  L. The golden   feather.  Illus­
trated by  David Sager. Toronto,  Longmans of  Canada  [CI 964].  r 82   p.
RAJOTTE, BERNADETTE.   Who am   J?  Mother
Goose  quiz  book. Riddles by Bernadette Rajotte,  pictures  by   Gwen   Braund.   [To­ ronto]  Longmans  [ r 964].  Unpaged.
REDMAYNE,  JOHN.  Redcoat spy.  Illustrated by
John   Lawrence.   Toronto,   Macmillan   of
Canada,  rg64.  r63   p.
ROBINS, PATRICIA.   Any   time   at  all.  Toronto, Macmillan of  Canada,  rg64.   63  p.
Rubaboo 3;  stories    for  boys   and   girls   from ten  to  twelve. Illustrated by  William Lytle.
[Toronto] W.  J. Gage, 1964.   r83  p.
THOMPSON, HARLAN. The  ranch   beyond   the mountains, by  Stephen Holt [pseud.]. Decorations by Pers Crowell. [New  York, Toronto, Longmans, Green,   cr96r]. 194  p.
VAIL, PHILIP.  pseud. The  magnificent   adven­ tures   of  Alexander  Mackenzie.  New  York, Dodd,  Mead,  rg64.  216  p.
WALKER,  DAVID HARRY. Dragon  hil/. Illustrated by  Robert Hodgson. London, Collins;1963.
157   p.

88
 WEES, FRENCES SHELLY. The treasure  of Echo Valley.  Illustrated  by   Anne  Linton.   Lon­ don,  New  York,  Toronto,  Abelard-Schuman [rg64]. 159  P·
WHITELEY,  MARY. HOW  do   you    do?- I'm
Shelley. New  York,  Macmillan, rg64.  157 p. WOOD, KERRY. Mickey  the   beaver, and   other stories.    Toronto,   Macmillan   of    Canada,
1964.   74  p.
YOUNG, ASTRID and   YOUNG, SCOTT. Big   city office   junior, adventures  and   problems of a new  girl  in   town. Toronto, Ryerson   Press [rg64]. 152  p.  (CanadianCareersLibrary). YOUNG, DELBERT   ALTON. Mutiny  on  Hudson
Bay;    a   story    about    the    last    voyage    of
Henry Hudson. [Drawings by Doug Sneyd] Toronto, W.  J. Gage   [1964, crg63].  200  p.


BIBLIOGRAPHY

BELL, INGLIS F.,  ed.   "Canadian  literature­ I963;  a   checklist."    Canadian  Literature
19:7r-98.  Winter  1964.
Canadian Cultural Information Centre. Cana­ dian    Cultural  publications;   publications culturelles   canadiennes.   r 2th    ed.    spring I964. [Ottawa, 1964]. [r6]  p.
Canadian index  to   periodicals and   documen­
tary   films;    an   author  and   subject index. Vol.   r6,   I963. Edited by  Margaret  E. Wodehouse and  Marion C.  Wilson. Ottawa, Canadian    Library   Association,  and    Na­ tional Library of  Canada,  rg64. 423  p.
Canadian  Library  Week   Council.  Some   not­
able    books,   1963.  Chosen  for    Canadian Library Week   by  Toronto Public Libraries. [Ottawa, I964]. [6] p.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



DEVERELL, A.  FREDERICK. Canadian   bibliog­ raphy    of   reading  and    literary   instruction (English)  I 760   to  I 959·  Vancouver, Copp Clark  [ci963].  24I   p.
MILNE, w.   s.,   ed.   Canadian   full-length  plays
in   English,  a   preliminary  annotated   cata­ logue. [Ottawa]  Dominion Drama  Festival  [I964]. 47   p.
ROY,  G.   ROSS   and     GNAROWSKI, MICHAEL.
"Canadian  poetry, a  supplementary  bibliog­ raphy."   Culture  25:  I6o-r7o,   June    1964. WATT, FRANK w.,   ed.   "Letters   in   Canada:
1963."   University   of    Toronto   Quarterly
33:369-540, July    I964.


BOOKS  AND   READING

DAVEY,    FRANK.  "British   Columbia  printing and  the  Morriss Press." British  Columbia Library  Quarterly   28:  r 7-24,   July-October I964.
DOOLEY,    D.    J.   "Censorship  and    the   literary scene." Culture  25:  I2-26. March  I 964. EDINBOROUGH,  ARNOLD  and   GOLDEN,  AUBREY.
"Censorship."   Saturday   Night    79: I2-I5,
May   I964.
FIAMENGO,    MARYA.   "Private  presses   in   Van­ couver."   Canadian   Literature     22:24-28, Autumn   1964.
FULFORD, ROBERT. "Day in Court: four  good reasons    why    the    government  should    quit the   censorship  business." Maclean's  Maga­ zine   77:45-6.  February  22,   I964.
GRAHAM, W.   R.   "Carleton   Library  ed.   by Robert  L.  McDougall." Saskatchewan  His­ tory    I7:37-9,  Winter  I964.
MARTIN, PETER.  "Canadians  buy   books-if they   are   sold."  Quill  and   Quire  30:24-8, March-April   I 964.
MICHEL,  J.  W.   T.   "Copyright."  Canadian
Author   and   Bookman   40:  I o- I r,   Autumn
1964.
MORRIS, J.   "One  week    in   the    cupboard." Atlantic  Advocate  54:43-6,   August    1964. PERCY,  H. R. "Canada Council and  the writer." Canadian  Author   and    Bookman  39:7-9.
Spring  I 964.
WINDSOR, J.   "Man  and    his   books."  British Columbia Library  Quarterly  27: I0-14, January   1964.
 PERIODICALS

NEW TITLES
Catapult  vol.   1,  no.   1 :  Winter-Spring   1964. Edited  by  H.  and   S.  Mayne.  5684   Clark St., Montreal, P.Q.  ( Supercedes Cataract). Imago   I. Edited   by   G.   Bowering.  English Department,   University  of   Alberta,   Cal­
gary,   Alta.
Intervales.   [ I963].  Edited  by   Peggy   Gam­ mon,    and   Diane  Thompson.  Arts   Society  of   the    University  of   New   Brunswick, Fredericton, N.  B.
Vancouver   Writers'   Guild.   Poetry- prose: members'   journal.   Edited   by    Marie   P. King.  No.  4,   I 735   West    I I th   Ave.,  Van­ couver 9,  B.C.

HISTORY AND CRITICISM
GZOWSKI, PETER.  "The  time   the   Schick    hit the  fan  and  other adventures at  Maclean's." Canadian  Forum  44: I 50- I 52,  October I964.
GORDON,  D. R. "Moulding the  Canadian mind without really   trying." Saturday Night 79: I7-r8,  January   1964.


LANGUAGE

BURSILL-HALL,  G.  L.  "The  linguistic analysis of   North  American  Indian  songs."   Cana­ dian   Journal  of  Linguistics   Io: I5-36,  Fall  I964.
VINAY, J.-P.,   AVIS, W.   S.,  and   RUDNYCHYJ, J.   B.,  compilers. "Linguistica Canadiana." Canadian  Journal   of Linguistics 9:117-124, Spring  I 964.
WIDDOWSON,  J. D. A.  "Some items  of a central Newfoundland  dialect."   Canadian  Journal of  Linguistics   ro: 37-46,   Fall    I 964.


LITERARY HISTORY  AND CRITICISM

GENERAL
BOYLE, HARRY J.  "Being regional; digest   of address."  Canadian  Author   and   Bookman
40:8-9, Autumn  I964.
BUTT,  GRACE. "Writing  in   Newfoundland."

8g

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



Canadian  Author  and   Bookman  40: 11-12, Autumn   1964.
FARLEY,  TOM. "Why  English Canada  needs  a
revolution."   Canadian  Author   and   Book­
man  40:3-5,  Winter 1964.
HARRISON, R.  G.   The  critical    approach:   a guide   to  the   comprehension  and   apprecia­ tion   of  prose  and   verse.  Toronto,  McClel­ land   and   Stewart   [Cig64]. 87  p.
LEBEL,  M.  "Histoire  de   Ia   litterature   cana­ dienne-anglaise-literary    history of   Can­ ada:  allocution." Relations  287:337-8, No­ vember  1964.
 CRAWLEY, ALAN
WILSON, ETHEL.  "Of   Alan   Crawley."   Cana­
dian   Literature  19:33-42, Winter  I964.

CURWOOD,  JAMES  OLIVER
GAMESTER, s.  J.  "Man  who   invented  God's country." Maclean's Magazine 77:19-22, February 22,  1964.

DANIELLS, R.
RAJAN,  B.   "Milton  seen    anew."   Canadian
Literature  2 I :55-58,  Summer  1964.

PERCY, H.
Author
1964.
 R.   "Idea  into    word."   Canadian and     Bookman   40:9-12,    Winter
 DAVIN, NICHOLAS  FLOOD
KOESTER,  c.  B.   "Nicholas  Flood  Davin;
politician-poet  of   the    Prairies."   Dalhousie

RIMANELLI,   GIOSE. "Canadian   literature:   an
Italian  view." Canadian  Literature  2I: 13-
20,  Summer  1964.

FICTION
WYLLIE, JOHN.  "The new  wave  writers, and after-" Canadian  Author   and   Bookman
39:2 and   4,  Spring  I964.

POETRY
BOWERING,  GEORGE.  "Poets in  their   twenties." Canadian  Literature 20:54-64, Spring I964. KATTAN, NAIM. "Montreal  letter"   translated by  Joyce   Marshall. Tamarack Review 30:
48-52, Winter  1964.
STEVENS, PETER. "A   counterb)ast  to  Mr. Bowering."  Canadian  Literature  22: 78-8o, Autumn  1964.

DRAMA
CRAMPTON, ESME. A  handbook on  the  theatre.
Toronto, W.  J. Gage, 1964.   264  p.
 Review 44:64-74,  Spring  I964.

DUDEK, LOUIS
FRANCIS, WYNNE.  "A   critic  of   life:    Dudek as man of letters." Canadian Literature 22:
5-23,   Autumn  I964.

FRYE, NORTHROP
REANEY, JAMES.  "Frye's  Magnet."  Tamarack
Review  30: 72-78, Autumn  I964.
SMITH, A. J. M. "The critic's task,  Frye's  latest work." Canadian Literature 20:6-14, Spring I964.
WATT, F.  w.   "The   critic's  critic."  Canadian
Literature  19:5I-54,   Winter 1964.

GARNER, HUGH
HALL, WILLIAM. "Without  camouflage." Cana­
dian   Literature  19:55-57,  Winter  1964.

LAURENCE,  MARGARET
READ, s. E.  "Margaret  Laurence, The  stone angel" [review] British  Columbia Library Quarterly  28:41-44,  July-October  1964.



INDIVIDUAL   AUTHORS
 ROBERTSON, Canadian I964.
 GEORGE. "An  artist's  progress."
Literature    2 1 :53-55,   Summer


ACORN, MILTON
GNAROWSKI,  MICHAEL.  "Milton  Acorn:  a  re­ view   in   retrospect."  Culture  25: 119-I29, June   1964.

CAL LAGAN, MORLEY
WOODCOCK,  GEORGE. "Lost  Eurydice."  Cana­
dian  Literature 2 I : 2 I -35,  Summer  1964.

go
 
MACEWEN, GWENDOLYN
GOSE, E. B. "They shall   have  Arcana."  Cana­
dian    Literature   21 : 36-45,    Summer   1964.

MCLUHAN,  MARSHALL
MCCORMACK, THELMA. "Innocent eye on  mass society." Canadian  Literature   22:55-60, Autumn   1964.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE




MAC  MECHAN,  ARCHIBALD
BENNET,  c.   L.   "Archibald  MacMechan." Papers  of  the  Bibliographical Society of Canada 3: I 7-26,   I 964.

MAIR, CHARLES
SHRIVE, NORMAN. "Poets  and   patriotism, Charles Mair and  Tecumseh." Canadian Literature  2o:  I5-26,  Spring   I964.

PETER, JOHN
 WEST, PAUL.  "E. J. Pratt's four-ton Gulliver." Canadian Literature  Ig:I3-20, Winter I964.

REANEY, JAMES
TAIT, MICHAEL. "The limits   of  innocence; James   Reaney's theatre."  Canadian  Litera­ ture   rg:43-48,  Winter  1964.

ROBERTS, CHARLES G.  D.
MAGEE, WILLIAM H.   "The  anima[  story:  a

DAVEY,     FRANK.   "Excess
Canadian   Literature
1964.

PRATT, E. J.
 of    completeness."
22:63-65,   Autumn
 challenge  in  technique."  Dalhousie Review
44:  r56-r64,  Summer  rg64.

RICHLER,  MORDECAI
KATTAN, NAIM.  "Mordecai  Richter."   Cana­

COGSWELL,  FRED. "E.   ].  Pratt's literary  repu­ tation." Canadian Literature I 9:6- I 2, Win­  ter   I 964.
FRYE, NORTHROP. "Silence  upon   the   earth." Canadian  Poetry  27:7 I-73,   August   I 964. FRYE, NORTHROP and   DANIELLS, ROY. "Ned Pratt: two  recollections." Canadian  Litera­
ture   2I :6-I2,  Summer I964.
LESLIE,  ARTHUR  K.   "E.    ].    Pratt,  one    of
Canada's  leading poets." Atlantic  Advocate
54:4o-4I,  June  1964.
SHARMAN,  VINCENT. "E.    ].  Pratt  and   Chris­ tianity."    Canadian   Literature     I9: 2 I-32,  Winter  I964.
 dian   Literature   2I :46-52,  Summer  I964.

SMITH, A.  J. M.
0  BROIN, PADRAIG. "After   strange   Gods (A.   J. M.   Smith  and   the   concept  of   na­ tionalism)."   Canadian  Author   and   Book­  man   39:6-8,  Summer  1964.

SOUSTER, RAYMOND
DUDEK, LOUIS. "Groundhog  among  the  stars, the poetry  of Raymond Souster." Canadian Literature  22:34-49,  Autumn   r 964.
FULFORD,  R. "On  Raymond Souster:  a  good
Toronto  poet    Toronto  never    discovered."
Maclean's Magazine 77:59,  April   r8,  I964.







THESES

Compiled by Carl F. Klinck



CLARKE,  MRS. RITA. Appearance and  reality  in the   fiction  of Ethel  Wilson. M.A.  University of  British   Columbia,  I964.
DALTON, SISTER MARY   KATHERINE. Poetry   of
Confederation.  M.A.   University  of  British
Columbia,  1964.
DENHAM, WILLIAM  PAUL. Music  and   painting in   the    poetry   of  Duncan  Campbell Scott. M.A.  University of  Western Ontario,  1964.
GOODWIN,  RAE E. The early   journalism of Sara
 jeannette  Duncan, with   a  chapter of  biog­
raphy. M.A.   University  of  Toronto,  1964. KEARNS,  LIONEL  JOHN.   Songs     of     circum­ stance- original    poems    and   introduction. M.A.  University of British  Columbia, 1964.  TUCKER, MARY CURTIS.   Toward  a  theory  of
Shakespearean comedy:  a  study   of the  con­ tributions  of  Northrop   Frye.    Emory   Uni­ versity,   1963.


LITTERATURE

CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE

liste etablie  par Susan Hand










ANTHOLOGIES

A    batons  rompus.  Montreal,   Editions   Noc­
turne,  1964.   96   p.
CHATILLON, PIERRE, ed.   Arpents  de   neige; evocation pohique  du Canada franfais. Vincennes, France, Theatre Daniel Sorano,
1963.   31  p.
Ecrits   du  Canada  Franfais, nos  17-18.  Mon­
treal,  1964.
OTTAWA. UNIVERSITE.  ETUDIANTS. Cahier   de poesie,    2.   Ottawa, Editions du    Coin    du Livre,  1964.   61   p.
ROBERT, GUY.  Litterature   du    Quebec. T.l:
temoignages de 17  poetes.  Montreal, Deom,
1964.  333  p.
Soleils  multiples, par  Levy  Beaulieu et  autres. Montreal,  Editions  Nocturne,  1964.   77  p. SYLVESTRE, GUY.  Anthologie   de    la   poesie canadienne-franfaise.  4e   ed.   Montreal,
Beauchemin, 1963.  376  p.
Tangentes  d'espoir. Laval-des-Rapides, Scolas­
ticat des  F.e.c.,  1963.  58  p.


ROMANS  ET NOUVELLES

ARCHAMBAULT,  GILLES. Une   supreme   discre­
tion. Montreal, Cercle du  Livre   de  France,
1963.   158  p.
BASILE, JEAN. La   jument   des  Mongols. Mon­
treal,  Editions du   Jour,  I964.    179  p. BENOIT,  REAL.  Quelqu'un   pour     m'ecouter.
Montreal, Cercle du  Livre  de  France, 1964.
126   p.
BER, ANDRE. Segoldiah. Montreal, Deom, 1964. CARON, ALBERT ENA.  Les    mauvais   bergers.

92
 Montreal,   Editions   de    !'Homme,   I964.
157  p.
CARRIER,   ROCH.  jolis    deuils.  Montreal,   Edi­
tions  du   Jour,  I964.  157  p.
CARTIER, GEORGES. Le   poisson   peche.   Mon­
treal,   Cercle  du    Livre    de   France,   1964.
229  p.
CHAMBERLAND,   PAUL.  Dans  un    automne  a
nous.   Ecrits   du   Canada Franfais 18:129-
145,   1964.
CLOUTIER,  EUGENE. Croisiere. Montreal, Cercle du   Livre  de   France,  1963.   189  p.
COURTEAU-DUGAS, BERENGERE. Enchantements.
Montreal,  Editions Bellarmin, 1963.  136  p. FERRON, JACQUES. Contes  anglais   et   autres. Montreal, Editions d'Orphee,  1964.   153  p. GIROUARD, LAURENT.  La ville inhumaine. Mon­
treal, Editions Parti  Pris,   1964.   187  p. GODIN,   GERALD. Telesse.  Ecrits    du    Canada
Franfais  J7:17I-2o8,   1964.
GRANDBOIS,   ALAIN. Avant  le   chaos,   suivi   de quatre  nouvelles  inedites.  Montreal,   Edi­ tions   HMH,  1964.   276   p.
GUY, MARIE-ANNE.   Toi  et   moi   vers  l'amour.
Quebec, Editions de I'Action Sociale Catho­
lique, 1963.  98  p.
HAMELIN, JEAN.  Nouvelles   singulieres.  Mon­
treal, Editions HMH,  1964.   190  p.
JASMIN, CLAUDE.  Ethel  et  le  terroriste.  Mon­
treal, Deom, 1964.   145  p.
LA  ROQUE  DE ROQUEBRUNE,  ROBERT. Les dames Le  Marchand, par   Robert de  Roquebrune, pseud.  Montreal,  Fides,  1964.   2 r o  p.
LECLERC,  CLAUDE.  Songe  creux  . .. reveil  bru­
tal.  Montreal, Editions Ia Quebecoise, 1964.
77 p.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



LORD,  DENIS. La  violence  des   forts.  Montreal, Editions du  Lys,   rg64.  205  p.
MAILHOT,  MICHELE. Dis-moi   que   je  vis.  Mon­
treal,  Cercle  du    Livre    de   France,   r g64. r6o   p.
MAILLET, ANDREE. Le    lendemain   n'est    pas
sans    amour;   contes    et    recits.    Montreal, Beauchemin, rg63. 209  p.
MAJOR, ANDRE.  Le   cabochon. Montreal,  Edi­
tions   Parti Pris,   rg64. I95   p.
MARTEAux, JACQUES. Un  chateau en Andalou­ sie.   Ecrits   du   Canada  Franfais   r 7:39-83, rg64.
PARIZEAU, ALICE  (POZNANSKA).  Fuir.   Mon­
treal, Deom, rg63. 271  p.
-. Survivre.  Montreal,  Cercle  du   Livre   de
France,  rg64. 315  p.
PINSONNEAULT,  JEAN. Les  terres  seches.  Mon­
treal, Beauchemin, rg64. 305  p.
RENAUD, JACQUES Le    casse.   Montreal,   Edi­
tions   Parti Pris,   rg64.  I26   p.
RIVEST, EUGENE. Roman  d'un  cure   de   cam­ pagne.    Montreal,   Editions  de    !a   Vallee, rg63.
ROQUEBRUNE,   ROBERT  DE  voir   LA   ROQUE  DE
ROQUEBRUNE,  ROBERT.
SIMARD, JEAN.  Treize  recits.   Montreal,   Edi­
tions  HMH, 1964.   199  p.
TERAMOND,    FRANCOIS DE.  Ainsi    tu   es   roi?
Montreal, Fides,   r g64.   190  p.
THERIAULT,  YVES. La  rose  de   pierre; histoire d'amour. Montreal, Editions du  Jour, rg64.
135  p.
VALLIERES, LUCILE.  La    fragilite     des   idoles. Montreal,  Editions  du   Lys,   rg64.  r 75  p. VIEN,  ROSSEL. Voyage  sans   suite.  Ecrits   du
Canada  Franfais   18:147-219,   1964.


POESIE

A    batons  rompus.  Montreal,   Editions   Noc­
turne,  rg64. g6  p.
ALLEN-SHORE, LENA voir    SHORE,  THERESE. BAUDOT,  JEAN. La   machine  a ecrire, mise  en
marche  et   programmee  par    Jean  Baudot. Montreal,  Editions  du   Jour,   rg64.  95   p. BAux,    RAYMOND. Etre   de    fer;   couronne d'epines. Montreal,  Editions du   Lys,   rg64.
57   p.
BEAUDOIN,  JEAN. Guerre  de  sang,  ou  Le   juif.
Montreal, Editions du  Lys,  rg64. 95  p. BEAULIEU, MICHEL.  Pour    chanter   dans    les
 chaines.   Montreal,  Editions la   Quebecoise, rg64.   70  p.
BLAIS,  MARIE-CLAIRE. Existences. Quebec,  Edi­
tions  Garneau,  rg64. 51  p.
CHAMBERLAND,   PAUL.  Terre   Quebec.   Mon­
treal, Deom,    rg64.  77  p.
CHATILLON, PIERRE,  ed.   Arpents   de   neige; evocation poetique du  Canada franfais. Vincennes, France, Theatre  Daniel Sorano,
1963.   31  p.
CHAURETTE, ANDREE. La     cellule     enneigee.
Montreal,  Editions  de   l'Hexagone,   rg64.
40  p.
CHOQUETTE, GILBERT. L'honneur   de    vivre.
Montreal, Beauchemin,  rg64.  59   p.
CLIECE, ELINA. Menuaille; vers  badin. Ottawa, Editions du  Coin  du  Livre,  rg64. 51  p.
CLOUTIER,  CECILE. Cuivre  et  soies.  Montreal,
Editions du   Jour,  rg64. 78  p.
DEROME,  GILLES. Dire   pour   ne   pas  etre   dit.
Montreal, Deom,  rg64. 73  p.
DUCLos,   JOCELYN-ROBERT. Valets  clos.   Ot­ tawa,   Editions  Sans   le  Sou,   rg64.   44  p. FRANCOEUR, SYLVIE.  Arc-boreal.   Montreal,
Editions Nocturne,  r g64.   r or   p.
GAGNON, ALPHONSE.   Jntensite;   poemes     et parodies.  Montreal, Editions du  Jour,  rg64. Ill  p.
GELINAs,  MARC-F. Ineffables saisons. Montreal,
Studio 6o,  1963.   26  p.
GODIN, GERALD.   Nouveaux  poemes.  Trois
Rivieres,    Que.,  Editions  du   Bien    Public,
1963.  53  p.
GRANDMONT, ELOI DE. Poemes. Ecrits   du  Can­
ada   Franfais  17:137-157,  1964.
LANDRY,   LOUIS. Fables.   Montreal, Cercle du
Livre   de  France,  r 964.   159   p.
LAPOINTE,  PAUL-MARIE.   Pour   les  ames.  Mon­ treal,  Editions de   l'Hexagone,  rg64.  72   p. LAURENDEAU,   JEAN.  Canadien   franfais,  dans tes    brfimes.  Quebec,   Editions    de    l'Arc,
1962.   61  p.
LECLERC, CLAUDE. Toi,  toi,  toi.    Montreal, Editions Champlain,   1963.   33  p.
LEFEBVRE,   JEAN-PIERRE. Le   temps  que   dure l'avenir.  Ecrits  du    Canada Franfais r8:
22 l-239,    1964.
LEVESQUE,  ALICE (LEMIEUX). L'arbre du  jour.
Quebec, Garneau,   rg64.  78  p.
LE   MOYNE, GERTRUDE. Factures  acquittees.
Montreal,  Editions  de   l'Hexagone,   rg64.
29  p.

93

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



MAILLET, ANDREE. Elimentaires.  Montreal, Deom,  I964. 59  p.
MAJOR,  ANDRE.  Poesie?    Ecrits    du    Canada
Fran tais   I8:87-I I8,   I964.
MARCEL,  JEAN. L'etoile noire.  Ecrits  du  Can­
ada  Fran tais  17: I59-I6g,  I964.
MAYRAND, OSWALD.  Chants ultimes. Montreal, Beauchemin,  I964. 86  p.
MONGEAu,  YVES.  Veines.  Montreal,   Deom,
I964. 93  p.
OTTAWA. UNIVERSITE. ETUDIANTS.   Cahier   de poesie,    2.   Ottawa, Editions du   Coin    du Livre,  I g64.   6 I  p.
OUELLETTE,  FERNAND.  Le  solei[ SOUS   [a mort.
Montreal,   Editions  de   l'Hexagone,   I964.
72  p.
PALLASC!O-MORIN, ERNEST.  Autopsie du  Secret.
Quebec, Garneau,  I 964.  78  p.
PARADis,  LOUIS-ROLAND.   Carcinome.   Drum­
mondville,  Que.,  Editions  de   I'Axe,   I 963.
70  p.
PARADIS, SUZANNE.  Pour  les enfants des  morts.
Quebec, Garneau,  I964.   ISO p.
PELOQUIN, CLAUDE. Les   essais   rouges.   Lon­
gueuil,  Que.,  Publications Alouette,  I964.
70  p.
-. Jericho. Longueuil,  Que.,  Publications
Alouette, s.d.  34  p.
PERRAULT, PIERRE.  Ballades    du   temps   pre­ Cteux.    Montreal,   Editions  d'Essai,    I963. I36   p.
PERRIER, LUG.  Du    temps  que   j'aime.   Mon­
treal,  Editions  de  l'Hexagone,  I963.   4 7  p. PRONOVOST,  ANDRE-F.  Eldorado. S.p.  Editions
Phenix,  I g64.   52  p.
REGNIER, MICHEL.  Generation. Quebec,   Edi­
tions   de  !'Arc,  I964.  I05  p.
ROBERT, GUY. Litterature  du   Quebec. T. l: temoignages de  17  poetes. Montreal, Deom, I964.  333  p.
SHORE,  THERESE.  Le   pain   de   la   paix,   par
Lena   Allen-Shore,  pseud.    Montreal,   Edi­
tions   du   Lys,   I964. 41  p.
Soleils   multiples, par  Levy  Beaulieu et  autres. Montreal, Editions Nocturne, 1964.  77 p. SYLVESTRE, GUY.  Anthologie   de    [a   poesie
canadienne-fran taise.  4e   ed.    Montreal,
Beauchemin, 1963.   376  p.
Tangentes   d'espoir. Laval-des-Rapides, Que., Scolasticat des  F.e.c., I963.  58  p.
TREMBLAY, GEMMA.  Sequences   du    poeme.
Paris, Grassin,  I964. 4I   p.

94
 VALOIS, FRANCINE. Reflets  de   berylune, par Frederique Valois, pseud. Montreal, Centre de  psychologie et  de  pedagogie, I964. 55  p.
VALOIS,  FREDERIQUE   voir   VALOIS,  FRANCINE.
VAN   SCHENDEL, MICHEL. Variations sur  la pierre.    Montreal,  Editions  de   l'Hexagone, I964.  46   p.
VIGNEAULT,  GILLES. Balises.  Quebec, Editions
de  !'Arc,  I964.  I23  p.


THEATRE

DUBE,  MARCEL. Octobre.  Ecrits    du    Canada
Fran tais   17:9-37,   1964.
ELIE,  ROBERT. La   place   publique.  Ecrits   du
Canada  Fran tais   I8:27-75,  I964.
-. Le  silence   de  !a  ville.   Ecrits   du   Canada
Fran tais  I8: I2-26, I964.
FERRON, JACQUEs.  Le   fou  du   roi.  Montreal, Cahiers  de   l'A.G.E.U.M.,   1963.
HUARD, ROGER-BERNARD.   Pile.   Quebec,  Edi­
tions   de  !'Arc,  I 964.   I I 2  p.
JASMIN, CLAUDE. Blues  pour  un  homme averti.
Montreal, Editions Parti  Pris,   I 964.   93  p. LE BEL, CECILE. Geraldine est  une  perle.  Mon­
treal,  Deom,  1964.   I I 2  p.
LECLERC,  FELIX. L'auberge  des  morts   subites.
Montreal,  Beauchemin,  I964.   203  p. PERRAULT,  PIERRE. Au  coeur  de  la  rose.  Mon­
treal, Beauchemin, I964. I25  p.
THERIO, ADRIEN.  Les  renegats. Montreal, Edi­
tion   Jumonville, I964.


ESSAIS

GAGNON,  ALPHONSE. Une   [une  de  trap. Mon­
treal, Editions du  Jour,  I964. 246  p. SIMARD,  JEAN. Nouveau repertoire. Montreal,
Editions HMH,  I964.
TOUPIN,   PAUL.   L'ecrivain   et    son    thefltre.
Montreal, Cercle du  Livre  de  France, I964. I04   p.


SATIRE ET HUMOUR

FONTAINE, NATHALIE. Maudits Fran tais. Mon­ treal,  Editions  de  !'Homme,   I964.   250   p. KEMPF,  YERRI. Pan-paon;   roman-caricature.
Montreal,  Editions a Ia  Page,   I964.  I I4  p.
SAVOIE,  RENALD,  comp.  A   joual  sur  les  mots;
les   jeux   de  !'humour  et   du   hasard. Mon­
treal, Editions du  Jour,  I964.  I23  p.

LITTERATURE CANAOIENNE·FRANCAISE



BIOGRAPHIES

ALLAIRE, EMILIA  (BOIVIN).   Tetes de   femmes; essais biographiques. Quebec, Editions de l'Equinoxe,  I963.   250  p.
CATTA, RENE·SALVATOR..  Pourquoi suis-je venue? Alexandrine  Pouliot, premiere  Auxi­ liatrice    canadienne,  z864-I937·   Montreal, Fides,   I964.  272 p.
DEsFossEs,  JOSEPH-ANATOLE.  Le   frere  Andre et   moi.   Montreal,  Editions  du   boulevard Saint-Joseph, I964. I28 p.
GOSSELIN,   PAUL-EUGENE.   Etienne   Parent.
Montreal, Fides,  I964.   g6  p.
HABERT,   JACQUES.   La   vie   et   les  voyages   de Jean    de   Verrazane. Montreal,  Cercle    du Livre   de  France,  I964.  444 p.
LABROSSE,   JEAN-GUY.    Ma    chienne   de    vie.
Montreal,  Editions  du   Jour, I964.   I4I   p.
 PARENT,   GUY-EDOUARD.  Sous   /e  regne   des bruiteurs. Montreal,  Editions du  Lys,  I g63.
I9I  p.
RIOUX,  JEAN·DE·LA·CR.OIX. Gabriel  Sagard.
Montreal, Fides,    I964.  g6  p.
THONE,  PAUL.  La   venerable Catherine. Chateau-Richer, Editions Marie-Mediatrice, Ig63.  roo   p.
ZITTR.ER,  DAVID.  A  nous  deux, madame Ia vie.
Montreal, Editions Veritas,  I963.  I I I   p.


LITTERATURE DE  JEUNESSE

BOISVERT, LAURENT.   Grain de  Sel  et  le  Spout­
nick  2. Sherbrooke, Que., Editions Paulines,
Ig63.  l4I  p.
BUISSER.ET,  IRENE   DE.    Kotikoti, OU    La   pou]e qui  voulait   devenir artiste. Montreal,  Beau­ chemin,  I963.   I07  p.






CJINJIDIJIN	LITERJITURE

BACK  ISSUES

Important back issues of Canadian Literature still available include  the  following:

No. 	8. Special Malcolm Lowry Number. Original articles, letters and poems by Malcolm  Lowry, articles by Conrad  Aiken, Earle  Birney,  Robert  Heilman, Max-Pol   Fouchet,  etc.

No.   15.  Salute  to  A.  J. M. Smith,  Articles  on  A.  J.  M. Smith  by Earle  Birney, Roy Fuller and  Milton  Wilson,  together with original  poems  and   a   Self-Review   by  A.  J.  M.  Smith.

No.   19.  Special   E.  J.  Pratt  Number. Articles   on   E.  J.  Pratt   by Paul   West,    Fred   Cogswell  and   Vincent   Sharman,   to­ gether with  Ethel Wilson's memoir  on  Alan  Crawley.

No.  22.   Articles  by Wynne  Francis  on Louis Dudek,  and   by  Louis Dudek  on Raymond  Souster, together with  Ethel Wilson's recollections, Reflections in  a  Pool.

$1.25   each

ORDER   YOUR COPIES  FROM
THE  PUBLICATIONS   CENTRE
UNIVERSITY OF  BRITISH  COLUMBIA, VANCOUVER 8, B.C.



95

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



CORRIVEAU, MONIQUE.  Le  Wapiti. Quebec, Editions  Jeunesse,  1964.  251  p.
DEVEAU,   J .-ALPHONSE.    Journal     de    Cecile
Murat. Montreal, Centre de  psychologie et de  pedagogie,  1963. 62 p.
HOULE,  DENISE.  La  maison   qui  chante.  Mon­ treal, Centre de   psychologie  et  de  pedago­ gie,   1964. 59 p.
LACROIX,  BENOIT.    Le    p'tit    train.  Montreal,
Beauchemin,  1964.  74  p.
LEONARD,    IVETTE.    La    quatrieme   caravel/e.
Montreal,  Fomac Ltee,  1963.  125 p.
LEPINE, COLETTE (FORTIER),  Les  contes  de Lariat. Montreal, Centre  de  psychologie et de   pedagogie,  I963.  76 p.
MORRIS,  CELINE   (DEGUIRE).   Tarin a,  la   perle
timide. Montreal, Centre de  psychologie et de  pedagogie,  I963.  6g p.
PERRON, SUZEL  (THIBAULT).   Le   petit   berger a  la  flute.  Montreal,  Centre de  psychologie et  de  pedagogie,  1964.  68  p.
SAINT-PIERRE,   MARIE.  Une  revolte   au  royaume des  (leurs.   Montreal, Editions Lemeac, 1964.
22 p.
THERIAULT,    YVES.   Zibou  et   Coucou.   Mon­
treal, Editions Lemeac, I964. 23 p.


BIBLIOGRAPHIES

CENTRE    D'INFORMATION    CULTURELLE     CANA­ DIENNE.     Canadian   cultural    publications. Publications culturelles  canadiennes. I 2. ed.  Ottawa,  I964.   I4  p.
DOWD, DOREEN. Canadian literature, 1963. Litterature canadienne-franC<aise. Canadian Literature  19:90-98, winter  I964.
JAIN, SUSHIL. French Canadian literature in English  translation;  a  short   list   compiled from   the   library   catalogues  of  the   Regina Campus Library. Regina, Regina Campus Library, Univ. of Saskatchewan,  1965.  10 p.
Livres   et  auteurs canadiens: 1963. Montreal,
I964. I54 p.
VINAY, JEAN-PAUL,   W.   S,  AVIS  et   ] .  B.   RUD­ NYCKYJ.    Linguistica  canadiana.   Canadian Journal   of   Linguistics  g: 1 I7-I24,  spring
I964.
WATT,    FRANK   w.,   ed.   Letters  in   Canada: I963.   Livres   en    franC<ais.  University   of Toronto  Quarterly 33:495-531, July    1964. WYCZYNSKI,    PAUL.    Histoire  et   critique  lit-

g6
 teraires  au   Canada franC<ais; bibliographie. Recherches  Sociographiques  5:52-69,   jan.­ aoilt   1964.


OUVRAGES   CONSACRES A   L'EDITION

DUSSAULT,   ANDRE.  Pour OU   contre  une   regie du   livre;  il   faut  mettre  fin   a  l'anarchie.
Magazine Maclean  4:4, 49, jan.   1964. LACROIX, LUC-M.   Le   livre   au   Quebec.  Main­
tenant  2 7:97-98, mars   I 964.
-. Rapport  Bouchard;  un   rapport  a  com­
prendre.  Maintenant    28:133-134,  avril
1964.
LAPORTE,  JEAN-MAURICE.  Pour   ou  contre  une regie   du  livre; dirigisme injuste et inefficace. Magazine  Maclean  4: 4,  jan.    I 964.
PATENAUDE,   ] .-LEON.   Au   Quebec  on   ne   lit
pas; on  vend   des  livres.   Cite   Libre    15: 19-
21,  avril    1964.
PINSONNEAULT,    JEAN-PAUL.   L'edition    Jitte­ raire  chez   Fides;  principes  et   realisations. Lectures   10: 260-261, juin    1 g64.
TAAFFE,  GERALD.  The fall  and   rise  of  the  oJd
Cite    Libre.   Tamarack   Review   32:40-53,
summer  1964.


REVUES

Lettres et  Ecritures. Faculte de  Lettres, Uni- versite   de   Montreal. v.l-          1963-


LINGUISTIQUE

ANJOU,  JOSEPH   D'.  Au   service   du   fran tais. Voir   numeros  mensuels  de   Relations.
AQUIN,  HUBERT.  Le  basic  bilingue. Liberte  6:
1I4-1I8, mars-avril  I964.
BARBEAU,    VICTOR.    Le    franfais   du    Canada.
Montreal,   Academie   canadienne-fran taise,
I963.  252 p.
BELLEAU,   ANDRE.  Notre langue comme une blessure.  Liberte  6:82-86, mars-avril  1964.
BOUDREAU, EMILE.  De  Ia  rue  des  Anglais aux Metallurgistes-Unis. Liberte 6:124-138, mars-avril  1 964.
DUBUc,   ROBERT.  Problemes et  solutions. Voir numeros trimestriels du  Journal   des  traduc­ teurs.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



GAY, PAUL. La   langue  franc;aise   au   Canada. L'Enseignement  Secondaire 4!2: gg-IoO, mai­ juin   1963.
GODBOUT,   JACQUES. Les   mots   tuent.  Liberte
6:139-143,  mars-avril  1964.
LANGEVIN, ANDRE.  Une   langue   humiJiee.
Liberte  6: 1 1 g-1 23,  mars-avril   1964. LAPLANTE, RODOLPHE. De  Ia langue a J'econo­
mique; si  nous   etions Iogiques.  Action  Na­
tionale   53:365-370, dec.   1963.
-. Pour    aider   a   nous    refaire   un   visage.
Action   N ationale   54: 194-197,  oct.    1964. LE  FRANCOIS, JEAN-JACQUES. ParaJJt:Je   in­ quietante. Revue de  l'Universite  Laval  18:
707-7Io,  avril    1964.
OUELLETTE,  FERNAND. La  Jutte  des  Jangues  et Ia   dualite  du   Iangage.  Liberte   6:87-1 13, mars-avril   1964.
PILOTTE, HELENE. J'avais oubJie   a queJ  point
nous   parIons mal;  pire,   nous   sommes   fiers
de   notre  joual.  Magazine  Maclean  4: 12,
68-6g, dk I 964.
THERIO, ADR1EN. Une    enquete  manquee,  ou Ie franc;ais  dans nos colleges.  Revue de l'Universite  Laval    19:37-45,  sept.   1964.
VINAY, JEAN-PAUL. Contacts  Iinguistiques  au
Canada et  en  France.  Le  Fran  ais
Monde  23:47-52,  mars    1964.


HISTOIRE ET CRITIQUE LITTERAIRES
OUVRAGES ET ARTICLES GENERAUX CORRIVAULT,  CLAUDE  et  autres. Une enquete;
le  statut  de  I'ecrivain et  Ia  diffusion  de  Ia litterature.  Recherches  Sociographiques 5:
75-98,   jan.-aoO.t   1964.
DAVELUY,  PAULE. Plaidoyer en  faveur d'une litterature  de   jeunesse.  Le   Devoir   55: 24,
4  avril    1964.
Le  Devoir. Supplements litter aires,  avec  v.55:
13-44,  19-36; 4  avril, 7  nov.  1964. DUMONT, FERNAND et   JEAN-CHARLES   FALAR­
DEAU. Litterature   et   societe    canadiennes­
franfaises;   2e   colloque  de   la   revue   "Re­ cherches Sociographiques." Quebec,  Presses de   I'Universite  Laval,  1964.   272   p.
ETHIER-BLAIS, JEAN.  La   cite:  ferment   inteJ­ JectueJ   et   symbole  de   demain.  Le   Devoir
55:26, 7  nov.  1964.
GRANDPRE,   PIERRE DE.  Le   risque    de   penser.
 Liberte 6:151-I6o,  mars-avril  1964.
HARE,  JOHN.   L'histoire  et   Ia   critique   Iitte­ raires   au  Canada franc;ais   au  XIXe  siecle. L'Enseignement  Secondaire  42: 17-35,  jan.­
fev.   1963.
-. Introduction  a  Ia  sociologic  de   Ia   litte­
rature  canadienne-franc;aise du  XIXe  siecle.
L' Enseignement Secondaire 42:67-92, mars­
avril   1963.
-. Litterature et societe  canadienne-franc;aise;
2e  colloque  du   Dept.  de   Sociologic et d'Anthropologie de  l'Universite Laval.  Cul­ ture   25:70-72,  mars   1964.
KATTAN,  NAIM. Lettre de  Montreal.  Canadian
Literature  2 2:50-54,  autumn   1964. LAMONTAGNE, LEOPOLD.  Les  courants  ideoJogi­
ques  dans  Ia  litterature  canadienne-franc;ais du   XIXe  siecle,   suivi   d'un  Commentaire, par Jean-Charles Bonenfant. Recherches Sociographiques 5: IOI-I2I,  jan.-aout  1964.
LE   MOYNE,  JEAN.   Woman   and    French­ Canadian  literature:   tr.   by   Philip  Strat­ ford.  Tamarack  Review    31:23-29,  spring
1964.
Livres  et  auteurs canadiens: 1963. Montreal,
1964.   154  p.
LOCKQUELL,  CLEMENT. Notre  Jitterature   est­ elle  le  rniroir   de  notre milieu?  L'Enseigne­ ment  Secondaire  42: 179-I8g,  nov.-dec.
1963.
-. Quelle a  et'e !'influence de  notre  enseigne­ ment de  Ia  philosophic sur  notre  Iitterature. Societe  Royale  du   Canada.  Memoires.  4e ser.,  t.  I,  sec.  I: 25-30,   juin  1963.
MARCOTTE,  GILLES. La   religion  dans   Ia  Iitte­ rature  canadienne-franc;aise   contemporaine, suivi  d'un Commentaire par  Hubert  Aquin, Claude  Jasmin  et   Georges-Andre  Vachon. Recherches    Sociographiques    5:167-176, Igi-!loi,   jan.-aoO.t  1964.
ROBERT,  GUY. Inquietude, revoJte,   revolution; explosives  ou  stagnantes, des !ignes  de  force en   marche.  Le   Devoir    55:22-23,  7   nov.
1964.
ROBERT,  GUY. Revues canadiennes. Maintenant
!26:68-6g,  fev.   1964.
SYLVESTRE,  GUY. Ecrivains  canadiens.   Cana­ dian    writers,  par    Guy    Sylvestre,   Conran Brandon,  Carl    Klinck. Montreal,   Editions HMH,  Toronto, Ryerson, 1964.  1 63  p.
-. Litterature  canadienne-franc;aise. In John
T. Saywell,   ed.,  Canadian  Annual  Review

97

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



for  1963.  Toronto, Univ.   of  Toronto  Press,
1964.  441-448.
Panorama   des    lettres    canadiennes­ franf1aises.   Quebec,   Ministere  des   Affaires  Culturelles,  1964.  77  p.
Temoignages  d'auteurs:  le  chanoine  Groulx, F.-A.  Savard, Fernard Benoit, Leo-Paul Desrosiers, Marcel Trudel,  Michelle Le Normand,   Paul-Emile  Roy.   Lectures  10:
251-259,  juin  1964.
THERIO, ADRIEN. Le   journalisme  au   Canada
Franc;ais.    L'Enseignement Secondaire 42:
8- r 6,  jan.-fev.  r g63.
TOUGAS, GERARD.   Histoire   de   la   litterature canadienne-franf1aise. 2e ed.,  revue  et  augm. Paris,     Presses    Universitaires   de    France,
1964.   312   p.
VACHON,  GEORGES-ANDRE. Litterature et societe canadiennes-franc;aises:  conclusions  et   per­ spectives.   Recherches   Sociographiques    5:
247-255, jan.-aout  rg64.
VAN   SCHENDEL, MICHEL. L'amour  dans   Ia litterature   canadienne-franc;aise, suivi   d'un Commentaire par  Hubert Aquin, Claude Jasmin   et    Georges-Andre   Vachon.    Re­ cherches Sociographiques 5:154-165,   rgr-
20 1,  jan.-aout  1 g64.
WILSON, EDMUND.  0 Canada; an  American's notes  on  Canadian culture. New  Yorker 40:
63-140;  64-140,  14  and   21  nov.   1964. WYCZYNSKI, PAUL. Histoire  et   critique   Jitte­
raires au  Canada franc;ais,  suivi  d'un  Com­
mentaire  par    Benoit    Lacroix.  Recherches
Sociographiques 5: I I-74,   jan.-aofrt rg64.

LEROMAN
CLOUTIER,  CECILE. L'homme  dans   les  romans ecrits    par    les  femmes.  Incidences   5:g-I2,
1964.
ETHIER-BLAis, JEAN. Letters in Canada:  rg63. Livres en  franc;ais.  Romans et  theatre.  Uni­ versity    of   Toronto  Quarterly   33:505-521, July  1964.
FALARDEAU,  JEAN-CHARLES.   Le   desir   du   de­ part  dans   quelques  anciens   romans   cana­ diens.    Recherches  Sociographiques   4:2 rg-
223,  mai-aout  1963.
Les  milieux sociaux dans le  roman canadien-franc;ais contemporain, suivi  d'un Commentaire par  Marcel Rioux. Recherches

g8
 Sociographiques 5: I23-150,  jan.-aout  1964. FILIATRAULT, JEAN.  Quelques  manifestations de   Ia  revolte  dans   notre   litterature   roma­ nesque recente, suivi  d'un Commentaire par Hubert  Aquin, Claude  Jasmin  et  Georges­ Andre Vachon.  Recherches Sociographiques
5: r77-2o1, jan.-aofrt  rg64.
GAY,    PAUL.  Le   roman   canadien-franc;ais  de
1 goo   a  nos   jours;  essai   de   classification.
L'Enseignement  Secondaire 43:21-26,  jan.­
fev.  rg64.
-. Le   vertige   dans    le   roman    canadien­
fran:;ais. L'Enseignement  Secondaire 42: I I I- I I 3,  mai-juin  I 963.
GRANDPRE,  PIERRE   DE.   Notre  generation "beat."  Liberte  6: 258-268, mai-juin   1 g64. HAMELIN,     JEAN.     Panorama   du     roman canadien-franc;ais.  Le    Fran11ais    dans   le
Monde  23:32-35, mars   1964.
KATTAN, NAIM. Pour  le  romancier   canadien­ franc;ais,  !'universe!  c'est   I'Afrique.  Le   De­ voir  55:23, 7  nov.   1 g64.
MARTIN, CLAIRE. L'homme  dans   le  roman canadien-franc;ais. Incidences 5:5-3,   I g64.
RIGAULT,  ANDRE  et  WILLARD  M. MILLER. Coup d'ceil  sur  Ia  langue du  roman canadien franc;ais.   Le   Fran11ais dans   le  Monde  23:
27-31,   mars   1964.
SAINT-ONGE, PAULE. Les   hommes d'ici.   Inci­
dences   5:12-17,   1964.
SAINTE-MARIE ELEUTHERE, SOEUR. La    mere dans  le  roman canadien-franfais. Quebec, Presses  de  l'Universite Laval,  1964.   214  p.
SIROIS, ANTOINE. Le   mythe  du   Nord.  Revue de  l'Universite  de  Sherbrooke 4:29-36,  oct.
1963.
VACHON, GEORGES-ANDRE.   Les    valeurs    reli­
gieuses; un  roman actuel trop  enfonce dans
!'Ancien  Testament.  Le   Devoir    55:27,  7 nov.   I964.

LA  POESIE
BOISSONNAULT, CHARLES-MARIE. Quarante ans de  poesie:  Ia  Societe des  Poetes  canadiens­ franc;ais.   Sociite   Royale  du   Canada.  Me­ moires.  4e   ser.    t. I'  sec.   I: I 63- I 75,   juin
1963.
GRANDPRE,  PIERRE DE. Le   rapatriement de  Ja poesie.  Liberte 6:306-3 I4,  juillet-aofrt 1964. ROBERT, GUY.  Peut-on   aimer  ce   qu'on    ne

LITTERATURE CAN ADIENNE-FRANCAISE



connait  pas?   Poesie   canadienne.   Le   Fran­ fais  dans   le  Monde  23:22-26,  mars    1964.  SYLVESTRE,    GUY.   Amour et   poesie;   Eros  au pays   de   Quebec.  Le   Devoir    55:20-2 r,   7
nov.   1964.
-. Letters in  Canada: 1963.   Livres en  fran­
c;ais. Poesie. University of Toronto Quarterly
33:495-505,  July    1964.
VACHON,  ANDRE.  L'annee   poetique.   Relations
282: r8o-r82,  juin   1964.

LE  THEATRE
ETHIER-BLAis, JEAN. Letters in  Canada:   1963. Livres   en  fran<;ais.  Romans et  theatre.  Uni­ versity   of   Toronto  Quarterly   33:505-521, July  1964.
HAMELIN,  JEAN.  Le   theatre  au  Canada   fran­
fais.    Quebec,  Ministere  des   Affaires   Cul­
turelles, 1964.   83  p.


OUVRAGES   CONSACRES AUX   ECRIVAINS

BRUNET, BERTHELOT
TOUPIN,    PAUL.    Jamais ses   desirs    ne   furent ceux    du    commun.  Le    Devoir   55: 15,   4 avril    1964.

BUIES, ARTHUR
 ford.   Revue  de  l'Universite d'Ottawa 34:
249-253,   juin   1964.

DUBE, RODOLPHE
ETHIER-BLAIS, JEAN.  Franc;ois  Hertel; le chant de  l'exil.   Le  Devoir 55:17,  4  avril   1964.

GARNEAU, SAINT-DENYS
BLAIS,  JACQUES.   Documents  pour   servir   a  Ia
bibliographie critique  de  l'ceuvre  de  Saint­
Denys    Garneau.  Revue   de    l'Universite
Laval   18:424-438, jan.   1964.
-. Le  theme  de  l' eau  dans  l' muvre  de  Saint­ Denys   Garneau. Quebec,  Presses   de  l'Uni­ versite   Laval,  1 964.
-. Un  nouvel  lcare; le theme de  l'eau. Revue de    l'Universite   Laval      18:210-235,   nov.
1963.

GRANDBOIS, ALAIN
BRAULT,   JACQUES.    Poetique d'Alain   Grand­
bois.  Le  Devoir   55:24-25, 7  nov.   1964.

GRIGNON, GERMAINE
LECLERC,  RITA.   Germaine Guevremont.  Mon­
treal, Fides,  1963.   r88  p.

GROULX, LIONEL
L'muvre   du   chanoine  Lionel  Groulx.   Mon­
treal, Academie canadienne-franc;aise, 1964.

GAGNON,    MARCEL-A.
Buies.     Montreal,
1964.   253  p.
 La    Lanterne   d'Arthur
Editions   de    !'Homme,
 197  p.
GUEVREMONT,  GERMAINE  voir
GRIGNON, GERMAINE.


BUISSERET, IRENE DE
GENEST,  JEAN.  L'homme peripherique.  Action
Nationale 54: rSr-187, oct.    1964.

CHAMBERLAND, PAUL
SAINT-YVEs,   JACQUES.   Prose poetique ou poesie  prosaique?  Action nationale 54:377-
384,  dec.   1964.
VACHON,   ANDRE.   Paul    Chamberland;  poesie et   revolution.  Relations  2 So: 1 16-1 17,  avril
1964.

CLEMENT,  BEATRICE
PERRAULT, THERESE.   Beatrice  Clement,  ecri­ vain   pour   Ia  jeunesse.  Lectures   11:71,  82, nov.   1964.
DANTIN,  LOUIS  voir  SEERS,  EUGENE.

DESROCHERS, ALFRED
MONETTE,   ARCADE-M.  Retour a  J'ombre d'Or-
 
HEBERT, ANNE
WYCZYNSKI, PAUL.  L'univers poetique d'Anne
Hebert. L' Enseignement  Secondaire 42: 51-
66,  mars-avril 1964.

HEMON, LOUIS
ZIEMAN, MARGARET K.  Origins of Maria  Chap­ delaine. Canadian Literature    20:41-53, spring    1964.
HERTEL,  FRANCOIS voir  DUBE,  RODOLPHE.

JASMIN,  CLAUDE
ROY,   PAUL-EMILE.    L'univers   romanesque   de
Claude  Jasmin.   Lectures   1 1:87-89,   dec.
1964.

LANGEVIN, ANDRE
GOBIN,   PIERRE.   "Le temps   des   hommes." Le
Franfais   dans    le   Monde   23:37-43,  mars
1964.


99

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE




LASNIER, RIN A
KUSHNER,  EVA (DUBSKA). Rina  Lasnier. Mon­
treal, Fides,    I964.  191   p.

LE  FRANC, MARIE
Me DONALD,   YVAN.   Pecheurs de  Gaspesie.  Lec­
tures    IO:II7-II9,  jan.    1964.

MARTIN, CLAIRE
LOSIC,  SERGE.  L'amour dans  l'ceuvre  de  Claire
Martin;  avec   ou   sans   amour.  Le   Devoir
55: 28-29,   7  nov.    1964.

NELLIGAN, EMILE
ROBERT,    GUY.    Du    desir    demeure   desir    au








































100
 "gout  bizarre du  tombeau." Le  Devoir   55: IB-19,  4  avril   1964.

ROY, GABRIELLE
HAYNE,    DAVID  M.   Gabrielle Roy.    Canadian
Modern   Language  Review   2 I : 20-26,   oct.
1964.
ROY,  PAUL-EMILE.   Gabrielle  Roy,  ou  Ia  diffi­
culte de  s'ajuster a Ia  realite. Lectures  I I:
55-61,  nov.   I964.

SEERS, EUGENE
LEROUX,  NORMAND. Louis  Dantin: une  atmos­ phere  inquietante  qui   appelle  de  seneuses reserves. Le  Devoir 55: 16,  4  avrilI 964.
