$I5.00 per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°*100









25TH
•
·	NNIVERSJIRY	·:
•
ISSUE












A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW


PREFACE






EMTIME  TO  TIME,  ci<eumstances a.e
very appropriate way to single out individuals, organizations, and institutions for
deserved recognition.
That  is the case with this 25th anniversary publication  of the critical quarterly,
Canadian Literature.
For  25 years, and  through  the  pages of  100 editions  over  the  past  quarter century, Canadian  Literature  quarterly  has been a major voice in celebrating  and encouraging Canadian culture.
This  Iooth  edition  of Canadian  Literature,  carrying  as it does new works of
contemporary writers, emphasizing  new poems and essays on subjects of current interest  to the  writers, lends proof to the belief that  literature in Canada is not only alive and well, but flourishing.
If it was the intention  of the publishers of Canadian  Literature to show in this
anniversary  edition  that  literature, and  culture  generally, is all around  us in the present and not  just something  we inherit from history alone, then  that  objective is herein realized.
I am  pleased  to extend  congratulations and  warm  best  wishes to  Canadian Literat'ure and  to all involved in the 25 years of achievement.  As a country,  and as a  people,  we are  indebted  to the  pioneers  of  Canadian  literature   and  their successors who have contributed so much  to the growth  and development  of cul­ tural excellence in our country.
I look forward  to 25 more years of Canadian Literature.

THE  RIGHT HONOURABLE EDWARD R. SCHREYER





3

SOMETHING VALUABLE TO SAY

IHAVE GREAT SYMPATHY  with literary anthologisrn, although
God  (the  author  of  all  classification)  knows  they  stick  their  necks  out.  The
challenge they volunteer  to outface  is one of nomenclature, rubric,  category;  of nailing a flag to the mast as they sail doughtily  between Scylla and  Charybdis,  or (in the native idiom) shoot the rapids.
At the mention  of the sub-section CANLIT, high-principled vigilantes spring up on every side-some  armed  with scholarly  lances  and  exploding  bromides, some counting on sheer lung-power-to dispute the umpire's  ruling, his method­ ology, his yardstick, his probity,  and  his sanity.  The  poor  fellow must  not  only define the field of literature  but  also defend  a gauge of quality  within it, simul­ taneously holding at bay the zealots who believe literary  excellence  to  be insep­ arable from external considerations of social, religious, political, sexual, and  even scientifically verifiable merit. And while so engaged  he must answer a riddle  that has baffled generations of his countrymen  and  foreigners  alike:  What  is a Cana­ dian anything?
What  is the earmark,  so to speak, of eligibility? Birth-place?  parentage?  resi­ dence? citizenship? subject-matter? setting? diction?-each of which has at  one time or another  been adduced  to include  or exclude  contenders-or is  it  some magical combination  of such factors? And does the  putative  reader care one way or another  about  any or all of them? -unless, of course, he or she is  trying  to pass an examination  or get a grant.
An anthologist of works by Canadian writers  (define the terms how you will) may certainly set his own parameters, gaining what credit he can for candour  and decisiveness and  hoping  that  the label and  list of contents  will act  as a sort  of caveat lector. But there lurk profiteers-the advertiser, the sophist, the oracle­ whose interest is served by creating  confusion between label  and  contents: as for instance the publisher of The  Great Canadian  joke Book  (padded  with universal chestnuts dolled up in local colour), the teacher  who needs grist for his pedantic mill, or the dogmatist  (his own premises unexamined)  who insists that  "It doesn't have to be Canadian, it has to be good!" -thus sinking  the ship with  its own flag-pole.
In brief, some parade  the brand  "Canadian" as a front  for marketable  shoddy
while others shun it as a form of Scarlet  Letter  on that  account.  And  both  with


4

PREFACE

equal  self-righteousness:  the  former  regarding  themselves as  vestal  virgins  en­ trusted with the Native Flame, however feeble, and the latter  viewing themselves as stern missionaries for World-Class Standards, however inapt.  That  the hypoc­ risy of the chauvinists  has, until recently, drawn  more attention  than  that  of the high inquisitors is a great pity. Many critics in this part of the globe have become, from long practice,  world-class experts in putting  down  Canadians  for no other sin than being Canadian, all the while proclaiming their superiority  to the narrow nationalism afflicting their less-perceptive colleagues.
The  twenty-five  years that  mark  the  lifetime to  date  of the  learned   journal Canadian  Literature  has been a period of passage in our arts and letters from impudence  to self-confidence. The  adjective Canadian  is no longer automatically risible  or  apologetic  or  reductive,   but  simply  a  catalogue   code-word.  In  this quarter-century, broadly  speaking, our anthologies have grown from sparse  clus­ ters of familiar  gems set in frantic  commentary  to toughly culled selections from a substantial  body of poetry, novels, essays, drama,  biography, history, and all the other  consecrated  divisions. They  are  read  by Canadians  and  are  increasingly recognized  by  readers  elsewhere,  their  provenance  now  less a  matter   of  self­ conscious image-making  than  of wider acceptance of a different  perspective.
This  perspective, moreover, is a congenitally  pluralistic  one;  and  it is possible to argue  that  at  this time  the  world has need of such  a  perspective. This  need would explain, for example, the proliferation of departments  of Canadian Studies in universities  in  the  United  States,  Britain,  Australia,  Italy,  China,  and  other countries.  (Perhaps the  American  tendency  to lump  Canadian with  Common­ wealth Studies tells us more about  Americans than they know about us; but word that we share the continent  with them is spreading.)
It is precisely for this reason that  we should  take note of some major  impedi­ ments to premature self-congratulation. Our  publishers, of both  books and  peri­ odicals, are in critical financial  condition. This is more than  an aspect of general economic belt-tightening; it approaches  communal  hara-kiri.  Neither  the  public nor the private sector seems sufficiently persuaded  that  if education  and  the arts are expensive, ignorance  and  barbarism  are  lethal.  And  at  the  very  time  when others have shown keen interest in our arts and letters, our governments  at every level have only begun  to grasp  the urgency of facilitating  cultural  exchange  be­ tween  societies. In  Beijing  (Peking), where  two  universities  have  courses  in Canadian Studies,  the only substantial  library  of  Canadiana is in the Canadian Embassy, which is in a compound  that is off-limits to Chinese students.  Of course, this will not matter  if we have no books to put in the library;  it would certainly cost less.
There  is a crucial  sense in  which  the  value  of all  communication, including
literature, can only be set by the addressee. "Canadian literature" is in effect the


5

PREFACE

label on a package addressed "To  Whom  It May  Concern"; it need  not  justify itself to the unconcerned nor seek a mythical universal approbation. The  Germans find the  plays of Oscar Wilde not especially funny  but superbly  organized;  Tol­ stoy, unfamiliar  with  England,  adored  what  he  thought   was  Dickens'  realism and had no time for Shakespeare's. The interested  readership  for what Canadians write has never been so large, regardless of what  is read  into it or  taken  from it. In the long run, it matters little what we judge to be Canadian about our literature  or how we categorize our authors  and  their  works;  what  matters,  now that  we have found our voices, and  know that others feel we have something  valuable  to say, is that we should not dry up.
In that sense the medium is certainly the message. The  production  and circula­ tion of a literature-especially in the context of a demonstrated demand for it - is one of the hallmarks  of a society's vitality. The  mighty  clashes  between  vigi­ lantes over badges, bailiwicks, and banners amount  to little more than occasionally elegant trimmings.
At least one measure of Canadian literature is the very existence and  perennial vigour of Canadian Literature. Many happy returns to it!

MAVOR MOORE
Past chairman of the Canada Council; Professor, York University






HIGHER LEARNING AND NATIONAL CULTURE

IHAVE  BEEN ASKED by the editor to comment briefly on the
significance of this special 25th  anniversary  issue of Canadian  Literature and  I
feel privileged to do so. The  publication  of this issue is a notable event, I believe, for several reasons. Most obviously, it marks a milestone in Canadian literary criticism  by signalling  the fact  that  for  a  quarter of  a  century  we  have  been fortunate enough  to have a  journal  of criticism  and  review that  has  concerned itself largely with  the literature  of the  nation.  During  this  time,  the scholarship found in these pages has made a number of important contributions to our under­ standing  of ourselves as a people. By putting  the work of our  writers, poets, and

6

PREFACE

dramatists  into sharper  perspective, it has helped explain to us the nature of their vision and  given us a sense of what they feel to be important, both as Canadians and  as individuals  who  are  part  of the larger  human  community.  At the  same time, this tradition of literary scholarship has alerted  us to our own literary  heri­ tage and has prompted us to recognize and  define standards of excellence in our thought  and  writing.  Furthermore, by seeking to interest a broad  audience in the topics it presents, Canadian  Literature  has done much  to popularize the exciting world of Canadian letters at home and overseas.
In a somewhat  larger sense, the publication of this special anniversary issue also
serves to remind  us of the important role institutions  of higher  learning  play in sustaining  and  developing  the cultural  life of the nation.  Since the beginning  of the Renaissance  700 years ago, the critical study of literature  has been a central part  of humanities study  in higher education  and  remains so today. In  fact,  by their  very existence,  journals  such  as  Canadian  Literature  embody  the  major purposes of institutions  of higher education.  By seeking to preserve established knowledge,  by  creating   new  knowledge, and  by  disseminating  what  has  been learned  to the world-at-large, they advance the process of inquiry  that  lies at the heart  of higher  learning.  Without  question,  they  are  the  most important  means by which we inform ourselves and others about the nature  of investigation and discovery. Put  simply, they serve as forums  where ideas are  examined  for their worth, where older and  conventional  ways of thinking  are challenged,  where the values we hold  are  clarified,  and  where  the  nature  of  the  human  condition  is viewed from many vantage points.
As a final note, let me say that in helping us to appreciate  the world of literature and in providing us with scholarly insights into the meaning of what we read, the individuals who have worked on, edited and otherwise contributed  to Canadian Literature  over the  past  quarter  of a century  have  clearly helped to enrich  our lives.
K. GEORGE  PEDERSEN
President
The University of British Columbia







7







RHYTHMS OF DISCOVERY






THERE  ARE   RHYTHMS  in  the  life  of  a  magazine,   rhythms that  govern how it begins, who it draws, where it leads, and  when  it does these things all over again. As it must, if it is to stay alive. It must  begin again,  draw again, seek fresh perspectives and  horizons it has  not  yet seen. But  how to find them?  where? It seeks its readers  by following its  writers,  making  a  magazine somehow a "journal" in that other sense of the word as well:  the explorer's record book, sent home from the frontier with charts and sketches, memories of the past, glimpses of the  unfamiliar,  and  tales of  the  miraculous. Do  we  promise  that? Only to try.
With this issue, Canadian  Literature turns  100 and steps into its second quarter­ century. It is by no means the longest-lived of Canadian magazines, but  it is the oldest critical  quarterly  to  have taken  Canadian writers  and  writing  as its sole topic; and because of its subject, the most miraculous  thing about  it may well for some people be the fact of its survival at all. For there  were many  in 1959-de­ spite the fact that the newly established Canada Council and the newly published Massey Report  were at the time calling for greater attention to Canadian culture
-who watched  the founding  of Canadian  Literature  with  disbelief.  (Wouldn't the journal  run out of material,  they said, and  anyway  who would  read it? who would write? was there a Canadian literature?  didn't we already  have somewhere an essay on Leacock?)  But after  the first issues there  was no dearth  of material, nor any lack of contributors  with original  minds and  articulate styles. And  there was an audience.  Canada's major  writers and  major  critics have written  for the journal.  Over  twenty-five  years they  have  educated  us how  to  read  Canadian writing, and  required  us to expect more from  it, to value  the  traditions  we have inherited and to appreciate  the writers writing among  us now. And in this issue - in all their variety, expressing points of view that  often  conflict  with  each other, points of view with  which  this  journal  sometimes  does  not  editorially  agree - many  of  Canada's major  current   writers  reflect  on  people,  politics,  art,  and

8

EDITORIAL


language. In the prose and poetry assembled here is a glimpse (yet only a glimpse, though through  several sets of eyes) of the plural character  of modern  Canadian literature, and of the several subjects which currently preoccupy Canadian writers' minds.
Looking back at the way Canadian  Literature began, it is easy to attribute cour­ age, faith,  and foresight to the founders. But theirs was also an  act  of  deliberate planning  and  sheer determination. Some of them had  been affiliated  with other journals and  were concerned  at the time to draw attention  to Canadian writing: Roy Daniells had helped found  the Manitoba  Arts Review before leaving Winni­ peg for Vancouver; George Woodcock had edited Now  before returning  to Can­ ada,  and  had  recently  been  arguing  in  the  Dalhousie  Review  for  a  journal  of Canadian letters;  Earle Birney had years earlier edited the Canadian  Author  and Bookman  and   was  enthusiastic   about   the  founding  of  a  new  Canadian  arts magazine. Canadian  Literature grew out of the concerted discussions of these and several other members of the University of  British Columbia  faculty,  particularly Geoffrey Andrew and Stanley Read of the English Department, and Neal Harlow of the  Library.  A grant  from  the  Koerner  Foundation   enabled  the  journal  to begin production; the University invited George Woodcock to be the first editor;  and  then  followed  the  years  of   discovery. There  were  many  other  people,  of course, whose taste, judgment, and energy have enlivened and  guided the maga­ zine -among whom are the successive members of the production  and  editorial staff:  Donald  Stephens, Ronald  Sutherland, Herbert  Rosengarten, Laurie  Ricou, with the assistance of  Inglis W. Bell, Basil Stuart-Stubbs, Tina  Harrison,  Renny Winterton, Beverly  Westbrook,  and  others still. But  it  is George  Woodcock  to whom so much of  the journal's development is due. It was his editorial skills which built the magazine over its first eighteen years, his judgments which so personally affected its contents, and his critical expectations which have so markedly touched the  recent  course  of  Canadian  criticism.  In  those  eighteen  years, the  journal helped  trace  the growth  and  describe the subjects of Canadian writing,  helped refine readers' sense of artistic  accomplishment  and focus attention  on the waves of talent that emerged in the 192o's, the 194o's, the 196o's.
And now the  journal is twenty-five. To celebrate, we are focusing in this issue less on the historical achievements  of the past than on the fact that  literature  is a live art, happening around  us in the present. And we are focusing less on theories of criticism  than  on  the  creative  practice  of writers  themselves -their  poems, their  journals, their  glimpses of the literary  craft,  and  their  views of the  world around  them.  It has been one of the characteristics of Canadian  Literature since its beginning that  writers and critics have shared the pages, repeatedly integrating the twin processes of reading  and  writing. Here they range  widely across subjects and  forms, seeking self, seeking shape  in the worlds they see and  dream -they


9

EDITORIAL

are map-makers all, reporting home on the territories of the mind, the memories of possibility, the miracles of language.
It  is a pleasure to acknowledge here  publicly  the support  the  journal  has  re­
ceived over the years: from the contributors  and  the readers  first of all, who by their enthusiasm  have helped create an audience  for Canadian writing;  from the University of British Columbia, which has published  the  journal  as one tangible expression of its concern for the university's role in community  education; from the SSHRCC, which has long assisted Canadian  Literature  financially;  and  from several organizations  for their special help in financing  this anniversary  publica­ tion:  the  Koerner  Foundation, the  McLean  Foundation, the  Samuel  & Saidye Bronfman  Family  Foundation,  the  Canada Council,  the  UBC  Alumni  Associa­ tion. It is a pleasure, too, to acknowledge the skills of Robert  Reid, who designed the typeface of Canadian  Literature;  of George Kuthan, whose prints graced  the magazine's early issues (and several of which are reprinted here) ; and  of Charles Morriss, Richard  Morriss, and  Ron Smith, whose love for the art  of printing  has given the  journal its visual appeal. We are grateful  for the contributions they all have made to the journal's continuity.
We acknowledge the past. We celebrate the present.
Yet it is the future  that  draws us forward. While celebrating  our  heritage  and the artistic talents around  us, we live as readers and  writers with an eye scanning the next horizon;  always there is a possibility yet to come. It  is this vitality  that leads  a  journal  on,  to  follow the  rhythms  of  discovery  into  its  next  quarter­ century:  the urge still to tell of memory and  imagination, and  to seek  new ways to send home maps and tales.
W.N.








10

MISERICORDIJI  GENERJIL



For Robert  Emmet Finnegan

The window
itself can't change and  I can't move enough to change what  it shows me the soiled brick
wall, part  of a white windowframe and sill four  telephone wires consciousness  distilled to the space between this tireless
machine that  breathes for me, and  a block
of sheltered lives.

The swamp invades itself	Under scum and broad  pads    green jaws cruise	Almost nothing remembers
how to breathe

Slippery tongs grip 	Suddenly flesh gives way
A long slow
slide and  you're there 	your lungs fill and  bum

Winnipeg.	I was born here. 	Cannonades
of light  over
the snow blew through childhood skirmishes.   They  left me hungry for exotic wars.
 


George Amabile



















































II

AMABILE

Hard
to believe, after  years in the signal corps
the great  pyramid cells, the horns
of grey matter, anterior columns and  tracts  blown
like power-lines  and  bridges ... Only  my eyes move.
At first, they brought me
books, turned pages till I slept.
I blinked  messages
like radio  code into deep space.    Nothing
got through.   I learned
to concentrate on the view.

Today the wall has broken out in what  looks like a cold sweat, as though it were ill
as though the whole damn  physical world were showing
symptoms  of decay.

But no.    By noon the bricks are dry.
By dusk they're  sullen.

I'm standing  on a bed of brick that  stretches and curves to the edge of the world. 	The sky is a glass kiln 		Hot wind  mixed  with  green shadow  dyes
my hospital gown
dark as a forest	Smoke rises	The bricks glow
and the cloth around  me bursts into  flame	Ashes
float	I can't
feel a thing      but waves dancing  in the air make my eyes water

12

AMABILE

open  to darkness
that  loosens as the wall grows back
Of course it's not  just
a block, but earth, soft rock
raised  by water, fire and sweat -lore old as the Chaldees.
I remember the master I worked with once
his exact  mouth, his face
baked  like a mask of the desert under a shock of white
hair,  the spare  frame crooked  fingers
his eyes, bright as a hawk's

digging  his loam in October letting it powder  under  the frost
mixing  the weathered remains  with spring water, ground chalk, ashes
bone, coal dust  or dried seeds, tempering this
to a smooth  pug with his feet culling and  kneading each clot lifting it over his head slamming it down into  the slick
or sanded  beechwood  mold and stockboard squaring the top with a wet strike
lugging the raw brick on pallets up to the drying ground
laying  them  in a scintle hack under straw  to cure in the air

stacking up codes in a kiln he knew he'd  have to break and build and  break  and  build every three  years
kindling the fire holes with  twigs and  paper
"to  drive  off water  smoke"
building the heat with stove logs then  charcoal.
Seal the arches let it cook for a week.

AMABILE

Night 	The siren gives up its pewter
ghost 	Time  is a glass
coloured shock wave that evaporates nerves 	All
that life in the leaves
waits...	The  first mortar explodes
the dark like a brimstone
flower	I'm over
the hill at last but the same habits 	keep    time 	My body shrinks 		That's fear
It will pass	These words come from the plasma	don't
laugh hysterical
perfumes or cry the dragon back from her peace

Reeds 	Hollow music    Whatever it touches
bleeds the same
honeybeer  syrup thick with  pride 	"I'm flying entirely  without
support ahead
of the storm  There are no thresholds	Every thing is now"

I'd  help him draw  the cooled stock amazed  at the way some change
in temper heat or stack pattern could  produce shades
of red from scarlet  to blood
pudding	pinks 	browns 	ochre     sulphur and  buff	orange  and grey
to green or woodsmoke blue

And they weren't just bricks, but  parts of a scheme he kept in his head

AMABILE

some chimney, garden walk or fireplace or gateway and  maybe, if the client could  pay
a glazed  puzzle that  would resolve
itself into emblems, a coat of arms, scenes
from  daily life.
He worked
all over the world, and  worked  on the day he died  at ninety-four: 	single
withe, cavity  walls, header
and stretcher, spreading the beds furrowing and  parging, buttering ends keeping the plumb line straight
to the rim of the course
raking or beading or tuck pointing.

English  bond, Flemish  bond running bond and  cross bond
garden wall and  herringbone and  Sussex

noggings  and  surrounds pillars, arches  and  quoins (I studied  this, there
in the war)  strapwork gaugework, dentil  sets and  rusticated patterns. He had  them  all
could  even carve in deep
relief an abstract figure or a family
face.    Out in the high sun finishing a patio  or pool, tap tap tap, and  the brick, fieldstone flagstone, tile, would split
a perfect  closer.

Cockle shells
Cockle shells

To  warm  the heart? No 	The sea
is cold 		Deep fissures in a thunder head 	I should have  been that


fact  and  nuance
 Strange how it rises



15

AMABILE

to the surface  of a mind  locked in a live shell it can't feel.

Is this what  we were taught
to fear this play
of self in the snow taste of remembered mornings   in the long dark empty of almost anyone else 	It
sings    this way
of touching the near silence 	All
the mind  can reach and become and  allow to fade fills
even a desolate  street with spring  light  that slowly explodes my cropped view of the world.
From the top right  hand  corner, telephone lines like a musical staff, drape
down and away electron streams vowels and  colours blurred  to a hum
where birds come to rest. 	Somewhere
they have nests and futures.

This time it's
a grackle.     Ugly
eyes, feathers glistening
like texas crude.   The  beak opens and  I hear, inside
a brief cry like a stone
breaking,  like the cracked note of the bugle
that  played taps
at Arlington for J.F.K.

Life still has these necessary

r6

AMABILE

flaws that  say don't gloat, each  triumph
is darkened by invisible failures, all of them real, all of them disguised  by ritual.
Sunfoil  flashes
Aerosol	Aerosol	Aerosol

Backpacks and  party girls
Police out on the roads

Courage, old heart somewhere in this paradigm the lion sleeps
I had lost count
of the days, the nights,  jars
of glucose hung  like sterilized fruit.     How could  I have known  immeasurable
sleep would  be redeemed by brick like faces

in a stadium they look
the same  but  have  their own wrinkles  and  weather
marks  perhaps the white of efflorescence, chipped or blackened by soot
like a formal death
letter-diverse histories,  none of them perfectly true.

Sometimes (in dreams?) they burn and  pulse like blood
cells, darkening
at dusk when  part
of a window ignites and  glows, yellow through soft curtains.

I have imagined a woman  in that  room sung her name to myself
watched her intelligent
eyes in conversation.

I7

AMABILE

Soon, we will know each  other.
Our  skins will heat  and  cool in the dark. And there will be children, games
friends  whose lives bind ours to the world.

I know that's not true
or perfect.     I know the film
that  keeps insight  from outlook. But why should  I care?


itself can only
 Death

hurt  as much  as a drawn shade. 	I've  got
what  many say they want
no worries    no pain no one to  fight with no one to blame
and  nothing left to account for.

Though I can't see the sun
I can watch  its moods, modes and  seasons, the day
changing, fierce or dulled by mist, rain, leaves
loose in the wind, shadows of smoke opening
the shadow of a gull's keen glide the snow arriving, straight
or blown, ice
that  shines    and  runs.

A white  horse gallops across the land into a thin cloud 	beard
of the wind and the  west blue rings like an anvil

And there is time
to dream  the new life before death, before
the 'copters bursting  in air
flames and screams the sudden  drill
of pain in my head
the mud, the lasting silence.



18

HE]IRT TEST WITH  ]IN ECHO CH]IMBER




Wired  up at  the ankles and one wrist, a wet probe  rolling over my skin,
I see my heart on a screen
like a rubber bulb or a soft fig, but larger,

enclosing a tentative double  flutter, the rhythm of someone out of breath
but  trying  to speak anyway; two valves opening and shutting like damp wings
unfurling from  a grey pupa.

This is the heart  as television, a softcore  addiction
of the afternoon. The heart
as entertainment, out of date in black and  white.
The technicians watch  the screen,
looking  for something: a block, a leak, a melodrama, a future
sudden death, clenching of this fist which  goes on shaking itself at fate.
They say:  It may be genetic.

(There you have it, from science,
what God  has been whispering all along through stones, madmen and  birds' entrails: hardness of the heart  can kill you.)

They change the picture:
now my heart is cross-sectioned like a slice of textbook  geology.
They freeze-frame it, take its measure.
 




Margaret Atwood



A deep  breath, they say.
The heart gasps and  plods faster. It enlarges, translucent,
a glowing  stellar
 


grows


19

ATWOOD

cloud at the far end
of a starscope. A pear
made  of smoke and  about  to rot. For once the blood and  muscle heart  and  the heart  of pure
light are beating in unison, visibly.

Dressing, I am diaphanous, a mist wrapping a flare.
I carry  my precarious
heart, radiant and  already fading, out with me
along  the tiled corridors
into the rest of the world,
which  thinks it is opaque and  hard. I am being very careful.
0 heart, now that  I know your nature,
who can  I tell?













20

IN THE MIDNIGHT  HOURS:

Douglas Barbour


Night  time is only
the other side of daytime
but if youve ever waited  for the  sun
you know what it's like
to wish daytime  would  come
& dont it seem like a long time seems like a long time
seems like a long long time
"Seems Like a Long Time"
Ted  Anderson  (Talking Beaver Ltd)
as sung by Rod Stewart on
Every Picture Tells  A Story



you enter  them 	alone 	always even if theres somone with you 	you

enter them  alone 	thats  given you dont  take it easily


(the  dark)
 its no gift
 


alone


breathe slowly behind  yr eyelids
 
slow down gather
 
the images they


are friendly 	enemies take them  as you will
on the always nervy surface  of yr skin 	yr thots

are showing again 	you
breathe faster 	know it 	slow

down you
go
to enter the dark its only the 	dark
youre in it 	as always alone 	&
breathing 	like
a human being


21

BARBOUR


moving in slowly
'one    breath 	at
a    time' 	asleep
 



again
 




in the dark


11

now    i would  join you there     he says 	she says	the lover



& means it 	wants  to be there
try to share
whats yours alone
 says

to bear

as desire & tongue  always wish  for
the pleasure  not yet spoken 	even to give it
 




language


loves us 	but
there is too much  dark

for words to cross
 


space

clearly its lost in such translation

& yet 'i' speak 	the poem 	'speaks' to you
in the dark  hours when once
youd have known 	its only ghosts 	or the weird
something wrong
but wrong rightly in a world where  such visitations come naturally	supernaturally


& theyll pass

but no 	the poem
isnt there now 	with you
 theyre  expected

as it wants  to be 	poems desire

the obvious 	'im  here'
the poem cries 	you cant  hear  it
 
to transcend

again


22

BARBOUR


you have
 
just ordinary

dark  to dare 	your mind 	your light  breathing 	breasts
rise & fall 	&

youre alone
as i said 	not wanting to 	not wanting to know  that 	know 		you
are alone 	where youve been before 	&

its all right 		youll come thru 	its all right 	not really 	all right 		but

its    all right 	for 	now

111

its midnight in the core of dark lie down 	&	listen

your last lost sigh 	recedes behind the song


in the dark
 (i send)
of the dark

you sing 	it springs forth
it is the song of the darks own you

&look 	you have  come  thru


we usually  do make  it 	with
or without a little  help
 



thru
 





the night


we always enter     alone even together       to get here         thru  it


say hello
 counts
open eyed
 you


the morning signals back the world as you know it 	as you know it enter it 	alive

CORPS DE NOCE CORPS DE DIVORCE

Chanson pour Aphelie  au bleu regard


Louky Bersianik


L'oeil

Elle l'epie
pierre  tapie  au coin de l'oeil  partie prenante de la lumiere
mais des franges du sommeil quand la lumiere
est confisquee
tres dense sous les paupieres tranchee au laser surprise du  parti  pris de l'oeil d'etre deux
comme  au coin du feu

Elle se situe incoherente et divergente en territoire de l'oeil
tranchee revee ou se retirer corps et liens et se sauver  du pire
ou entasser  le corps entier de I'Autre
chasse au tresor perdu  enter11e sous les cils et conserve sous globe oculaire

Parfois la noce aux yeux Aphelie tu flechis
la ou ton coeur flanche  au large  d'un double
etui  d'etain reduit  a se repandre
quand la lame a l'oeil d'Himlett part  en fleche et t'atteint
!'amour se liquefie sous la fra.lche peau de
source
se mele ala  teinture bleue vire au gris et s'asseche  hors d'atteinte
Poudre d'iris  a l'ouverture a Ia sortie  du
sommeil aux retomhees  des apparences dites 11ealite
rideau  lourd
taie parfumee sur l'oeil quand il arrive qu'elle se tait
a l'heure de fermeture a !'entree des paupieres
un oeillet noir palpe la fin du monde

24

BERSIANIK

Elle a des yeux pour  tout  visage des ye11X que pour  lui des cils demesures  la fibre optique en vibration
une elasticite optimale des rides postiches des le clin de l'oeil
Parfois  le souhait de voir decliner  la faculre  de voir d'accentuer le regard  baisse
le temps  de lever les apparences

La moue
Moilt  de la pensee qui s'exprime foulee au pied jusque dans  la bouche
grappes de sang dans la bouche court-circuit de
parole  des cheveux aux chevilles
advenant la foulee grave des mots sur les levres ecume  et huiles d'un  contrat de drupe
advenant la piqfue  invisible sur la levre
contractee d'ou  le baiser s'echappe grand cru du terroir
et greve la nuit des temps  repandu en vain sur la moue de l'Incredule

Les cheveux
Aphelie son futur amour Aphelie  ta robe en envoi blanc sur le mur  gris
le jour d'une aureole prelevee sur l'enfance
moyennant ce ballon  de lumiere  opaque en ascension  d'images sur la brique  noire
Sept  ans moins douze mois et deja  des trahisons
Le ruban dans tes cheveux  sur le haut de l'oreille inaperc;ue
luttant deja  contre I'agitation du geste de
lancer
contre !'excitation
les bras leves le jeu l'autre fillette soudain inapparente
les bras leves le jour de ta naissance  les pieds devant etta vie tiree par les cheveux
Une  rafale  d'avenir decrit  un cercle sur ta tete tu auras la tonsure  des gens qui abandonnent
leur corps aux survivants un bras leve
t'arrachant les cheveux  una un les lissant eprouvant le contact du bulbe entre  deux  doigts
signe sensible de I'arret mais de la racine

BERSIANIK


et te fa onneras cendres
une perruque pour I'amour

L'amour
Aphelie son Aphelie accomplie entre  mort  et lie le mot vie t'effraie sur son oreiller
Aphelie son Aphelie  abolie entre  vie et mort  le
mot amour t'a  rayee a Ia craie
Ou es-tu pres de lui en quels lieux
Ou dors-tu contre  lui en quels creux
Reve noue ongles ronges sangle autour du cri tu t'augmentes de tes sanglots  d'enfant retenus
jusqu'a lui
tu t'etrangles de sa vie et t'acheves de ses propres  mains
Aphelie son Aphelie  ensevelie entre  amour et
glaive le mot corps t'arrondit et te preserve de lui
Lui ange et angles
et toi corps de rechange
Ou vas-tu  avec lui en quels yeux

Les dents
Un  mur de son derriere le front
transcription au point  de croix sous Ia tonnelle tout en dentelle du couvent
Un mur de chaux derriere les levres
barrage de !'inaudible au  jardin conjugable ou se heurte Ia langue  a Ia proue  du desir
De tout le carnage elle n'a  desserre  les dents pour dechirer Ia pelure  des mots canins
ni mordu l'idee  fixe du carnivore
devoration au point du  jour dans Ia verdure tout en duree  du malentendu

Le tilleul
La fee lit pour tout  jasoir seule les £leurs du tilleul qui Ia coiffent
pour toute fin et soif et pour  tout  reposoir  elle veille
Ia fee delie Ia teille et ce delit  d'insistance l'ecriture coulant entre  ses doigts
elle trame  Ia chaine du desespoir entre  ses

BERSIANIK

doigts  d'esperance
la respirante des cymes du liber impregnant le papier  de sa substance
elle espere faire  respirer  quelques semblables par les pores de son empreinte digitale
et se faire  reconnaitre des glycines
a defaut


Le pied

Le piege n'attend plus que le pied distrait
la marche a interrompre brusquement au milieu
d'une phrase
la flamme a eloigner  du flambeau  des voyelles
la chair a mettre en pieces trebuchantes
quand le corps qu'on sonne ne tient  plus debout corps de noce corps de negoce
ne tient  qu'a la persistance  des os en morceaux piles moulus et rassembles
au pied de la lettre


Les lieux

De grands pans de monde  entier  se detachent les glaciers  a la derive
quand elle part  en voyage immobile  sur le quai de grands mouvements de debacle  liberant l'eau
sous-glacine et le soleillevant
affieure I'horizon sous-marin et flottent les maisons  amarrees a l'hiver
Aphelie son Aphelie  eperdue
les lieux hors-saison  a ne pas perdre de vue


Lesyeux

Corps  de noce corps de divorce clef de voute  egaree
l'os a decouvert dans la cour des miracles
pas un ongle pas un cheveu  ne fut epargne
ni l'ecorce des fictions forcees chair  pulverisee le regard reste bleu coute que coute
et cherche la fille encore  vivante non pas d'Orphee mais de Demeter

BERSIANIK

Les temps

Jusqu'a la fin des tempes entre le coin de l'oeil et le haut de l'oreille
une pause a chaque seconde  dans  son recit
ou bat le tempo d'une nouvelle ere
Aphelie son Aphelie  revolue figure d'un plan mis de cote
dans les meplats du corps depose ou les os du temps sont absents meme la marque est perimee







pas
 La main

II ne peut  te trahir sans te tenir  la main
de la tienne ala sienne il n'y a eu qu'un faux

le mot main  t'emiette et tu tombes de la table

des riches
le mot aliment te lie autrement te ment
le mot coeur  t'aneantit casse-tete pour  ta main de pauvrete nantie d'annees bien alignees
coeur manie  fragment multiplie
main dans la peau  profondement

Lafaim
Jusqu'a la fin des temps I'amour aussi en perdition
en perte de vitesse et d'eclat
le sang de !'absence battant aux  tempes barattant son fteuve fluorescent dans !'Invisible fulgurance rouge du crane civilise a la plante
sauvage  des pieds aller  retour
pour annoncer la faim  des etres la faim  des autres
elle s'apaise  toujours
dans un tlot de bras refermes sur elle ou a plat  ventre  dans le vide

Lesmains
Elles sont au nombre de deux  elles etaient au nombre de quatre en liasse
elles sont l'ombre portee  de ton futur nom en liesse au coeur fevrier  et tendre

BERSIANIK

un atre  d'hiver pour etre conc;ue dans les ftammes
elles sont quatorze membres  de novembre son
doigte
un art de naitre dans  la neige pour etre le feu elles sont mille sont neuf sont cent sont trente
gemissantes sous l'onglee autour du  premier  cri
du commencement des apparences

La fin
Le mot pain  te Caresse a la peripherie
auvu
lieux de detresse ou ta main  du froid s'absente le mot amour te vide tu le nourris en vain
le mot vin te vire et tu pars en voltage au su
lieux de derive  ou ton coeur d'Aphelie s'eloigne
d'un soleil couche  eteint  nomme  Himlett
tu reposes ta hanche de ses exd$ millenaires et questionnes ta soif etanche
dans  l'etang d'Ophelie

* * *
(Vercheres, fevrier et novembre 1983)









TWO POEMS
 


Earle Birney



STILL LIFE NEJIR BJINGJILORE

The painter quiets all but his brush
The writer needs to know  : what  then?

My train  is creeping blind  through all this canvas out  to Bangalore

Nearest  my window  right  an oxcart's moving (stopped?)
on a pinched  black road where  jacarandas
have left magenta bruises, and  two women  stand face to shadowed face beneath tiered  baskets
They are compositions   skyblue shawls and  sable braids
aslant  down chalk-white saris (Merchants' wives with time  to gossip?) Left of them  the road elbows
vanishes with  palms

Beyond the oxcart, emerald paddyfields submit  to paired  brute  buffalo,
indifferent geometrists who draw  in ochre  mud
their sinuous counter-patterns
Behind each slatey team an almost  naked human beast, bareheaded, breeched with  rags, ploughs with a stick  (is it?)  clutched
in raddled hands while a companion guides
their Shivas by a rope threading sacred  nostrils Around cows inert  as corpses they are steering and  boulders obscure,  huge
as bones of longdrowned mastodons

The background, between  bamboos and  breadfruit trees, allows a glimpse of thatch, a lizard-grey-
(the  village of those still, still-talking matrons?)
Near  a splash of wall where  a flamboya bums a figure bears a tray,  perhaps of frangipani
for a temple i cannot see 	or sandalwood
(my window cannot smell)
On  the horizon  a last stand  of jungle
(swelling?)	whatlivesinthere?    whatwill?

30

BIRNEY

The train slides my frame  forever past
as round the bend  to Bangalore  comes sudden mounting filling the road a ten-ton  oiltruck
(It is surely  roaring, blaring, screeching?
My window cannot hear)

Did  the women  move?    Is there still time?
1983






ELLESMEREL]IND 1983

At last in Ellesmereland's hotels
for a hundred and fifty each per night we tourists  shit down  plastic wells
and watch tv by satellite

The "land beyond  the human eye" the Inuit call it still.
Under the blinding midnight sky our  missiles wait our human will.












THREE POEMS
 


Bill Bissett


b b 	b
b 	b 	b 	b
b 	b 	b   b
b 	b   b 	b
b 	b
b 	b 	b 	b 	b
b 	b
b 	b 	b  b 	b
b 	b 	b
b 	b
b b
b

B]IYBEES BRETH

laydeez slippr blu bells

clovr
bachelors  buttons daisee

fox tails
musturd  seed
spruce
poplar
shepherds purs
dandee lions
thistul
pine
cedar
sage
hors radish
cow sills
coppr  petals
sun    flowrs
blackeyed susans
purpul astrs
blazing    star
n th tiny branches     from th musturd  seed    sharpr n leening     tendr     as
pine     smell th needuls 	but they dont  prickul     th branches  uv th musturd seed    as    we are small n leening     n wud see a huge flowr
on top uv a spruce  tree 	th limbs uv th musturd seed    so delicate n strong     th yello flowrs tickul  my nose    bring
me dreems    what  we ar 	fleshee    n mounds     wun surface reveels    anothr   surface     th treez n flowrs 	they
hardlee     grab  at th lite 	like us 	missing it    thn we pull it togethr   pick it up
thru     push ups    prayr     bcum agile     as beavr 	danse     undr th moon  lite    ar
surroundid by crikits     woolvs    lay
all    our    dangr   to rest    our arms    undr
th longest rain 	bcum like th branches uv th musturd  seed	defind 		not  musheee     n all ther 	not blobee as
we    ar 	thees mind shaping bodeez 	but sereen 	from th
powdr     our soul imagines  us to b lithe  n running	thru  th clouds tord  th mor
sunnneee  harbor




32

BISSETI'

ME N jiRLEEN USD TO DRIVE EVREE WHER

drive  evree wher 	to london	hamilton	north york 	scarborough   missisauga 	watrloo   barree
to thornlea    georgetown   collingwood 	to evree wher 	almost chain smoking 	puff puff 	n with th top down 	we both wore sun glasses
she was a great  drivr 	i was xcellent  passengr    we drove  evreewher to moovees 	to concerts	to restaurants   oftn    to free ways    wun  time we wer driving to a reeding		at a church hall    sumwher 	downtown   we
werent late yet    but fr sure not earlee     weud dun a lot uv driving that day 	n we wer cumming to cross street  n talking  abt  th prson who had
bin sending us hexes	keeping  us up all nite    smoking  n talking   whn a
car 	WITH 	NO	WUN 	IN 	IT		tore thru  th intrseksyun	arleen  was brillyant		she slammd on th brakes 	stoppd  us in time    n th ghost
car blew it 	did 	yu 	see 	that 	she sd to me 	yes i sd
ar    yu 	   thinking   what     ium    thinking		 yes		i sd 		n we sped to th reeding	parkd  th car 	it was veree cold    wintr 	nite 	steemee toronto		go to th reeding 	 we walkd in th door 		holding hands 		mor joind 	by ths terror car 	n she was standing   up    in th audiens   th onlee prson 	 standing   staring at us    n sd 	my name 	i sorta wavd at her
she lookd  veree releevd 	like she cudint go thru  with sumthing   or was
in sum  psychik shock 	astonishment   i went thru th reeding   wondring how n hoping
it wud go ok 		ther was sumwun els aftr  us    who was getting violent  now 	wud she
b ther  too with  a ketchup bottul	a gun for us    as sheud  thretend alredee   th
reeding
was almost  in th round	reelee likd it 	aftr  th reeding     arleen  n me 	didint drive evree    wher 	we drove  home immediatelee   parkd 	rushd  in  put on th coffee
kept 		our sunglasses on	startid  smoking     talking  abt all uv that  evree angul  uv it    n trying  to pacify th physical vibraysyuns we saw in th
air    wch wer veree upset 	all nite 	ths was gud for at leest two packs each 	ths was bfor we had  herd anee  health warnings	was
eerlee  mid seventees 	at 6 i went to bed 	had to b up at 8:go 	for a reeding	n arleen 	out  to th offis   but first we drove  to th reeding
out along  th lake    to see school 	n talking     n talking     breething 	n weering sun glasses 	n gliding 	n smoking 	n unafrayd








33

BISSETI

























































34
 


WHN DIEFENBJIKER WENT

into spirit

i herd th radio  say

his bodee wud tour canada 	in a train 	so peopul  n him cud see each othr for th last
time

th train  went from ontario wher it startid	thru  manitoba to saskatchewan		wher it stoppd

yet anothr view uv geographee

PORTRAIT OF THE ARTIST AS YOUNG PUP

Clark Blaise



MONTREAL HAS A CERTAIN CENJUS for spawning poetic movements-from poets like A.  J. M. Smith  and  Frank  Scott  in the twenties, down through  Louis Dudek,  Irving  Layton  and  A. M. Klein  a generation  later.
And  while individual novelists had  always existed in  English-Montreal-Hugh MacLennan, John  Glassco  (and  stretching  a point)  Brian  Moore  and  Leonard Cohen-it  was my privilege  to be associated with the only conscious gathering of English language  Montreal prose writers in this century.
Time and doctoral  dissertations seem to bestow inevitability  and  distinctive colouration  to such groups, as though  internal  affinity, not external  need, account for literary alliance. We were five prose writers in the same city at the same time; we had similar  critical standards and  very different  literary  tastes. And  in 1970, under  the guidance  of John  Metcalf and  Hugh  Hood, we--Hood and  Metcalf, Ray  Fraser  and  Ray  Smith  and  myself-became the  Montreal   Story  Teller. We're  now a footnote in the larger  history of Canadian  literature, but we rate  a few paragraphs in the history of contemporary  Canadian fiction. The Story Teller is yet another  instance of synchronicity and serendipity at work:  contemporary Canadian literature was just being born, and  we were in a time and  place, with the energy and vision to assist the delivery.
Montreal  is a cultured  city with many writers. The  problem, in those first few years, was with  me. The  only young writer  I  knew in  town  was Jerry   (C.  J.) Newman. Hood was around, of course, but teaching in another  world, l'Universite
de Montreal. I'd  been writing in a vacuum, except for Jerry's  critiques and nearly all the stories I  was publishing,  despite their  Canadian setting,  were still being placed in the  United  States.  Nevertheless, I'd  felt hurt  and  resentful  when John Metcalf, another  local novelist and story-writer I'd  never met, published  the first significant  anthology  of the  new  writing-Sixteen by  Twelve-and  had  left me out.
(How a pompous young pup can howl!)
I  was still discovering  the  city, or more  precisely, discovering  parts  of myself opened  up by the city. I was respectful if not worshipful of all its institutions.  I defended its quirks and inconsistencies as though defending  myself against abuse; I was even charmed  by things  I would have petitioned against in Milwaukee  like


35

BLAISE

separate  Catholic  and  Protestant  schools, Sunday  closings and  male-only  bars. "The Frencher  the Better" was my motto  to cover my encroachment on the aboriginal rights of the English.
I was writing very openly, in the late sixties, of Montreal. The city was drenched
with significance for me-it was one of those perfect  times when every block I walked yielded an  image, when  images clustered  with  their  own  internal  logic into insistent stories. A new kind of unforced, virtually  transcribed  story  (new for me, at least)  was begging to be written -stories like "A  Class of  New  Cana­ dians,"  "Eyes," "Words  for Winter,"  "Extractions and  Contradictions," "Going  to India," and  "At  the Lake" were all written  in one sitting,  practically  without revision. I'd  never been so open to story, so avid for context.  I was reading all the Canadian literature  I could get my hands on, reading  Canadian exclusively; there was a continent  out  there to discover. My literary  community  was more  on  the page than  in the  flesh. I  had  only Jerry  Newman,  George  Bowering for  a  few years, Margaret Atwood for one year, and I had the poetry-readings at Sir George and  the  parties  after  them -those  were  my  only  contacts   with  the  raucous, boozy, quick-witted  writing-life I'd  known, and depended  on, at Iowa.




l:osE, THEN, ARE  THE  pre-Story  Teller  facts.  I  knew  of Metcalf  from  the  Clarke-Irwin   1969  volume  of  New  Canadian  Writing (he'd appeared  with Jerry  Newman  and  Doug Spettigue; I'd  appeared  a  year earlier in the same series with Dave Godfrey and  David  Lewis Stein). Of course I knew Hugh  Hood's  work-he went all the way back  to my Iowa  days when  I'd  read him in Dave Godfrey's hand-me-down  review copies. Ray Smith  I knew through his "Cape Breton Is the Thought-Control Centre  of Canada" story in Tamarack
-one of the breakthrough stories in our  writing.  I  particularly   remembered  it because I'd  thought  my story, "The Mayor" (later  retitled  "The Fabulous  Eddie Brewster")  was a shoo-in for the President's Medal  as best story of the year. That my story actually did win is a testimony to the innate  conservatism of the  judging process.
I've tried to be honest, even if I come off looking terrible.  I know how this must read:  I was a posturing little pup, a typical product  of American  alienation, mixed with Canadian sentimentality.  (The  portrait  of "Norman Dyer"  in "A  Class of New Canadians" is my own ironic self-portrait.)  I considered  myself an  heir to the Two  Solitudes, the uncrowned  princeling  fated  to  write  the  books, discover the new talent, script  the movies, teach  the secrets, that  would  move Canadian literature  to the cutting  edge of the world's consciousness. Canada's duty  was to exploit its twin heritage of English and  French, its twin tensions of America  and

BLAISE


Britain.  I was ambitious,  ruthless, selfish, vain, and  arrogant. I was also  hard­
working, observant,  anxious to learn, and even humble.
Then  Metcalf  called. How  he got my name, I never asked. He mentioned  the group: himself  (whom  I  resented), Smith  (whom  I  feared), Hood   (whom  I admired), and  Ray  Fraser,  whom  I  didn't  know. None of us, I suspect, knew that  Literary  History was knocking-that moment  when one's lonely individual efforts have suddenly  passed a  critical  mass and  gained  enough  collective  sub­ stance to set off other writers' alarms.
Our   purpose  was admirably   eleemosynary. We  would  charge  two  hundred
dollars  a  performance -forty  dollars  apiece.  Twice  the  scale  of  Fiddlehead. The  Protestants wouldn't  have us (I  had assumed, until reading  the full story in Metcalf's  Kicking Against the Pricks that  the Protestants  had rejected us because Hugh  was so dreadfully  Catholic), but  the  island  was even  richer  in Catholic schools, and they were agreeable to trying us out.
Money,  then,  was the first goal. John  and  the two Rays were living  hand-to­ mouth  as free-lancers.  Hugh,  as a matter  of principle  (everything  with  Hugh  is a  matter  of  principle)  insists on  top  dollar  for  any  creative  work. Ray  Fraser epitomized  the word, and the consequences, of "free-lancing"; he raised it to an art while writing  characteristically Fraseresque stories for the local tabloid,  Mid­ night, in the Maritime tall-tale genre touched with a bit of the Montreal  macabre:
DAD RAPES INFANT SON; SERVES HIM FOR  DINNER.
Our  second  goal  was a  bit  more  combative.  John  was  tired  of  the  bloody poets getting  all the readings  and  recognition. It seemed to us that  the league of warblers  had  enjoyed  their  monopoly  on  the  stages of  the  country  quite  long enough.  Prose was intrinsically  more interesting  and  easy to follow than  poetry. There's  no  reason  why stories, if limited  to  fifteen  minutes,  should  not  move, delight and instruct  any audience -and still not betray our own high standards. This, it seemed to me, was a battle worth joining.
The third, and most altruistic goal, was to prove something to, and for, Canada. John  had  taught  in the  high schools and  knew the attitudes  of the  boards  and most of the  teachers.  Chesterton  and  Kipling  as moderns.  Morley  Callaghan  or Hugh   Garner   thrown   in  just so the  students  could  thrill  to  seeing  the  word "Toronto" in print. Just think what we could do:  living, young, Montreal,  funny, sexy, bold, dirty writers. We'd  begin that great reaming out, the great scouring of all those corroded  pipes. We'd  have the rarest of all literary  privileges-that of creating our own audience.

IREMEMBER THOSE DRIVES through unfamiliar  but very Cath­
olic parts of the island; a jolly band of prose-troubadors  in my car, or Hugh's.  We


37

BLAISE

were a  hit  from  the  beginning;   I  couldn't   understand  it.  The   bookings  were coming three and sometimes four  times a week. Every  now and  then  I'd  wince at  our  collective arrogance,  inflicting  all  this  shameless  puffery,  this  elevating slobber on immigrant  youngsters whose English needs were for something more rudimentary   and   whose experience  of  literature   was  utterly   virginal.  And   a second later  I'd  think  what  a splendid,  noble thing  we were  doing.  Those  kids were our  perfect audience,  uncorrupted   by ghastly good  taste, analogues  to our purest intentions. Didn't  we want to communicate the real, the actual, the tangible montrealitude?  Didn't  we want  to present ourselves as serious writers  who were also living, imperfect Montreal  presences? Didn't  we pride ourselves on the acces­ sibility of our stories, that  anyone could appreciate them?  Our  proudest  boast in fact was that  unlike Chesterton  and  Conrad,  we were in the  phone  book!  Look us up, call us, talk to us. We drink, we fart,  we get horny,  we make fools of our­ selves, we lust, our lives are usually in a mess, we're afraid  of cops and  taxes, we screw around, and  we're  not ashamed  to show  it.  Like  kindergarten kids  with finger paints, we wallow in it ! We make art of it !
In  a typical reading,  I'd  do one voice from  a segment  of John's  novel, Going Down Slow, where a high school teacher is so drunk  he gets thrown  out of a bar. I read  about  a man  who watches  Greek butchers  popping  calf testicles in  their mouths and sucking; Big Ray Smith did a monologue  on tall girls' fashions with such  intensity  that  he  would  be  crying  while  the  audience   laughed.   Hugh's "Socks" was about  an immigrant  from southern  Italy  who  ends up  working on snow removal in wet socks. And there was Ray Fraser's  unpredictable and never­ repeated  routine,  tall  tales of mounting  disgust,  teetering  over  a  pit   (one  sus­ pected)  of imminent  intervention  from a barely-amused  administration.
Despite all that  (and  of course because if it)  we became  legitimate.  We grew out of the ghetto of Catholic  schools to the  junior  colleges and  university  class­ rooms. We filled the second issue of the  journal  of  Canadian  Fiction  (my  two tales in that  issue, "Is  Oakland  Drowning?"  and  "The Voice of the  Elephant" were inspired  purely by our ensemble readings,  the  need for  levity, brevity, and surreality. I wanted  to be as precise as Metcalf,  as witty as Smith, as various  as Hood,  as irreverent  as Fraser) . We  read  at  the  conventions  of  the  Protestant  teachers. We popped  up in Fredericton,  Saint  John,  and  Ottawa.  We got to be polished, convincing, and even successful in all three of our initial goals.
We were clearly an idea whose time had  come. We were a new generation  of Canadian writing, arriving all at once, in all parts of the country.  The  first book of the movement was Flying a Red  Kite, then Alice Munro's Dance of the Happy Shades. There  were the  two  Clarke-Irwin collections,  plus  the  early  House  of Anansi  books-collections by  Ray  Smith  and  Dave  Godfrey.  Peggy  Atwood was writing The  Edible Woman during  her year at  Sir  George  Williams. Then

BLAISE

came Sixteen  By Twelve, the first national  collection. Then  the Story-Teller; the first national  performance group in fiction.
We were, however, a group very much of our time and place and class-interests:
no French,  no women,  no unseemly minorities.  When  I  think  of our  work, as opposed to Alice Munro's, for example, I see a line of continuity  with the typical French-language Montreal  conte. Our work has a similarity to that of Carrier, Vigneault,  Ferron,  and  Tremblay, though  we in  no  way  consciously emulated them. Merely that  the structures we accepted -a dramatic appeal  to a tangible audience, a firm sense of place and voice and  readership, a political and aesthetic intention-acted as a  different  confinement  from  the  printed   page.  We  were moving toward  compression. It took me an  inordinately  long  time  to write my first novel (if indeed I ever have), the two Rays never have, and John  (I suspect) is most at home in the novella form.
I should also acknowledge  the influence on my work of Hugh  Hood.  His ease of delivery, the way he wraps allegorical significance around  the keenly observed realistic core, the variety of his styles and voices, left me feeling one-dimensional and thin-voiced. It was Hugh  who titled and could easily have written a story like "He  Raises Me Up," and it was for Hugh that I attempted  the supposedly casual­ memoir form, such as "I'm Dreaming of Rocket Richard."
The  Story Teller is now an obscure part of Canadian literary  history. For me, it was the  public  manifestation of my inner  maturing. I  learned,  in  the  group, that  I still needed an ensemble;  despite my immodest flights of fancy, I wasn't yet ready  to stand  alone. I  always had the sense that  of the five, I  was the one the audience  hadn't heard  of, and  I was the one they had to endure  after the famous Hugh Hood and the sexy Ray Smith and the nasty John  Metcalf and the whack-a Ray Fraser. So I learned  to tame myself; to wait. Our  time, each  and separately, would come.




OuR EFFECT? WE ARE   NOW   at  the age of the ageing  rock stars of the sixties; our  real  fire is behind  us but our  best work is still to come. We're  a little too grey and  cranky  to give collective readings.  We've  proven that prose on the podium is interesting and profitable;  we've succeeded in stuffing Canadian literature into every cranny in the curriculum.  And, I fear, we've lived to demonstrate   the  applicability  of Murphy's  Law  to literary  funding.  Official money and government  money will drive out private money. The bureaucracy  will replace  individual  choice  and  initiative.  The  magic,  the  sense of  occasion, the mystery of having a writer  in your presence, of words made  flesh-that is now beyond our students. The  budget for such extravaganzas  has all been lost. In  the


39

BLAISE

way of benevolent  bureaucracies,  everyone gets something -a  lot less of  some­
thing-and the intangibles that truly meant  something  are lost.
We have lived to see a dangerous corollary to our  hardest-won  battles. It goes like this:  if you're in the phone book and if you give readings,  let's  call you up and ask you to read. Anybody, anywhere. I've had calls from high school teachers a thousand  miles away, asking if I  wouldn't  mind  flying out  and  addressing  a tenth-grade class. I've  been at  Canada   Days  and  I've  had  my  ticket  punched down at Harbourfront in Toronto.  This fall in my first long trip  back to Canada in three  years, I'm  giving more than  my  upper  limit  of eight  Canada  Council­ supported  readings. I enjoy it. It's  part of the whole fabric  of  Canadian  life; it's what I dreamed,  it's the literary equivalent  of the CBC's own  national  mandate. But.
But this. Thirteen years ago our Sir George Williams poetry series had an equal mix of Canadian and American poets; now  (I'll  wager)  if it has a series, they're all Canadian. Very few colleges in Canada have anything but Canadian readings. We had a two thousand  dollar  budget for our  readings;  we even  budgeted  our after-reading parties at  seventy-five dollars  for  booze, breads,  and  meats.  I  re­ member  the big pre-reading  dinners at the  best restaurants, and  I remember  the very well-attended,  packed auditorium.
And now, I will be giving my readings this year at one o'clock in the afternoon, in  a  classroom.  No lunch,  no announcements. I  remember   the  weeks it  took, designing posters, picking them  up at a  printer's  and  then  distributing  them  to Montreal's   bookstores and  cafes. Now  there  will  be  a  xeroxed  nine-by-twelve sheet of typing  paper  with a magic marker  announcement of my reading,  taped to  the  door  and  pinned  to  the  cluttered   bulletin   board.  There   will  be  thirty students  for  my  reading-the  same  attendance as the  regular  class.  It  is the regular  class. The  last evening  reading  I've  given,  significantly,  was  not  at  a university, but at  the Jewish  Public  Library  in  Montreal. What  are  we saying? Simply that  people will not come out at night for a Canadian reading.
And,  I fear,  we suffer a surplus of Canadian talent.  Alice Munro is an  esti­
mable writer and probably only second to Mavis Gallant  as a writer of prose, but it's wrong  that  she alone should  be the model  for  all short  story  writing  by all women in this country.  When  I  teach in  Canada all  I  need  are  her  books, At­ wood's novels, and  maybe one or two others  ( Kroetsch  or Wiebe)  depending on the region. There's  something wrong when a Chinese-Canadian  woman  in Mon­ treal has never heard of Maxine Hong Kingston, or a woman concerned  with her Jewish background  has not plunged  beyond  the sensibility of  Mordecai  Richler.
I once had the bizarre experience of being told that  I could fly Audrey Thomas
-a writer I admire  greatly-to Montreal  from Vancouver at Canada Council expense, but couldn't  offer John  Gardner  a fifty-dollar bus fare from  Bennington.

BLAISE


By that  time, you see, Sir George Williams had  given up its private  budget  for other exigencies, and Canada Council was picking up all the tabs.
Good sense and  maturity will eventually  triumph. Excess is never a  cure  for deficiency, and  a less-charged  time  will permit  both  generosity  and  cosmopoli­ tanism. Our  little  revolution  of the sixties needs to be protected  from  too much success; it needs to build on the fact that  Canadian Literature should not  be an end in itself but only a tool of a larger Canadian Studies. We need to redirect  a fraction  of the honoraria and  travel expenses now paid  to keep a thousand  poets and  story-writers  airborne   to  the  dozens of  world-stature  authors  out  there   in Europe, Asia, the Caribbean and Latin America as well as the United States  who would  be  excited  by  the  prospect  of  reading  in  Canada  and  instructing   our students. Otherwise, our little revolution will die of boredom.










BY FL}ISHLIGHT

Roo Borson


Camped out  here once, much  younger,
with  Paul-his muscles all awake  beneath the shirt­
whom  none of us would touch.  Betsy, Jan, and  I
lying wide apart in the clearing like freshly-branded cattle,
wet grass at the edges of our eyes.
The  icy heat,  the paralysis, the wish ...

the stars so far apart up there you could see between  them

but trusted  ourselves even less and so lay there
knowing only what  we felt:
those who ministered to "the  real world" were full of empty  threats.

The firs jut three feet farther into the sky-map  now.
The flashlight  leads us back,
you, my favourite remembered friends: for this we need one set of legs to share, my eyes, and  the flashlight, grazing  frictionless over the ground, as guide.

For my part,  I come back
every few years to take a turn  through these woods, our piece of luck for a summer, eight acres
of redwood  and  huckleberry,
papery  skulls embedded in the forest floor, the bulkier  bones
we could  never assemble: of deer, or stray  cattle, or some other  animal we never saw alive.
Which  of you keeps up the breadbaking, in memory of that  first laughable sunken  loaf?  Which  of you still moons at fourteen-year-old boys for us all?

Sitting by the fire, muscles tired
from  carrying all three of us around.
Funny how little  I've  learned, when  everyone  else has grown taller  around me, like the fir trees,

42

BORSON

shutting out  a little  more light.
The taste of coffee, deep at night, when nobody  could  care. The bat  that sweeps at eye-level through the twilit  house. The hidden inhabitants, the unknown  guests.
Huge forests, fostered  on neglect.
The sensuous, probing spiders. Lights that  get left on all night.
The sudden attack of rain on the roof, anytime.




















I

















43

FORM JIND VJIRIJITION




I named  it heartbreak,
but it was a house in which
I had rented  room.
I named  it loss and  despair;
it was not my own country.

What was the payment
for pleasure in this lodging? I never knew.
*
I named  my house in your name. It was heartbreak.
I knew the payment was pleasure, but you were in despair, lost;
it was not your country.

Why didn't we join in exile? I never knew.
*
I rented  a stranger's room.
It was in your country.
I knew I would find you
if I could make the payment.

Pleasure  was in exile, but we joined in pain.

Was this the longing
that  took me from  my country? Better  to have lost
than  to find refuge in heartbreak.

*
I never knew the currency that  paid me.
 


Marilyn Bowering


44

BOWERING

I wanted to live and  not lose you.

But we were full of heartbreak, in exile from  a country
I never knew.



























45

IN OCTOBER

Elizabeth Brewster


They  are alive after  all, the geraniums with the fresh snow gone.
I consider  trying  to save them
but they are so thick, so deeply rooted, and  I have  no jar big enough
to hold them.

Somewhere in another country south of me
my ex-sister-in-law is dead.

I didn't know her well.
She led my brother a merry  dance all those years ago,
but  I liked her, liked her laugh,
her vivid lipsticked  mouth.

I dig in the garden with my spade, root up tangles of peas and  beans, withered empty  pods,
blackened tomato vines, rotted.

Alone in her car she was, rolled over, broken.
I can't  think  how
it must have been, imagine a gash, red, smeared  on her forehead.

My hands  are cold.
I can't  get the earth tidy, am giving up for the day.

Geraniums, I think,
will just have  to learn  to die like the rest of us

BREWSTER

but  I take  a blossom inside, a small shoot to put in water,
and  fill an empty  can with soil
in case the stem  puts out feelers.

How  do I know it won't survive  the winter,
sit on the window  sill yet gazing  out at snow?






















47

TWO VJIRIJITIONS

Robert Bringhurst


I: THE  READER

for Celia Duthie

... der da mit seinem Schatten I getriinktes liest -Rilke

Who  reads her while she reads?  Her  eyes slide under the paper, into another world
while all we hear of it
or see is the slow surf of turning pages.

Her  mother might  not recognize  her,
soaked  to the skin as she is in her own shadow.
How  could you then? You with  your watch  and  tongue still running, tell me:  how much  does she lose

when she looks up? When  she lifts the ladles of her eyes, how much
flows back into the book, and  how much
spills down the walls of the overflowing world?

Children, playing alone, will sometimes come back suddenly, seeing what it is
to be here, and  their eyes are altered. Hers  too. Words she's never said reshape  her lips forever.


II:  LARIX LYALLII

for Dennis Lee

... es sind I noch Lieder zu singen  jenseits / der Menschen-Celan

In  the threadbare
air, through the tattered weave of leaves,
the blue light cools
into ash-black  shadow.

BRINGHURST

Tree: the high thought roots itself
in the luminous clay
of the caught light's  closeness to audibility.

So we know  that again today,  there are songs still to be sung. They exist. Just  on the other side of mankind.























49

JOURNAL INTIME


Nicole Brossard


Le 26 janvier 1983
II est neuf heures vingt-quatre  et assise a rna table de travail,  je cherche a eviter le quotidien,  ce continu  durable  qui n'a  de cesse qu'au   moment  ou l'on  ne  par­ vient plus adequatement ale  nommer  realite.*  Autour  de moi, tout  ressemble a ce que  j'imagine et j'essaie de m'imaginer  aussi concretement  que  possible. Aussi concrete que possible rna vie qui n'est qu'un  tissu de mots. Qu'il soit cependant  entendu que je n'aime pas faire etat de rna vie, meme entre les lignes.
Aujourd'hui, j'ai relu quelques  pages de ce que  d'autres appelleraient "mon journal."  Mais  je n'ai  jamais eu de  journal  intime.  Tout  au  plus, trois cahiers noirs dans lesquels j'inscris une fois ou deux  par annee  un quelque  chose qui me
permet de verifier que  j'existe encore. D'une  annee  a l'autre, Ie texte varie  peu.
En general, je note "je souffre" et je referme sans plus le cahier. II m'arrive  parfois d'ecrire: j'existe. D'avoir a ecrire j'existe est une preuve qui en temps de crise me
suffit. C'est Ia moindre  des chases que de  ne  pas avoir  a faire  taus  les jours Ia
preuve qu'on existe. C'est Ia moindre des chases bien que  je connaisse des millions
de femmes qui chaque  jour doivent en faire Ia preuve. Certaines  crient, d'autres grimacent, d'autres se tordent de rire, d'autres se frottent  les mains comme pour en faire jaillir le feu, d'autres  se penchent sur un enfant,  d'autres pensent qu'une existence remplie de mots c'est comme un trou nair dans le cosmos; d'autres  disent qu'exister c'est parler dans Ia matiere ou encore qu'exister  c'est tracer  un chemin avec sa bouche et son souffle dans l'infini recommence de Ia matiere.

Dix heures vingt-et-une secondes

Chaque  instant  a son importance pour  ce qui s'eveille en  moi du seul fait  de penser a !'instant. Si Ia vie est faite  d'instants  precieux,  on  ne peut  pas en dire
autant  du quotidien qui minute apres minute  nous engloutit  dans un autre vingt­
quatre  heures auquel  il ne sert a rien de  vouloir  resister.  Aussi, d'un  instant   a
l'autre,  suis-je en train  de m'inventer  comme ce matin,  un avant-midi ensoleille, glacial, blanc. Aveuglant. Blanc. Terriblement blanc. C'est  le temps qu'il  fait:  il fait blanc et lumiere. En ce moment,  tout  n'est  que  vibration. La lumiere  prend toute Ia place, s'infiltre dans I'avant-midi, silencieusement  s'infiltre et c'est comme si je voyais soudainement  tout en details. Toute  Ia chambre dans laquelle je suis est

*Ce texte  a    t crit                                                                                          a  Radio­ Canada, le 8 aoilt 1983.


50

BROSSARD


envahie de mille structures qui comblent l'espace, qui vident l'espace, laissant ainsi les objets familiers sans ombre. 11 n'y a d'ailleurs dans cette chambre que !'indispen­ sable:  le papier, le stylo, la table et moi. Pas meme un dictionnaire, pas une seule regie. Et le givre m'aveugle, c'est le givre; ne me demandez  pas ce que serait rna vie, ne me demandez  pas ce qu'elle fut. Je n'en dirai rien. Ce  journal m'aveugle. Quelle etrange matinee  pour qui aime ecrire.

Dix heures cinquante

Que  peut-on  dire  dans  un  journal  qu'on   ne  le  pourrait   ailleurs?  A  quelle memoire nous adressons-nous lorsque nous pretendons faire revivre un passe, aussi rapproche soit-il? Qu'y-a-t-il de  si intime  dans  un  journal  qui  ne saurait  etre partage,  entame  par  la lecture  de quelqu'un d'autre? lntime. Les Japonais  em­ ploient  !'expression   mono   no  aware  pour  signifier  "l'emouvante  intimite  des choses." C'est  je crois ce qui dans rna vie cotoie la troublante violence des choses. Le volcan. Ce sont  la  des dimensions qui  nourrissent  !'intuition d'une  pratique  existentielle  dont  la  conscience  s'affiche  essentiellement  a  travers  l'ecriture.  Si l'ecriture  est lucidite,  elle  n'en  demeure  pas  moins  le support   d'un   affichage; affichage d'une  vie comme on s'affiche dans un contexte social et politique. Epin­ glee sur le mur  de la culture  rna vie,  mon  texte. Rien  de moins que  cela pour apprendre a  lire.  Et  puis,  qu'est-ce  que  l'intimite  sinon  un  enthousiasme,  une profonde inspiration  de l'etre  qui, comme soudainement  coupe de son souffle, en cherche la source. Ce temps d'arret ou la vie se decide sans qu'il  ne soit possible d'y ajouter  un mot.

Midi, le 26 janvier 1983

Midi,  blanc,  lumiere  sur le reel. Le quotidien  tranche  sur la  realite.  Julie  est assise au  salon  en  train  de  lire  Comment Wang-Fc3  fut  sauve  de  Marguerite Yourcenar.  Sage comme une image comme si la grippe et la greve des professeurs stimulaient  dans les yeux fievreux un gout, une soif pour la lecture. Je pense a la fille de Hilda  Doolittle  qui  dans  sa preface  a  HERmione, raconte  ce quotidien d'une mere qui ne pensait qu'a  ecrire, qui s'enfermait  des heures entieres dans son bureau.  11 y avait  de longs silences suivis comme par  un effet de frayeur  par le crepitement  des frappes  du dactylo. C'etait  toujours:  "Silence, silence, ta mere travaille."  Et Frances  Perdita  Aldington  de dire comment ses deux  meres, Hilda et Bryher etaient en fait pour leur societe victorienne:  Mrs. Richard  Aldington et Mrs. Robert  Me Almon. Oui, le quotidien tranche sur la realite. Le quotidien des couples de femmes. Tous ces couples qui entraient  au salon de Natalie Barney, au
20, rue Jacob,  couples fascinants  de Gertrude  Stein et Alice B. Toklas, de Sylvia Beach et Adrienne  Monnier, de Radcliffe Hall et Una Troubridge. Couples d'ar­ tistes. Comme si couples de femmes etaient  couples d'artistes.  Comme si la crea-

BROSSARD

tion etait une inevitable mise en scene de cette forme d'esprit  qui consiste pour une femme a projeter de tout son etre sur une autre  femme le meilleur d'elle-meme  et qui, comme une intelligence propice a l'imaginaire, lui donne  l'energie  de  con­ cevmr.

28 janvier 1983
11 est bien evident  que tenir  un  journal  c'est  comme  tenir  maison. 11 faut  se faire a l'idee!

30 janvier 1983
Vemissage des dessins, eaux-fortes et gravures de Francine Simonin. J'ai  marche longuement, lentement sur une rue St-Denis triste comme  un dimanche  de lende­ main de la veille. J'aime  marcher  dans rna ville. J'aime tout  ce que  j'y vois parce que cela me force a voir. Et sur la rue St-Denis, je vois simultanement et en alter­ nance trois generations, quatre sexes, des nombres  pairs et impairs qui vont ici au cafe, la a l'eglise, en face ala tabagie, a cote au Sauna.
A la Galerie Treize, sur la rue Duluth,  ce sont les Fetes tribales, les Tribades  et cette belle serie d'Hommages a Maria Callas. Je me promene d'une  piece a l'autre,
attentive  et presente au travail  de Francine.  Puis, a la Galerie  Aubes,  je regarde et regarde  Madone  des Sleepings et plusieurs fois Af adone des Sleepings en  eau­ forte et je me dis qu'il doit certainement  y avoir un rapport  avec rna lecture d'hier  soir. Oui,  tout  cela me revient:  "Un  peu  de  pluie.  Lorsque  nous  dormons,  n'y voyons gouttes. Que  gouttes. Mais attendons que  passe la madone  des sleepings. Qui sechera nos pleurs."
Au retour,  vu de l'autobus,  le pare  Jeanne-Mance m'arrive  a la  hauteur  des yeux comme une sequence d'hiver gris, puis je me deplace  lentement  vers les ter­ rains vagues dans Mama  Roma  de Pasolini. En entrant dans I'image et le temps, a la  hauteur  des yeux, je me surprends  a  imaginer  un  art  de  vivre  qui  puisse contenir toute la nostalgic dont on se sait capable  et dont depend parfois un certain gout pour l'art.

Rome, le 15 mars 1981
De rna chambre,  j'entends la musique annon ant
pare, Piazza  Navona,  contre l'avortement  clandestin. La  manifestation  est  orga­ nisee par le Parti  communiste. Les femmes sont rares, Piazza  Navona,  le bruit  des talons sur la pierre. Bar Navona.
Piazza Navona, l'eglise Ste-Agnese. Marbre, cierges, micros, messe. Piazza  Na­
vona, une femme chante comme pour implorer.  Le micro fait de l'echo.
A !'hotel,  un portier se tient a l'entree,  les mains  derriere  le dos;  il regarde,  la tete un  peu toumee  vers la gauche,  un  jeune  homme  blond.  A la  reception,  les sensations sont vives. A la caisse, un homme appuie sur des chiffres.


52

BROSSARD

Piazza  Navona,  en sortant  de l'hotel,  une femme noue lentement  son foulard autour  de son cou. I1 fait froid dans la Rome lumineuse. Piazza Navona,  j'achete un recueil de poemes de Pasolini:  Poesia in  forma di rosa.

Rome,le 31 juillet 1963
Une  nuit  si claire.  Une  lune  merveilleuse. Sonia,  Dante  et  Vincente.  Nous marchons  jusqu'au  Colisee. C'est  fameux  Rome la nuit.  A un  moment,  j'ai  cru etre un personnage de Fellini. Mais cela n'a  pas dure longtemps et j'ai gache  un peu la nuit en me demandant si un personnage fellinien etait dans rna tete, feminin ou masculin.  Plus tard  dans la  journee du I er  aout I g63, nous avans  marche le long de la Via  Appia.  Nous nous sommes arretes  dans  un  petit  bistrot  et  nous avons ri et bu. Mais qu'est-ce que le rire d'une fille de vingt ans?
2 feurier 1983
J'ai  reu
dependance que  j'ai  a l'egard  de chaque  mot  ecrit  par  toi.  De  la  plus banale remarque a la moindre ellipse, chaque lettre tracee par toi justifie man fetichisme de la carte postale. Et puis, il y a des mots qui me font trembler. Aujourd'hui, je sais que le temps va s'organiser  autour  de ce que  je lis de toi, de ce que je vois de toi dans cette calligraphic.  Etta signature, une initiale, indechiffrable  pour qui ne la connait  pas. Depuis notre premiere rencontre,  je n'ai epuise aucune  des images que  j'ai de toi. Chacune est intacte,  integrale,  une. C'est sans doute  ce que  l'on nomme la tension amoureuse. Une tension qui vide de leur sens les mots que l'on pourrait  prononcer.  Je sais, dans ces moments, qu'il n'en  est aucun  qui puisse reellement  signifier. Les mots deviennent  alors des formes  dans  l'espace  mental. Ils sont comme des signes qui dessinent la structure  meme  de la tension. Ce sont ces mots qui  m'interessent,  ces mots qui, isoles ou regroupes, n'ont  de sens qu'a travers la forme ephemere  que  je puis entrevoir. Je ne parle pas ici d'organisation linguistique, je parle ici d'une forme energetique qu'a moi il m'arrive  de fantasmer en empruntant a deux categories:  les mots et la pensee.
3 fevrier 1983
J'ai  consacre  toute  rna  journee  a lire la  traduction   anglaise  de  L'amer  dont Barbara  Godard  vient de m'envoyer  la version finale. Travail epuisant  que  celui de la lecture  en traduction de l'un  de ses propres textes. Epuisant  parce  qu'aux operations  mentales  que l'on  execute en redigeant  le texte, s'ajoute  un  processus que  j'appellerais,  le devoilement.  Car ce que nous choisissons de cacher  dans  un texte, voila, qu'il faut  maintenant le devoiler. La au la critique,  par exemple, ne peut que presumer, rever ou imaginer un sens ace qu'elle lit, la traduction cherche ale certifier. C'est dans cette certification que je dais affronter  ce a quai  je m'etais consciemment  et scrupuleusement derobee. Etre traduite,  c'est etre enquetee  non


53

BROSSARD

pas seulement dans ce que l'on croit etre mais dans sa fac;on meme de penser dans une  langue,  de  meme  que  dans  la  fac;on dont   nous  sommes  pensees  par  une
langue. C'est avoir a s'interroger  sur cette autre  que  je pourrais  etre si je pensais
en anglais, en italien  ou en toute  autre  langue.  Quelle  loi, quelle  morale,  quel paysage, quel  tableau  me  viendrait  done  alors  a l'esprit?  Et  qui  serais-je  dans
chacune  de ces langues? Que  m'eut  reserve la feminite  en  italien? Quel  rapport aurais-je  eu a mon corps si j'avais eu  a le penser  en anglais?  Comment  le mot
kimono, s'il m'eut ete quotidien, eut-il modifie rna fac;on de seduire et de travailler? La question qui se pose en traduction comme en ecriture  est celle du choix. Quel signifiant privilegie, elire pour animer en surface les multiples signifies qui s'agitent invisibles et efficaces dans le volume de la conscience? C'est formellement  que  je dais compenser  pour  que  l'energie  qui  alimente  rna  pensee  ne se retourne   pas contre moi, pour que la langue elle-meme ne se retourne  pas contre la femme que Je SUlS.
Comment le mot kimono,s'il m'eut ete quotidien ... Tokyo, le 17 mai 1982
Une  ombre  est un theme  indecidable  du  haut  de Tokyo  Tower.  Du  haut  de Tokyo Tower,  c'est en costume nair d'ecoliere  que les filles songent  qu'un  grand kimono les retient. Mais l'abime, mais l'abime.
Ce matin,  j'ai marche dans les rues de Tokyo. Assez longtemps  malgre l'heure matinale  oil les rues sont encore desertes. A cinq heures du matin,  je cherche  un endroit pourboire un cafe et ecrire. J'ai  trouve, dans le quartier  de Roponggi,  un Dunkin  Donuts et je sais que malgre l'apparence internationale du  comptoir  que je suis bel et bien au Japan. Malgre "you were on my mind" et "I had  a dream"
qui jouent sans cesse. Je suis a Tokyo entre la realite et une fiction. Je suis videe de
toute  passion. Je suis une mer de silence entre  le passe et le present. Je suis une
Geisha assise devant  son ordinateur, tenant  dans  rna main  gauche  un  beigne au miel et dans rna droite un stylo que je tiens a la verticale  pour en quelques signes,
tracer la sensation de vertige que j'ai eprouve hier matin du haut de Tokyo Tower.

Kyoto,le 27 mai 1982
Le Pavilion d'or  luit dans l'etang  comme la poitrine  de Mishima.  Je  dais me resaisir. M. me prend le bras et nous avanc;ons avec beaucoup  de concentration parmi les petits sentiers qui sillonnent les abords du Pavillon.

Kyoto,le 28 mai 1982
Je sais que bientot les mots me manqueront pour  parler. J'oscille entre  le sacre et le profane comme un moine qui compte sa monnaie.  Chaque temple  m'emeut, chaque  jardin.  En  litterature,  on  n'a   jamais  compte  autant de  suicides.  C'est


54

BROSSARD

pourtant par millions qu'il  faudrait ici parler de sourires. C'est une etrangete  qui me va droit au cortex. 11 ne faudrait pas ici parler de signes. 11 s'agit  tout simple­ ment  d'une  marque  d'attention que  je porte  a la douceur  de  la  soie  quand  il
m'arrive  de froler une passante en kimono.

Kyoto, le 29 mai 1982
En m'eveillant, j'ai vu ton epaule et instantanement la porte en papier  de riz; entre les deux, les arbres du  jardin. Dans le corridor,  j'entends  les pas feutres de quelqu'un qui  vient.  Le tatami  s'est deplace  pendant  notre  sommeil. Tu  ouvres les yeux. Lethe est servi. Nous buvons lentement. Chaque  gorgee est une vision du Ryoan-ji.

Le 4  fevrier 1983
J'ai  dephase d'un  jour Ia date de man  journal afin d'imaginer Ia sensation que cela pourrait  me procurer  de penser que  j'ecris demain.  Hier,  j'ai follement  at­ tendu  une  lettre,  une  carte   postale  qui  n'est  jamais  venue.  Aujourd'hui,  j'ai
commence a lire la traduction de Finnigans Wake. Je me suis arretee a Ia page 83:
"Mais  attendons  que  passe la  madone  des sleepings. Qui  sechera  nos  pleurs." Dans la  joumee,  j'ai lu aussi que Joyce avait  dit  a propos d'Ulysse:   "J'ai ecrit
x8livres en x8langues."
11 fait  un froid a fendre  l'ame.  Je  m'interroge  sur  Ie fragment. Fragment  de
sensations, de vie, d'oeuvre. Je  m'examine  par en-dedans  et  je ne decouvre  rien qui  puisse pour  le moment  soutenir  man  attention.   Je  prefere  me  remettre  a
plus tard.
C'est une belle joumee. Je n'y suis pour rien. Je m'interroge sur le fragment  et sur ce qu'il faudrait entendre par I'expression:  une joumee dans la vie de Nicole Brossard.







55

MOUNTJIINS
 


Michael Bullock


Once  more I look out  through my window at the mountains across the bay
the mountains gaze back over the rooftops
with teeth  bared in a cold white  smile

The air between is another wall of glass a wider window stretching to the sky
no message passes through from  the mountains to me and  the birds are black notes lost on a lineless page











TWO POEMS



NEUCH)ITLITZ

Not many  people live
in Neuchatlitz anymore. The old ones die
The young ones
move away

We saved some money
and  got a government grant and  worked  like hell
and  ran  a water pipe
from  the freshwater spring on Nootka  island
across the bed of mothersea to our  village.
The water here
IS scarce
and  so full of minerals your throat chokes
if you try to drink  it.

It wasn't always like that.
Maybe the cannery did something before it closed
or maybe  the copper mine or the mills.
They  all did a lot of blasting and  the rock kind of shifted and split.

There were too many freighters in Tahsis harbour
so they gave permission for a big ship
to anchor offshore  here.

the anchor
smashed through our waterpipe
 


Anne Cameron



57

CAMERON

That was eight  years ago and  nobody claims responsibility

We bring water  in tin cans
by outboard across the waves from  Nootka  island

We got no more money to build a new pipe

They'd just bust it again

The government wants us all to move somewheres  else

The old ones die the young ones move away.



IRIS

Iris didn't look on it as a miscarriage
she figured it was her baby.
But the priest
wouldn't let her bury it in the cemetery.
He said she had  to go to the hospital  with it
and  they'd  check her over and
dispose of the foetus.

So she got out of bed, her eyes dry as summer
and  dark  as cigarette burns in a wool blanket
and  she took it
to the old graveyard.

CAMERON

She dug  a hole
with  her bare  hands
and  laid the blanket wrapped mess on a bed of leaves,
She wanted to cry but couldn't
and  as she started to fill the hole
all the old people
who'd  followed  her began  to sing
the old words
to the old songs,
and  they went  to her, and  touched her,
with loving  hands,
and  wept for her because she couldn't.

they tapped the drum and  shook the rattles

one old man danced goodbye
on stiff skinny legs

they weren't disposing of a foetus

they were havin  a funeral for Iris' baby

then  we went  to her house and  drank tea
and  held  her
while she cried










59

DEUX POEMES

Paul Chamberland


L'ENIGME

Plus d'images. Plus de mots.
Les yeux ouverts,  vous marchez, la, dans  la maison,  d'une piece a l'autre.
La minute suivante ne vous appartient pas.
Vous ne savez plus prevoir.

Le jour baisse.
Vous vivez dans une ville. Tout peut  arriver.
Vous  ne vous en  remettez plus  a ce que  vous  desirez,  ou  a ce qui  vous inquiete.
Vous  ne  comprenez meme   plus  ce  que  cette  question, qui   je
suis, veut dire.
Qa vous arriverait pour  la  premiere fois. Pour  la premiere fois a ce point-la.

Vous  avez  decide  de  ne  plus  ajourner cette  chose  qui  roam­
tenant prend  toute  laplace.
Mais  cette  chose, vous  ne  savez  pas,  vous  n'arrivez pas  a voir
ce que c'est.
Vous  persistez a ecarter mots et  images  pour  ne pas risquer  de perdre cette chose,
sa densite,
l'insistance de l'appel qu'elle obtient de vous. Vous ne vous laissez pas distraire.

Oil cela devrait-il vous mener? Au bonheur?
Ala verite?
Mais ce sont la si facilement des mots. Cette chose, l'enigme.
La nuit est tout a fait  tombee  a pvesent. Vous sortez.
Vous  marchez  au   hasard. Vous   changez  de  direction   assez souvent.

6o

CHAMBERLAND


Qa  pourrait etre  une  nuit  de  mai,  tiede,  lumineuse, chargee d'odeurs.
Sainte, oui, sainte,
parce  que vous en accueillez le bienfait par  tous vos pores. Parce  que tout, en vous, va au-devant.

Que  pourrait-il alors se produire?
Seriez-vous  seul a ce moment-Ia, ou  auriez-vous ete  rejoint en
route  par  des compagnons,
qui en seraient au meme  point que vous? Auriez-vous cesse, simplement, d'en  douter?

Est-ce que ce serait  un peu
comme de s'abandonner a la douceur de mourir,
les yeux ouverts,
enfin?




UN LIVRE DE MOR:zlLE

(trois extraits)


Je suis force  d'inventer pour  ne pas perir-fuite en avant dans
!'improbable. Quand au  dehors  la fin de  non-recevoir est coupante comme un trente sous zero.
Quand l'embleme de mon amour  est un enfant au  regard franc que  le monde chasse de partout comme  un geneur.
Quand le chef de l'Empire couvre les assassins du  peuple  Maya, quand  il  fait   interdire un  film  sur  la  terrification  nucleaire  des vivants, alors  que  dans  ce film on voit et on entend une femme,  qui
est  un  medecin, repercuter, avec  les mots  de !'intelligence  respon­
sable,  l'appel des femmes  et des enfants que  se prepare a engloutir
l'engrenage genocide des Etats.
Pour  detourner de mon  coeur  le collapse  de  rage  accumulee et emmuree,
je suis force  d'inventer chaque matin des  strategies pour  mon amour:
oui,  du  moins,  garantir cela: tenir  debout, et  rester  secourable dans  l'etat d'urgence.
Du moins, cela, c'est retablir le souffle en soi et hors de soi,
c'est  defendre en son integrite la semence  du  recommencement du monde.

61

CHAMBERLAND


Oui,  chaque jour,  je me  souviens  que  je  porte  en  mon  corps
!'engramme genetique d'une puissance qui fait  tourner les galaxies.
Et j'honore, en osant  contre tout  espoir l'echappee, !'heritage de
Ia jubilation c11eatrice.

*   *    *
A tout  moment le vent  nucleaire peut  souffier le ciel par-dessus nos tetes. Done  cet  instant a deja  eu  lieu.  Nous  ne vivons  plus  que
d'une existence  provisoire,  mais  c'est  d'un effet  magnifique: notre splendeur, enfin  soustraite  a tout   souci  d'avenir, peut   etre   jouee
sans restriction, depensee  sans retenue. Nous multiplions sur nous les couleurs,  nous  arborons  nos  parures  d'immoies, nous  fascinons le regard  des dieux; irradies nous  passons d'un coup  ala condition des astres,  au  surflamboiement du  stade  terminal, a la  supreme extase des novae.

*   *    *
Compagnon parallele au-dessus
je marche sur la terre dans  l'ombre de tes ailes.

Mon coeur se serre, je ne vois plus.
Ai.je  done  ere  cet  enfant qui  fon<;ait au-devant de !'eclat  in- augural de ta venue ici-bas?
Depuis longtemps tombe  en cendres,
mon coeur est le nid deserre  d'un phenix infecond. Et la frontiere, avec moi, se defait,
-aire grise desolee ou boire est amer.

Compagnon parallele au-dessus
je marche ou nulle trace,  qu'interrompue, n'est laissee de ton retour.






DIX POEMES

Cecile Cloutier


Mes mains
Interrogent
Toutes les lumieres
Du froid

*
J'aime tant mamaison
que  j'entends sa toux

* Tout le
bleu
du monde est
blanc
J'ai fin de toi

*
Des cris soyeux Creusaient des nids Des feuilles de bois Ecoutaient

J'etais un fruit

* Assumer l'ogive
de rna main

*
De grandes plumees  de verbes
Attendaient
Dans  le nid de mes poemes

*

CLOUTIER

11 aurait fallu t'aimer
Aussi fin
Qu'une fougere
Ecrit ses feuilles

*
Une  goutte  de bois
Dans tes yeux
Pour  terminer un chagrin

*
Mon  demier mot
Je veux le dire
A un enfant
Dans l'octobree des feuilles

*
Et s'illuminerent
Les grands  pas bleus
Tout au bord
De rna patience

Quelque chose se terminait

*








NOTES ON REALISM IN MODERN ENGLISH-CANADIAN FICTION


Matt  Cohen


A "REALISTIC NOVEL" IS usuALLY  TAKEN to mean a
novel in which narrative is the connecting thread,  in which not only does thought
or action lead to subsequent  connected  thought  or action,  but  does so in groups of words organized into logical sentences, paragraphs, chapters, etc.
But "realistic  novels" are also novels written  about  "reality"-as opposed  to novels perceived  to  be about  something  which is not  "real." Thus,  aside from realistic novels there are novels which are termed gothic, or science fiction, or fantasies, or dream  journals, or simply "experimental"-a class of novel which conjures  up the image of a fanatically  mad scientist blindly pounding  at  a  type­ writer  (or, latterly, a word processor) .
In   Canada, the  novelistic  technique   most  practised   by  writers,  and   most accepted  by readers,  critics,  and  academics,  has been  from  the  beginning  and still remains the conventional realistic narrative, though there have been some interesting  innovations.  One  of the  characteristics  non-Canadians always notice about  Canadian novels is that  an amazingly  large  proportion  of them  are set in the country. Even of that  fiction set not in the countryside but in the city, much portrays the city not as a cosmopolitan centre but as a small town.
There is, I think, a political reason for this.
Canada, like the  rest of the  "developed" countries,  is a  place  in  which  the dominant way of life is an urban  one. Just  as American  culture  is dominated  by Los Angeles and  New York, as British culture is dominated  by London, as French culture  is dominated  by Paris, so, too, is English-Canadian culture  dominated  by Toronto.
But Toronto  dominates  English-Canadian culture  merely in  the  sense that  it is the centre of the media-that it is the place from which the dominant images of television, films, magazines, and  books are distributed.  But the  place of origin of those images  is rarely  Toronto -like a dutiful  suburb  Canada watches  the television shows that  are produced  in New York, Los Angeles, and  London,  goes


6s

COHEN

to movies originating  all over the world, reads imported  magazines  or designs its own magazines so that  they are almost indistinguishable in format  and  ideology from those that come from across the border.
Canada has not fully developed its own distinct way of regarding  its own urban life. Although  it is very different to live in a Canadian city than  in an American or British one, the articulation  of the experience  of living in  a Canadian city is not part of the national consciousness. The  Canadian writer  and  reader  have not developed a common vocabulary for talking  about  the lives that  they share.
On the other hand, Canadian rural literature has its own developed  myths, its own way of being talked about. Thus it is in Canada that  much of its best fiction describes geographic realities in epic terms, where the characters  are almost over­ whelmed  by their surroundings.  I am thinking  of the  novels of Frederick  Philip Grove, Ernest  Buckler's The  Mountain and  the  Valley, The  Manawaka  novels of Margaret Laurence,  Alice Munro's  short  stories, the  prairie  novels of  Rudy Wiebe and  Robert  Kroetsch, David  Adams  Richards' Maritime novels, the  west coast novels of Harlow and  Hodgins-one could go on indefinitely. Even  those novelists like MacLennan, Callaghan, and  Davies,  who set  their  novels in  the cities, tend to populate them with those who exemplify the protestant conservative rural  ethic  which  has  been  the  basis of  English  Canada's-especially  central Canada's -economic and moral strength.




REALISM AS  A  LITERARY MOVEMENT  derives its power from the fact  that  it goes beyond  literature-the making  of  words  and  books-to making  real  the  inchoate  energies  and   images  that   lie  in  the  centre  of  the imagination.
The  great  characters  of fiction  are  universal:   Pinocchio  and  his  nose, Don Quixote's  perpetually  ridiculous  escapades,  Captain Ahab  in  pursuit  of  Moby Dick, might  even  be said  to exist apart  from  the  novel  or folktale  or  play in which  they  first appeared; for  not  only  do  we  remember   them  for  whatever scene the writer  placed them in, but  we also recognize other  situations  in which they would be comfortable.
Yet, despite the fact that  there is an international consciousness in which such characters   can  take  root,  each  one  also  springs  from  a  particular  person,  a particular  place.



When  I  was growing  up,  a student  in  high  school  and  university,  I  under­
stood that American  books were American,  British books British -but  I had  no


66

COHEN


idea  what  a  Canadian book  was. I  had  read  Canadian books, of  course, but although  the poetry had struck me as distinct, the novels seemed generally written by people who lived in New York or London.
Then,  a little  more than  ten years ago, I spent  two weeks at  a friend's  house
babysitting their cats. On the kitchen table I found four books: Fifth Business by Robertson  Davies, As For Me  and My  House by Sinclair  Ross, The  Stone  Angel by Margaret  Laurence, The Mountain and the Valley  by Ernest  Buckler. Each of these books was  well-known  in  Canada-and  had  been  published  interna­ tionally  as well -yet  I  myself, starting  to write  in  a literature  about  which  I knew virtually nothing,  had  never felt any particular  curiosity about  them. They were, I thought,  books by people of a different generation  from me, so antiquated that I couldn't  possibly find in them anything of interest.
Fifth  Business had  just been published to much  acclaim.  As For Me  and My House was thirty years old -it had first been published in I 94 I but had recently been re-issued. The  Stone  Angel  was first published in I964.  The  Mountain and the Valley had come out in I952, but was now reprinted in paperback.
Not only was there a wild disparity of publication dates, but also of geography:
the books were set in places from the Maritimes to the Prairies, almost the whole breadth  of Canada.
But despite the wide range of time and place, the books might have issued from one mind -not the mind of a person but of a people. What  was being revealed was not the life story of one -or four-individuals, but  what  might  be called our own national  character -or at least the national  character  of a certain  kind of Canadian: the anglo-saxon small-town protestant conservative.
Three things struck me about this national soul-baring.
First, that the most hidden secret, the secret that could not be told, yet was completely obsessing, was sexuality.
Secondly, that  the bond  no one could articulate,  yet that  surrounded, limited, CYen nourished their lives, was the bond to the land.
Finally, that  although  the characters  in the books lived their lives as best they could, their lives were largely lived unlived. That  is-they  had  sacrificed what they wanted to do in order to do what they ought to do. In  all cases, it might  be added,  this sacrifice  of desire to duty  had  disastrous  consequences  not  only for those who made  the sacrifice, but  also for those around  them  upon  whom they took out their bitterness and resentment.




In Canada, as in many other countries, the 196o's was a decade of tremendous ferment  and  unrest.  The  "unlived  lives" of the  previous generation  became  the

COHEN

fuel for the explosion out of the old constricting  bonds into a new utopian  hedon­ ism. Along with the desire to topple the old political  and  moral  order  came  the impulse for an aesthetic revolution.
In  art  forms  other  than  literature,  this  revolution  was  hardly  new  with  the
I g6o's. Painting  had  for decades been dominated by forms  other  than  realism. Music, too, had long broken from traditional forms. One  could go through  other arts,  too,  everything  from  sculpture  to  dance,   and   one  would  find  that   the nineteenth-century realist forms had  long since  been  replaced  by a  new  main­ stream -itself ever-changing and constantly being re-developed -a mainstream based solidly on the corpse of realistic/representational art  and  dedicated,  in all its changing forms, to finding a non-realistic basis for artistic expression.
In fiction, the equivalent  of painterly  realism is of course the narrative novel, a kind of novel which had  in many  ways reached  its peak  of expression  by the end of the last century.
But what has realism been succeeded by in the contemporary novel?
Modernism -it  might  be  said.  First  of  all  James   Joyce,  who  substituted stream-of-consciousness for  narrative  sequence-and then  Stein,  Woolf,  et  al. But  the  experiments  of Joyce  were one  of  a  kind.  And  similarly  the  literary voyages of Stein,  Woolf, Ford  Madox  Ford,  Faulkner, all had  much  to  recom­ mend  them,  but  unlike the  preceding  realistic  tradition they  did  not  pave  the way for further  experiments  in the same  line. They  were  not a  school,  though some might be grouped  together in retrospect.  They  were much more a group  of eccentrics,  mutually  interested,  perhaps,  but  not  mutually  dependent   for  the development  of techniques  which  they  borrowed  from  each  other  and  used  to "advance" the novel in some recognizable joint way.
In fact, despite the literary experiments of the early part of the century, the mainstream  of the  English language  novel has continued   to be that  of realistic fiction.
In  Canada  this is especially true.  Although  there  was, among  the  Canadian poets, a highly developed formalistic  debate,  and  a  participation in  the  various international theories of poetics, fiction was a different case.
Morley Callaghan, Frederick  Philip Grove, Hugh  MacLennan, Hugh  Garner, Ernest Buckler, Sinclair  Ross, Margaret  Laurence  all shared  an  absolute formal adherence  to the  centre of the fictional mainstream. If one  imagines  a  cocktail party  of world fiction writers active  between  I 920 and  I g6o  one  could  expect many  a  bizarre  costume.  But  the  English Canadians would  have  arrived  as  if dressed for church.
Amazingly  enough,  that  is still largely the  case. Of  our  internationally well­
known fiction writers -one  might  name  Robertson  Davies,  Margaret  Atwood,


68

COHEN


Margaret  Laurence, Alice Munro,  Mavis  Gallant,  Mordecai  Richler-none is considered avant-garde or formally experimental.
Despite  the  prevalence  of realism, however, there  have  been  many  successful
departures from  it.  One  might  name  such  books as Leonard  Cohen's  Beautiful Losers, Robert  Kroetsch's  The  Studhorse  Man, the deliberately  bizarre  fantasies of Michael  Ondaatje as well as perhaps a dozen other novels and  groups of short stories. But these books remain  isolated experiments. And although  these  experi­ ments  have  often  been  enthusiastically   welcomed  by  critics  eager  to  see  the emergence  of a "post-modern" Canadian literature,  "post-modernism" in  Can­ ada is more alive as a critical theory than as a group of books.
But  within  the  mode  of  realism  itself there  have  been  two  interesting  inno­
vations.
The  first has been the development  of the Canadian  taste for the  writing and reading  of short stories. Thus  while short stories are a form  which  hardly  exists in some literatures -and  is a commercial  disaster in  most others-in  Canada they are  often  considered  to be Canada's leading  prose product.  And  thus  it is not  only internationally but  also at  home  that  many  of our  most  widely read writers are principally authors of short stories.
Of  these writers  the  best known  work in  the  traditional   narrative  form;  but there  are  also  many  experimentalists   among  the  short  story  writers,  who  al­ though  they have not attained  the commercial success of the realists, have made careers  and  gathered  audiences  for a form other  than  pure  realism.
Not so among  the novelists. There  is no figure in Canada comparable  to Itala Calvina,  or  Gabriel  Garda  Marquez, or  Carlos  Fuentes.  There  are,  of course, admirers  and even imitators  of the new forms of writing, but no Canadian writer has yet struck  a widely responsive chord  with  his own original  form  of writing.
By this I don't  mean to say Canada has not its visionary writers. Canada's best
novels are  completely  achieved  in  the  imagination,  full  and  resonant  re-seeings of their fictional worlds-but they are visions of Canada  itself, the land  and  its people-not a  world  of  formal  or  aesthetic  play. Thus,   for  example,  Rudy Wiebe's The  Temptations of Big Bear, Margaret  Laurence's The  Diviners, Robert Kroetsch's Badlands are novels in which an actual re-seeing of the land is the most important event in the novel.
In  this we encounter the second major  way Canadian fiction has changed  its idea of realism.
Nineteenth-century novels had  characters  playing out  their  dreams  with  each other  against  a static  background. But  in  many  Canadian  novels, the  climax of the novel occurs when   the characters  turn away from each other to re-examine
-and re-make-the relationship  between  themselves and  the stage on  which
the more superficial action of the book is set.


6g

COHEN

This  strange   innovation -solving the   problems  in  the  foreground   by  re­
arranging the  background -is well suited  to  Canada and  Canadians.
The  Canadian reality is a discontinuous  one in terms  of history. In  this way it is radically  different  from  European   countries.  Countries  of the  Old  World might  be seen  first of all  as  having  a  dual  history  of  man  and  landscape - that  is the land, the way it has been used, the edifices and  civilizations that  have literally  been  built  upon  it -and  parallel  to  the  history  of  human   alteration of the landscape  runs the  history of the  various  peoples and  empires  that  lived there.  Between  person  and  earth   has  been  a  gradually   evolving  relationship. Obviously  it  begins at  the  time  when  the  peoples  of  Europe,   as  everywhere, lived  an  existence  dependent  on  hunting   and  primitive  agriculture. But  over many  millennia,  the hunting  and  agriculture became  increasingly  sophisticated, even  aided  by  machines-and thus  the  once  primeval  forest  landscape   was de-forested  and  has  become  an  agricultural and  industrialized   land-mass.
In  the  New World,  the  change  from  primordial  land  mass to  industrialized and technological society was a much  more sudden  one. Most of the agricultural heartland  of Canada  was primal  forest or  untouched  grasslands  as little  as two hundred  years ago. Most of it, only one hundred  years ago, still maintained its integrity.  Only  the  building  of the  transcontinental railway  at  the  turn  of this century  changed  Canada   from  a  country  in  which  native  peoples  could  still dream of living well, in the old way, to one in which a modern  technological  way of life seemed the only long-term possibility for survival.
Furthermore, the rapid and drastic  change  which Canada underwent  was not a change made by those who had  habitually  lived there. It  was a change  imposed by settlers from  across the ocean,  a change  based on  ideas that  had  originated elsewhere.
The  difference  between English-Canadian literature and  European literatures
might  be said,  therefore,  to  reside in  the  fact  that  while  for  European  litera­ tures  the  Garden   of  Eden  is a  place  described  in  the  Bible,  in  Canada  the Garden  of Eden is secretly-and guiltily -thought to be what there was before the white man came and destroyed North America.
It  follows, naturally,  that  the literatures  of the  two  continents  have  different ideas of "grace." To  European  writers grace  is a spiritual  state  attained in  the relationship  between  man  and  God.  But  in  most  Canadian novels, grace  is to be found in a redeemed relationship  between man and  nature -a climax where somehow,  through  some  form  of  penitence  or  madness,  the  white  European man  or woman  bursts out  of his whiteness and  throws  himself upon  the  mercy of the  world  of nature-which  he has  previously  violated -and  then  is  for­ given and made whole.

COHEN



CANADA IS  AN  IMMENSE  COUNTRY which  overpowers  its inhabitants' capacity  to hold in their minds the idea of where they live.
The  difficulty of holding  the  physical idea  of Canada in  the  imagination   is equalled  by Canada's inability  to imagine  itself politically. Thus  while the  rest of the world has spent the last few years mired in the problems of sagging econo­ mies, Canada-whose  economy  is sagging deeper  than  most-has  continued  to be preoccupied  by the saga of bilingualism, the patriation of the  constitution, and controversy over switching to the metric system.
The  Canadian novelist, who after all reflects as well as invents his times, must like everyone  else try  to  fill in  his  consciousness that   most  bizarre  gap -the lack of a country.  This  he does by continually re-inventing  the country  in which his novels would take  place -if  there were a place for them  to take place in.












CULTURE AS CARICATURE

Reflections on a continuing obsession: Newfoundland

Michael  Cook





NEWFOUNDLAND  occuPIES A   UNIQUE, and   little  undcr­ stood, place in North  American  history. It  was occupied  by Irish,  English,  and Basque fishermen long before that  unscrupulous  adventurer, Sir  Humphrey Gil­ bert, claimed it for Queen  Elizabeth in the dying stages of the sixteenth  century. Prior to that, in  the tenth century it had been settled for two years by the Vikings, as  recent  excavations  on  the  northeast   coast  have  proved. It  was,  however, always a survival  culture.  Whereas  settlement  on  the  Eastern  seaboard   of  the United  States  proceeded  in  a somewhat  orderly  fashion,  with  studied  attempts to re-create an orderly society, Newfoundland  always remained  an outpost.  Per­ manent  settlement  would  disrupt  the  business of  English  merchants,   and   the Navy, recognizing  that  people trained  to fish in  the  most  violent  waters  in  the world  were  valuable,  used  the  Grand  Banks  as a  natural training  ground  for press-ganged sailors. Always destitute,  a  place  from  which  things  were  taken, not  developed,  Newfoundland   became  a  place  for  the  dispossessed:  from  the famines in Ireland, the land  enclosures in England, people came,  hid, survived. Their   language   was,  until   recently,   eighteenth-century  Wexford,   Cork,   the west coast of England.  Sea wanderers,  they established  a commonality  of place and  tongue  unique  in  North  America.  There   were  highly  ritualistic   rites  of passage;  the  annual   seal  hunt  followed  by  the  summer   journey  to  the  cod fishery off the  Labrador  coast,  beset by fog, storms,  icebergs.  For  four  hundred  years this people moved in ways unknown  to the rest of the world, a mixture  of Celt  and  Anglo-Saxon  that  survived  because  the  nature   of  the  environment determined  that  it  was  more  important to  depend  upon  your  neighbours  than it was to keep old  animosities alive. Obviously, in survival  cultures,  art  does not flourish, but, with the advent of Union with Canada, roads, radio, television, the inevitable  happened, hastened  by politicians  and  bureaucrats who  slavered  at the  prospect of being able  to  practice  planned  obsolescence on  people.  Within two  decades,  the  ritual  and  mythology,  as  practised   in  reality,  died.  And  in the death  throes the sleeping, visionary spirit of the soul of Newfoundland  mani-

COOK


fested itself in the imaginations of those whose task it is to  record  the  joys and agonies of life about them, the artists.
Their  emergence coincided,  uncannily,  with the beginning of the Resettlement
Program,  an  assault  upon  a  traditional way of life unparalleled   since  the  en­ forced  evictions  from   Ireland, Scotland,   and   England   that   had   brought  so many settlers to the Maritimes. Joey Smallwood and  the Ottawa  bureaucrats he imported   to  implement   the  program   loved  it.  Drag  in  the   people  from  the myriad  outer  islands  and  headlands   about  the  coast,  the  reasoning  ran,  pay them a cash settlement-from $r,ooo to $3,000-and bundle them into growth areas   where  they   could   join  in   the   great   industrial   programs   that   would catapult  Newfoundland from  the  eighteenth  to  the  twentieth   century   within a decade.  Medicare  and  education  would be free for  all, and  their  souls would flourish in magnificent  cathedrals erected  by  soaring  technology ! Other  nations were  already   instituting   programs   that  used   technology  to  make  it  possible for  those in  remote,  poorly  serviced  areas  to  stay  put,  and  at  the  same  time enrich their lives. Newfoundland did the reverse.
The  reality? For many,  of course, there  were obvious benefits from improved health  care  and  education, and  access to social amenities.  But  for  many  too, it  was also  a  bitter  and  heartrending loss. They  left  behind  fine  three-storey homes, made  by their fathers  and  forefathers. They  left behind  instant  access to the  best  fishing  grounds  on  the  coast.  They  left  behind   noble,  high-steepled wooden churches,  built by their own hands. They left behind  their sense of identification   and  place  and  community.  They  left  behind  the  bones of  their ancestors. They left behind their history.
It  took time for the  reality  to sink in but  I  think,  finally, most  realized  that a blow  had  been struck  at  the  psyche of  Newfoundland  from  which  it  might never  recover.  Many  of  the  attitudes  adopted  by Brian  Peckford  and  his  col­ leagues, supported  by  the  people,  have  their  roots in  the  moral  and  physical anguish  created   by  resettlement,  and   Newfoundland's continuing  struggle  for survival.

IAPOLOGIZE FOR   sucH A  LENGTHY  introduction, but  indige­
nous culture  cannot  be separated from  history and  those events that  profoundly
affect a people's lives. It  was this program  that  provided  much  of the inspiration
-if one  can  call it that-for  my  play about  a failed  revolutionary   who  was hanged in St. John's in r8r2-William Gayden:

GAYDEN: "I have visions. I have dreams I tell ye. Things I never told ye before­ nightmares but they is real. I sees yer children hounded like dogs  from their bits o' land, their hovels, their history piled high on carts behind  them,  the bones o'


73

COOK

their parents moulderin' behind them. I sees the green hills too, Douell, and  the rivers, and  the trees full o' birds, and  chickens scratching  under  kitchen  tables. But they're not your fields, your trees, and  the rivers will never know yer face. The  only grass ye'Jl ever own will be what  grows about  yer grave.  I  sees ye, generations of ye, broke backed and sweating to fill others pockets wi' shiny new coins. I sees ye, packed and  herded into  prisons of cities, chained  to  the  walls, fergetting laughter, and the good work of hands."

Newfoundland   is a  dramatic,  intensely  theatrical  environment, and   I  have always been  moved  by the fact  that  fishermen  leave  their  stages  every  day  to go forth  upon the bitter waters. Logically, it seemed  that  the stage that  imitates life would  become the  principal  form  of expression  in  any  cultural  revolution. In  fact,  it  was  two  visual  artists,  with  strong   literary   connections,   who  set out  to raise the consciousness of Canadians, and  their  own  people. Christopher Pratt   exposed,  to  an  astonished  country,   his  immaculate  and   brooding   ab­ stractions  of  Newfoundland. Aegean  seas -not  the  wild  Atlantic -were  the background  to outport  houses ennobled  by  perfection,  yet  achingly  empty.  He would  set  out  to  restore  dignity  to  the  real  artifacts  of   the  province,  houses, people, animals,  the landscape. His is a vision that,  like  Samuel  Beckett's, often emphasizes the spiritual isolation of man in this corrupt and tumbledown  century. An  enlarged  backdrop  of a  Pratt   painting  would  match  the  spirit  and  intent of "Endgame" perfectly.
Also -out  of the strong oral  tradititon  of Newfoundland, complemented   by the mythic  intensity of Coleridge's "The  Ancient  Mariner," came  David  Black­ wood and  "The Lost Party  Series." This  young engraver  etched  the  images  of Newfoundland's great,  and  often  tragic,  annual  Rite  of Passage, the  seal  hunt, burning  them  forever  into  our  own  consciousness even  as  the  seal  hunt   was dying.
In  ways beyond  their  knowing, both  of these  artists  helped  create  a  climate
in which, finally, indigenous theatre-unheard of-could  flourish.  Of  course, there  had  been  theatre  of sorts.  In  Newfoundland  politics  is theatre,   and  the principal  actor  since  1949  had  been  Joey  Smallwood   whose  histrionics  could rival  any  of the  great  old tragedians.  It was  not  surprising  that  the  first  pro­ fessional company  to emerge, The  Mummers  Troupe, would  itself  concentrate upon political material.
But  there  was another  figure who had  pointed  the  way  to a specific type  of
theatrical  development -Ted  Russell. He  had  been  magistrate, teacher,  cabi­ net  minister,  a  wise, gentle  man  who  had  created,  for  radio,  a  series  called "The   Chronicles  of  Uncle  Mose,"  a  glowing,  golden  account  of a  way  of life rapidly  disappearing into  the  fog of history.  Here  was a  richly  observed  com­ mentary  on  outport  life, peopled  with  the  wise, the  foolish,  the  humorous,  the


74

COOK


strong and self-sufficient. This was a world in which a hangashore  (a rogue, too lazy to fish)  could  be  brought  before  a  magistrate  for  stealing  a  neighbour's hole in the  ice. But  as the  magistrate  couldn't  get there  before all  the  ice had gone, the evidence  had  disappeared. It  took folk wisdom-not  Solomon-to solve that  one. Later,  a  radio  play, "The   Holding  Ground," would  become  a stage  play, produced  with great  success. In  this work too, the essential thesis of the goodness of man,  and  the stability of society remained  the same. Newfound­ land men, like the boats in which they roamed, always came back to The Holding Ground,  that  place on the seabed where the anchor always holds firm, where all is safe and secure. Donald  Bartlett, of Memorial  University, described Ted  Russell's work in The  Newfoundland Quarterly  as:  "secluded, predominantly  Protestant, restrained  and  neighbourly." I  agree, but  it was an  idealized  perception,  recol­ lected with love, and  certain  darker  elements of the  Newfoundland  reality  were not permitted  to disturb  the idyll. Perhaps this was as it should be, but, in a time when  Newfoundlanders  have  been  vilified  over  the  seal  hunt,   become  stock figures for  jokes  (particularly in  Quebec -for  long  their  real  allies in  misfor­ tune), Russell's perception  of them  became the one with  which they yearned  to identify. The  consequences still echo on the stage.
As previously mentioned, The  Mummers  Troupe  became  the first professional company to concentrate solely upon indigenous material,  under  the financially shrewd, but often controversial artistic director, Chris Brookes, who had tempered his political  theories  about  theatre  as  Artist-in-Residence  during  the  turbulent years at  Simon  Fraser.  Paradoxically,  it  was at  the  moment  of greatest  public approval  for  a theatre  that  dealt  specifically with  Newfoundland, that  the  pos­ sibility of a failure  of nerve became evident.  In  1974 my own play, "The  Head,  Guts and  Soundbone Dance," was televised on CBC TV's "Performance." Cast in a tragic mode, the play depicted the end of an era for a tyrannical old Skipper, his retarded  son, and  his principal  crew member  and  whipping  post, his son-in­ law, Uncle John.  The  play had  been performed superbly  by a uniquely  talented group  drawn  mainly  from  university  ranks,  and  had  been  very  well  received. However,  the  audience -at  that  moment  in  time,  although   expanding -re­ mained  essentially  a  professional,  middle-class one.  The  TV  production   would expose the  work to a great  mass of people who had  never  been  to the  theatre.  The  result  was  instantaneous,  and  devastating.  The   play  (and   author)  were reviled, and  it became  evident,  I  think,  to everyone  working  in  theatre  at  that time  that  the  potential  audience's  image  of themselves could  not  be  tampered  with lightly. That anxiety still exists and to a large extent  has proved detrimental to the creation of a theatre  that could have been unique in the country.
The Mummers Troupe concentrated all their resources on collective, politicized theatre,  using Paul  Thompson's Passe Muraille as a role model. Often,  they were


75

COOK

extraordinarily  effective. When  federal  agencies tried  to  "resettle"  people  from an area in Gras Marne,  the designated  National  Park,  the  Mummers  moved  in rapidly and succeeded in creating a show which so affected public opinion that decisions already  determined  in  St.  John's   and  Ottawa  had  to  be  redefined. When  Buchans, a mining town in the interior,  was threatened with  closure, the theatre  company  again  moved in and,  supported   by the  miners'  union,  created a vivid testament that illustrated the cynicism and  inhumanity of corporate  giants towards those who have spent, and  sometimes given  their  lives, in  their  service. They even got as far as Vancouver  on a national  tour of "They  Club Seals Don't They," a show designed to try and educate  the Canadian public into the realities
of the Seal Hunt.

BuT THERE HAS ALWAYS BEEN  an essential flaw in the col­
lective process, a flaw exaggerated  in Newfoundland because,  beyond a  handful
of amateur  groups, there was no other theatre  against  which one could make comparisons. Once a certain level had been reached,  both audience  and company seemed frozen in a time warp. The characters in all of the collectives rarely, if ever, changed.  Newfoundlanders  were perennial  victims, were always cast in a  heroic and suffering mould. There  was the strong-willed,  often angry  or grieving,  New­ foundland  woman.  There  were the  boys in  the  bar,  witty,  sardonic,  knocking everything  and  everybody. There  was the exploited  fisherman,  the  wicked  mer­ chant,  the ignorant  and snobbish mainlander, the  indifferent  and  corrupt  politi­ cians. Like cardboard cutouts, with little variation, these stock characters  popped up in every play, and their sallies and  jibes were greeted  with  roars of approval  by a growing  audience  who  came  to see Newfoundland and  Newfoundlanders (Good)  triumph  over the forces of Evil (anyone  from  away,  politicians, et al.). In political theatre, the message is deemed to be more important than the develop­ ment of character  or plot -those appalling manifestations of the  Deadly Thea­ tre. Unfortunately, what  was substituted for  those archaic  theatrical  props even­ tually was melodrama,  sentiment,  and, above  all,  caricature. The  promise  of a theatrical  renaissance, of the kind typified by the great  days of the Abbey Theatre in Dublin  (inspired by many of  the same reasons),  had been frittered  away. What had been a great opportunity to create a truly National  Theatre had  been squan­  dered-without  anyone  realizing  it.  By the  time  the  Mummers Troupe  col­ lapsed, riven by internal dispute and also, I believe, by its refusal to grow, it had developed an audience that had come to depend  upon those comfortable, familiar,  complacent images of themselves. McDonald's Theatre.
"The  modern  theatre  has  died  away  to  what  it  is because  the  writers  have thought oftheir audiences instead of their subject" (W. B. Yeats).

COOK


"The dramatist  has something  better to do than  to amuse either  himself or his audience. He has to interpret  life" (George Bernard Shaw).
If this assessment sounds  too gloomy, I hasten to add  that  there  were-and are -exceptions to my general thesis. I am thinking specifically of fellow writers Tom  Cahill and  Al Pittman, but in general, in Newfoundland, it is still easier to mount  a  collective  than  a  scripted  play. There  is a  profound  mistrust  of  new work, other  than  one acts workshopped  and  mounted  essentially for an in-house audience. Edmund MacLean, the Artistic Director of Theatre Newfoundland  and Labrador, the  touring  company  based  at  Stephenville  on  the  west coast,  has recently gone on record as saying that  he dislikes indigenous  theatre,  it is usually poorly written,  and  in any  case, is a cheap  way of attracting an  audience.  The contradiction of terms  is obvious, but  it is also a sad  commentary, for  without companies to put on new works there will be no new works. I also would suggest that  behind  MacLean's statement   lies that  nagging  sense of  inferiority -not unique  to Newfoundland but aggravated  by isolation-that fuels the notion that imported  culture  is superior  to our  own,  particularly  as it  is manifested  in  the performing arts.
Rising Tide  Theatre, the company  that  is now trying,  successfully, to keep professional  theatre  alive  in  Newfoundland, has broadened   its  base  to include plays from the Canadian and  American  repertory in its season, but  still depends heavily upon  collectives to maintain its good relationship  with  its audience,  and those collectives depend  heavily,  once  again,  upon  those  instantly  recognizable stock types. There  is a genuine  fear  of giving offence, of losing the  broad  base so painstakingly won.
Can a culture interpret itself honestly by caricature  alone? Can any indigenous theatre  survive without encouraging  its artists to interpret  life, as they perceive it, in all of its rich  manifestations?  Are  Newfoundlanders  going  to succumb  to the final indignity  of other,  mainland  images of themselves, support  it even? On  my right, sir, is the Stage  Newfoundlander, roaring,  boisterous, a song  in the heart and a beer to hand,  a jolly fellow just like his Irish counterpart. On  my left, the Fishing Newfoundlander, stoic, pipe clamped  between rugged  jaws, clad forever in oilskins spitting seawards. l'se the b'y that builds the boat.
I don't believe it is necessary.
Some years ago, a group  called cooco  took every one of the proliferating stock types stalking  the stage  and  turned  them  inside out in  a series of biting satires. Scatological,  often  deliberately  obscene, they took up  the  medium  of black  hu­ mour, which has always been a part of Newfoundland's survival kit, and parlayed it into an attack  upon all that  was sacred. The  Church  and  State,  unscrupulous landlords and ladies, sexual mores, even basic soul food like fish and brewis was all grist to their mill. Their  spiritual  mentor  might have been Lenny  Bruce, but they


77

COOK

were motivated  by serious social intent,  and  were, perhaps,  closer to that  dark, existential  world of the German  nightclub  in  the  thirties.  For  three  years they blazed,  becoming  increasingly outrageous  until,  as always  happens,  the  group split up  and  went their separate  ways into  film, television -the  fate,  it seems, of most contemporary  satirists -to become absorbed  by the  very establishments they abhor.
Nonetheless, cooco provided proof that there was a wide audience-equally divided  between outrage  and  hysteria -hungry  for images of themselves other than  that  provided  by the collective and,  yes, even Ted  Russell's gentle  percep­ tions. It is still not too late to learn that lesson. If we are to create a truly National  Theatre (and  I believe much of our chance of cultural survival depends upon it), then we shall have to challenge both audiences  and  ourselves more, not less, than in the  past. Our  theatrical  practitioners  have  no permanent, satisfactory,  home. They  operate  out  of  houses, shoe  boxes, small  buildings,  renting  facilities  or co-operating  in  joint ventures with  the director  of the  arts  and  culture  centres, like the fishermen of old. They  have demonstrated courage  and  tenacity  in that situation.
Now  I believe it  is their  responsibility,  to  their  audience,  and  to  that   most
profoundly  human  of all the arts, theatre,  to create  a climate  which will elevate, enlarge,  and  not demean,  Newfoundlanders' perception  of  themselves, and  the world's perception  of that little nation on the edge of the world itself. All may be well.






THREE POEMS



WIND

It is she, the lonely one, barren and  envious has sent them  to fetch  you.
Too  many  to be counted

these small demons
who rattle the doors and windows, find their  way under your skin, distract and  torment you.

They will never steal you away.
I draw  a circle of light around our  bed:
Sanvi, Sansanvi, Semangelaf
 



Jeni Couzyn


By this charm I protect  thee.
The demon  woman  is behind  them out of sight and hearing. Her  body is cold, her breasts little  hard  stones

her mouth a flaring  wound  of darkness. She has no eyes
her hands  wave helpless as dying  tentacles

and  a whirlwind of rushing  darkness opens in her  belly.
The winds spring  out ancient and  half-formed

vengeful infants.
They want  to carry  you away  to that  hungry pit. I remember its bitterness

from  within  my own belly
and  the unborn furious  children
with starvation shrieking  from  their  cells.

I draw a strand of love from  my navel like a shining golden  spider.
I draw  a circle of love around us. Dear one

fear  nothing from  them,  those cries call you
from  a time long ago, though a part  of yourself.


79

COUZYN

San vi, Sansanvi, Semangelaf,
send them  yelping and snarling on their  heels. You at my breast we are safe

as the watching moon.






CEREMONY  OF THE JIFTERBIRTH

One  buries it in the cleft of a tree.
Mulberry mouth  grinning out from  the leaves little ghost in the branches

now raises you in springy arms pops juicy gifts onto your tongue all childhood long.

One  wraps  it in deerskin
with miniature tools and  a pouch  of seeds. Little ghost in your work, with a pure  heart.

One  in a vessel of clay
sets it adrift on the great  river. Little ghost slips into  the depths  as they open

to the origin  of water
joyful as a dolphin. So river will carry  you ocean  receive you.

One  buries it under  the house.
Little  twin dancing from  room to room, scattering her spell :

The giving one, the soft one, the strong  one
enter,
the light one, the wise one, the singing  one
enter,
the still one, the true one, the loving one
enter.
This house is blessed, all entering, all leaving and all within.

8o

COUZYN

One, unknowing
turns  away. Like white ants they hurry  it to a blind  furnace.

Hush a bye, hush
no animal will eat it no spirit  enter it.

From the glowing  bowels of the furnace a white  heat  rolls upward
purifying, cleansing, atoning.

Now in the smoke rolling upward the little  ghost stretches itself
wondering what happened to its childhood.

As it raises its arms
it rears to a great  height,
a white  form,  invisible in air

but  its newborn eyes are bright  with love they see you, always
and  newborn hands

caress your forehead as you sleep. Hush a bye my darling
all fire of earth is beloved to you now

it will light  your  passage through darkness of air through a forest  of stars.







TR]INSFORM]ITION OF THE SPIRITS

1

In the world  she is child
thrashing with  terror in her father's arms. Thick and  hairy. His strides long


8r

COUZYN

his jaw murderous as he carries  her to the terrible  privacy of her room.
The mother-face near  the door,  a mask on a pole

blank and staring.
Punishment. The  word gongs out  cold and rises above her screams. The beloved

who brought  her frail life as a gift
and laid it beside their  hearts. Parent-faces grim and  mad as rats in a laboratory

with probes in their brains
eating  off their own feet. The pain  within. The pain of doing. The  pain  writhing

and  grey pleasure  of it.
Stillness on their faces like doors slamming like rocks splitting.

2
They  are three in one. He  the doer,
his bones and  muscles knotted into  weapons.

She the believer,  judge in her black  and  pomp stiff with purpose.

Child  the incarnation
newly arrived  and  clothed  in body.

The urgencies of flesh its hungers, its danger.

3

In  the place of power is the transformation.

Power of your eyes, child.
Power of your  frail body like a flame and the  fire roaring.

COUZYN

Withdraw old ones
mad as tormented  bulls. A white blaze before you she's impossible to harm.

They  cower. They  whimper.
They  kneel to fall within  the shadow of her blessing.

Rain  upon  them  now
and  they're wrinkling inwards they curdle into  the ground.

A bird of smoke rises on air, a star that  was child  of their flesh.
Bow your heads, old ones, as she passes.

Now you are empty  skin-sacks fruit without seed
dissolve into your shadow.










RIEL
 


Frank Davey



1.  Nice Things

The  nice thing  about  Louis
was that  Davy Crockett went south
to the Alamo. The  nice thing about Louis was my mother always called  him 'real.' The  nice thing  about  Louis
was that  us smart  kids
got to take a classy subject  like French in Grade  9· The nice thing  about Louis
was that  he'd  never appeared on Disneyland,
& looking at him in 1955
from  the lower Fraser  Valley  there  were so many nice things about  Louis Riel.

The 'real' rebellion  she called  it.
I believed her. It hadn't happened in Mexico. You couldn't play
cowboys & Riels, you couldn't play Riels & Indians. There was no way you could imagine it & therefore
it had to be a real rebellion.


2. Wacousta

I knew he was not Wacousta.
I'd  never heard  of Wacousta, my mother hadn't heard  of Wacousta, only,
of the real Louis but we both  knew he was not Wacousta.
Now I have heard  of Wacousta I can say that  if Louis had  been Wacousta
all the Rudy  Wiebe Cree on their  piebald ponies
would've come whooping from  their  tipis. Louis would've glared  up from  U.S.  postage  stamps wearing  feathers & warpaint. Dumont
would've won the second  battle of San  Jacinto leaving
Middleton's army steaming
in its charred CPR pullmans.

DAVEY

Of course if Jesse James  had  been Louis Riel, he'd  have  been a Red  River cart  robber,
a survey crew bandit, a pemmican kid.
There'd have  been no General Middleton only a Pinkerton man.

3. Trying to Think of Louis Real

A raw-boned Canuck in long underwear. A solemn  mouth under  black whiskers.
A man  from  Winnipeg.
A man  from  Winnipeg which  was the head  office of Eaton's catalogue, where my flannel
shirts  & corduroy breeches came from,
in brown  paper packages,  each November. He did look a bit like Timothy Eaton.
He was dressed  in black like Timothy Eaton. Came out of the black past like Timothy Eaton. Had  not moved  history, had  been moved into it, had  joined  with  words like tax man, back east,
Liberals, baby cheque, Royal Bank, Toronto Conservatory, rationing, Mackenzie King.
He was dressed  in black like Mackenzie King.
He had  done something and  now it doesn't  matter. He had  done  something but now it wasn't  something. At 4 pm, after  I had  died several times as an  Indian my mother called  me in to practice the piano
& above each  piece of music in my practice book
was a small  picture of a black-bearded unsmiling man. There was something wrong  with these pictures. Sometimes the music smiled, or flashed
an orange mustache. The  Real  Rebellion.
There was something fishy, my mother  would say, about Louis Real.

4. Louis at Fort Garry

We  are not in rebellion against the British supremacy ... Moreover  we are true to our native land.

LOUIS RIEL
NOVEMBER  16, 186g

'Oh  shit,'  Sir John A. said, 'Riel
has shot  that  Thomas Scott.'  Damn Tom  Scott.

Bs

DAVEY

He was a troublemaker. He should've been born on a mountaintop. Should've gone south
& run for Congress. Got himself  drunk.
even in Fort  Garry  prison got himself  drunk.
Had  once tried to throw  the boss of his road crew into the Red.
Maybe he was an anarchist individualist.
He called Riel a 'dumb frog,'  the Metis
'a pack of cowards.'
Maybe he was a fascist running-dog.
He  told Louis in colorful  Protestant language to go love the Blessed Virgin.
Louis Riel said, 'He  is a very bad  man,'
& sent him for trial  to a Metis  tribunal. The court  found  Tom
not up to community standards.
Man, this is one tough city, said Tom Scott. You can't even have a little drink, a little fun, even curse out a Frenchie
without they bring on the Gestapo.
There'll be no more American licentiousness. We must stamp  out  the Wacousta factor,
said Louis Riel.


5.  Louis in Hospital

All month  Louis has nightmares. In  the nightmare he prays. '0 God,  make me thy prophet,
make your David  thy prophet,' he prays.
'O.K.,' says God, & jumps  thru  the barred window dressed as a Baltimore oriole.
'What shall I say, 0 golden  & adored?' prays Louis. 'Say
the 2oth century belongs to Canada.' Louis flinches.
'Say per ardua ad astra, say mens sana in corpore sano.'  Louis covers his face.
'Say nemo dat  qui non habet,' chirps  God.
'You're no oriole,' says Louis.
He backs into a corner  of his cell.
'You're a Macdonald,' he shouts.
'A tyrant,  an overdressed  Bismarck!' he screams.
God grins. 'You sound  a lot like Col. Crockett,' he says, then flies off
into  the wild blue yonder.

86

DAVEY

6.  Louis in Montana

Maybe he wears a six-gun. Maybe he shoots buffalo.
He's  a 'hard citizen,'  says the Fort Benton
Weekly  Record. Maybe  he busts broncos.
'He's one of worthless  brutal race of  the lowest species of humanity,' says the Fort Benton Weekly Record. Maybe he's a grizzled old prospector,
maybe  he's a scout for the sth  Cavalry. He writes to Gen. Miles of the Cavalry asking for a Metis  reservation.
He wants  them  taught to farm.
He wants schools. He lobbies the U.S. Marshal to have whiskey-traders jailed
for selling to drunken Metis.  On  weekends maybe  he races chuckwagons.
Maybe he plays poker in the Bucket of Blood saloon.

In  1883 he is hired  as a teacher by a mission school.
He hangs  up his six-gun.  He unloads his buffalo gun. Sells
his decks of marked cards. Gives away his Bowie knife. He is bored.
His old buddies Dumont, Ouellette, Isbister  come down for a binge.
To  play the slot machines. To gawk at the Silver Dollar  Bar. Afterward, flat broke, hung  over,
Louis rides with  them  back to Canada.


7. Louis at Fish Creek

A tree-covered cut in the prairie grass. A 'nasty' place
says Middleton, aiming his cannons into it. Dumont's men enjoy
the dim light of these bushes, sing & pray as they fight.  Meanwhile,
Louis is waiting,
his arms  upraised, is praying for vision. He opens his mind.

DAVEY

'Be allways sure you are right,  then  Go, ahead,' Davy Crockett tells him.
'Yes go ahead,' Dumont insists,
by messenger from  the battleground. There must be authority, says Louis Riel. An authority that  loves us, he says.
'Authority ain't worth
the underside of a coon's  tail,' says Crockett.
'They've got Gatling guns,' reports Dumont.
'We've got to attack from  the darkness, fire from  the trailside  hollows.'
An authority must love its people, says Louis
or else the most they can achieve
is to be martyred by that  cruel  authority.
'You want  us to be martyred?' says Dumont.
'Boy, wuz I ever,' says Davy. 'I got stuck like a bar atta  turkey-shoot.'
You were your own authority, you never asked for love, says Louis Riel.


8.  Louis at Batoche

Ya gotta  choose, said Charley Mair. If ya ain't one of us yer one of them.

Imagine halfbreed Louis trying  to play cowboys & indians. Palefaces
& redskins. Yankees & rebels.
Or Cornwallis & Washington. De Haldimar
& Wacousta.
Ya gotta  choose, said Dumont, gotta  let us shoot, he said,
& afterward headed  south  to Montana. Louis kept crossing the border. Down
to Minnesota up to Toronto, to Montreal to attend school. Down  to Minnesota
up to Assiniboia to meet a survey crew. Pardoning Charles Boulton. Executing Tom Scott.  Down  to Minnesota
up to Ottawa to sign the Parliamentary register. Down  to Montana. Up  to Duck  Lake, Batoche. Guns sounded. The bullets
went back & forth.
Ya gotta  choose, said the billbore  man.

88

DAVEY

Instead, Louis  prayed. Moved  from house to horse to house, praying.  Moved
from chapel to chaps  to chapel,  praying.
Nothing was quite right. The  Church of Rome. The wild-west ambush. The  Dominion Lands Act. Statehood. The bullets went back & forth.
To  & fro. He prayed.
He prayed  for aboriginal rights,
for low tariffs,  for provincial ownership of natural resources, for a homeland
for the Metis,  for amnesty, for funny money,
for a railway  to Hudson's Bay,
for long skinny farms, for the Crow Rate. His friend  Lepine accordingly had a vision of valleys and  coulees with low houses shaded by birch  trees. Louis said hey,
that's just what we need, & so told Dumont to go build  more  trenches  & barricades
of birch  logs. Then Louis prayed  again.
When he was finished  praying the bullets stopped
& three  Mounties led him away to meet the General.












8g

DREiiMS  OF DESERTION

Barry Dempster


The soldier sits facing the China Sea, a can of pears in his lap
overflowing with moon.
Rifle at his side, in the sand, like a hand stung with sleep.

Where  in the night are the targets,  the teeth, the hearts  with curving
moons like clenched  knuckles? Where  is the string of
fire stretching the length  of a man?

You could almost brave  the sea and run.  Pears and rifle like a
boat with oar. The sand stretches land to land,  unseen.

You grasp one bit of moon, like reaching for a pear, clasp knuckles to rock, keep dreaming.

You could walk on your hands in the water,
a dead  man facing down. A pear, bloated, swept  to sea. A string
of rifles stretched
across the moon.

go

DEMPSTER

Where would  they find you, those enemies, this life, no
messages left in the sand,
just the imprint of a lost
body. Just  the moon, as always tangled, bobbing  in the slightest wave, like an empty  can.

You could  live again, stand and  face the endless sea of sky, your hand
white against the moon, complete surrender, your heart
stinging in the glare
of deserted  dreams.






















gr

SEND ME  Jl POSTCJIRD

Pier Giorgio Di Cicco


Friends shallowly enter  through the rheum and physics of the mind. They  went  here and  there, saw the great  Salt Flats, imagined Jose Carnivale shooting  down  the flats, saw that  and  more.

The  way the world  revolves, at half past eight,
is the most wonderful thing  in the morning. The imagination must give itself scope. You are dreaming this. You dream  the most appropriate things  at odd  times, don't you, Harry? Yes; the wife stumbles in on two legs
to give me medicines, and  take me out  of fright.

And the missiles stand  upright in hundreds of silos. It is the beginning and  the end of all we love;  the moment
a friend  says hello and a bomb explodes, while a flower is
gawking out of a bit of earth. Everything, simultaneously, gets up in its sleep and  closes the  refrigerator door.

Who would want  to brave  things  in the cold?  How  many jackasses does it take to have lunch  and  report on the latest Salt Talks?

We saw Peter  Pan flying low on the land, and  Popeye and
Daffy Duck crying like madmen in the comic  book sky.

Love, I hold you like an arsenal, for I too have failed  to love. That much,  the obvious,  must  bless us, if nothing else, and  now I say-aha! and  did you like Wyoming?







92

MOON  SH;21RKS

Mary DiMichele


Dark reduces  our legs to slugs as we try to make our way back from  the river. A long talk
to celebrate cosmologies
of wood,  moss, fern and  quick
clean  trout. Pre-Copernican, our words say that we have watched the sun
set. How  little  we understand
of each  other, even here, close as twins bobbing in the embryonic sac, night,
when  only the larger  heart  is heard  beating.

They say the dark  is romantic
and  the passionate are prone  to drowning. You can watch air thicken
as if the absence  of light makes molecules huddle closer, liquefy.
The languid motion  of our limbs like walking through water,
as if we had  lost our way
and  floundered back into  the river. We strain to see and our vision
has the grainy texture of video.

Night  was made for listening. Because sound  undulates
our  ears are shaped  like shells.
An ear, dismembered, is a strange gift, the same basic structure as a shark: cartilage and  flesh,
full of biographies, mangled parts.

We follow slowly and we need time.
I grasp  for this man's  hand  out of what  need?
like a flashlight in the dark?
His white  pants,  legs of the moon, help us find our way.


93

DIMICHELE

In  the flush of lunar light we are that  thin  black line the river rejects:
digestive tract of a shrimp.

Having lived so long with gills
we go back to our beds, a peculiar breed. Soon the sun will rise like yesterday
and  the atmosphere adopt its usual gaseous state, only the grass a little  wet from a night  underwater.





















94


TWO POEMS





SCRIPTS




Consider me a specialist
in impossible  loves with a flourishing sideline  in visions -not my choice, blame
God's  secretary, cantankerous clerk who arranges actors' appointments, ensuring
continuity of theme  and  scene
in this goddam everlasting soap opera

take a simple  frame, clearing the ground, the sharpest picture, honed  to reality, ColorVision yes,
brilliance of sun and  moon together then  darkness that  folds, unfolds, shutters the eyes
 Gwladys Downes


only later
when  the rhythms close in, like pincers,
do you know, dream-walker drawn by a Maker's dream, you are  being written
into a script





no guns, no spurting whales or flames, banal, not stuff for drama
this sunlit  image  ... ourselves well-met in a parking lot
weighed  down four  hands at once by pearl-white bags
you said
"Not now, lady,  not till I put  these down"





95

DOWNES

next day through glittering cars we crossed, weighed  down
by books in plastic  bags pale as the dream, to a gravel circle ringed
with surely mythical stones, red salvia
and a few exceedingly  ordinary marigolds, but  no one had warned  me the script
had  already  been changed
that  the dialogue would be different ... shall I complain furiously  to the secretary?
shall I protest  "You  have done  this to me before, written  me out, too often?"
shall I fly straight to the top, shouting
"Tell God I came  and  no one answered?"





I did not need such grief
burning out  the green  heart  of summer, surely my winter  shelves
(ashes filtering  to air through porous  jars)
are burdened quite  enough-my cellar  hoard, my rue, my rosary, though not another
hours I spent with thee dear heart, merely
the rough draft of a discarded script laced with cliches

cover the screen,
tune out,  turn off, o please turn  off the light
I go below to break my ghostly  jars
praying for my Mother and  the newly dead, don a disguise, black holes for eyes
and  feather cloak  to dance this ragged weeping











g6

DOWNES

THE RETURN

My bargain with  the goddess did  not include
your rising from  the sea-bed ...
o not Neptune's monster,  merely the usual miraculously restored  hero last seen mangled on the shore
roaring his way back now to the family  farm

I might have  known she'd cheat though the pact  seemed proof against great  winds and  the folly of waters
I would  drink  stone, eat silence reflect another face in streams the far side of despair, and she would  grant me air
with  just enough of mind and shallow breath
for country walks defined
by barbed wire fences-I would  be gentle nodding to neighbours

you must  be back ...
someone  has burned the hedges broken  the grace  of sleep, and look! around that corner
all my safely grazing sheep lie by the headland,
calm  throats savaged, slit.


















97

WHY AND HOW AND WHY NOT AND WHAT IS THIS, ABOUT STARTING ANOTHER NOVEL ...

Marian Engel




WAT BEGAN AS  AN IDEA many  yea" ago, and  must  be written  because it has not been forgotten, has begun  to be a pain.  The  paper  is in the  typewriter, all  the  thinking-in  the  bath, at  the   jigsaw  puzzles,  walking along  the street,  in  restaurants while  pretending to  read  the TLS- has gone  as far as it can. The  characters have characters. The  events  are in place. The  writing has to begin.
I  have  again   to  become  an  omnipotent  two-year-old, capable  of  anything, especially flying. Not, of course, all the  time.  Just  here  and  now, so I can  begin. I'm  lucky I have an ideal first line.
Old  Superego doesn't  like this:  a first line isn't  a book, you schmo.  Old Super­ ego doesn't  like anything. Do  I  have  to  battle him  to  the  ground  before  I can continue? And  is he a  him?  He's  probably a rotten old  woman  with  iron-grey  hair,  like mine.  I  wouldn't have  noticed  that  my  hair  was  grey  if  old  Superego hadn't said, "You  think you're still a tiny blonde, you're a fat middle-aged woman with an iron-grey  bob, the kind they  won't  wait  on in the store, you can't write." It always  begins this way, but  every time  the  voice is more vicious, it has more  past to chew up and spit at me. You won't  make  any money  (so, does Kroetsch?), you're  not  as good  as Alice  (I'm just as good  for  me, said  she ...) , they'll  come to the house  to interview you and  spend  all their  time  asking  you questions about Atwood   (I won't  answer  them,  they'll  have  to  ask  about me  or go away; better  still, not come). I shall  have them  take me to restaurants with  extravagant views. In order  for this to happen I shall  have  to buy a skirt,  and  I shall  WEAR it. "I'm sorry, but  I can't open  my mouth except  in Stop  33 ..." so that  in  moments of
humiliation, I, the flyer, shall have the sky.
First, write  your  book. It's  been nagging  for years, if it lasts for you, it will last for a reader.
But is it post-modernist? No. Is it post-post-modernist? No.  My brain  is addled, I mix up Foukine and  Foucault and  Fouquet (we  shall  all  have  a lovely time  at

g8

ENGEL


Stop 33, the sky will be full of us),  I shall soon be 50 years, one is one's age, and this story demands craft, time, incident. Above all, it's a story.
It will get you in wrong with the feminists.
I  was born  to be in  wrong  with  the  feminists, who don't  realize  I  invented them:   but  in  narrative it is important to remember  that  what  is is a subject; what should be is for fantasists and essayists. What  might  be is romance: we can play with that, too. But my primary excuse is that people who were frightened  out of their skins by female  relatives  at  an  early age don't  invent  feminist  empires. Why set up a government  that will behead you?
If you are intending to  write  a serious novel, define what  a serious novel is.
A novel that attempts to be serious attempts  to describe a hypothetical  situation in terms of its own hypothetical  society, and in believable ways. I have to believe in the characters  and  they have  to believe in me enough  to give me the energy to describe their context.
But thirty years, child, you're taking 30 years to do it, and  popping  from town
to town....
It's  a bummer,  but  there  it is:  look, I've  been long-sighted  all my life, even before I got bifocals and if I didn't  have a sense of history before I studied  with Hugh  MacLennan and fought  his (Cape  Breton is not the thought-control centre for everyone),  I have one now. If you take 30 years, you have to select very care­ fully, fill in with  broad  brushstrokes,  and  above all separate  real  time  from  fic­ tional time in a way a reader  anywhere can understand.  Over  that  period of time things  changed,  particularly for  women:  the feminist  point  that  this book will make, if it succeeds, is that  liberation  and responsibility are still all mixed up and my generation  has been punished  at  both ends of the scale;  first  for  wanting  to marry  or not wanting  to marry; then  for wanting  to divorce or  not  wanting  to divorce. And they've  been punished  economically as women  always are. But this is getting  ahead  of myself because it's a novel about  rivalry, not  punishment.



l:E LENGTH OF  TIME I'm  handling is going to require char­ acters and scenes in the old-fashioned  Dickensian way. It's  easier to write a novel that  covers only  a short  time-span :  then  you can  use flashbacks  and  dreams. This one, which could also be written  as a historical novel set in  the  nineteenth century  though  that  would involve a tedious amount  of description  that  already exists in Mrs. Moodie, will have to make use of the historical method; but  there is no harm  in  that  provided  one is aware  that  one is  working in  the  twentieth century  and  technical  tools of another  sort exist. It springs  into  my  mind  this moment,  for instance,  that  I  could read  "La  Jalousie"  again  with  profit, make the narrative  more abstract. Call them  He, She-one, She-two, She-it.


99

ENGEL

But you can't do it, can you, your sensibility isn't really modern,  you hark back? I don't  think  I'll  bother with that  question,  I'm  going to have to try to make
it go away:  I want readers. I've had readers before and  I like it; I have to write a narrative  they  can  read.  But you're  right,  in  that  my sensibility's  always  a  bit behind, and my theory's rocky. I'm  not as conservative as the TLS but I read less French  than  I  used to, and  I'm  told that  Lacan  is a shiningly  bad  example  to novelists. Besides I think the video-artists are filling that  territory.
Excuses, excuses; this is an  imitative  novel;  you're  taking  your  history  from
Hugh  MacLennan and your technique from  Margaret Laurence.
It's my geography I'm  taking from Hugh  MacLennan: that  theory of his that in Canada we have to map the country. I'm  dealing with the difference in cultural sensibility-or maybe  even garbage  collection -in  the  two  places.  Laurence worries me more:  my sub-plot scheme is like hers in The  Diviners, and so are my songs:  but utterly different in content. Perhaps  at this middle-aged  point in one's life a simple narrative  line isn't enough to include  all one has to say, and one opts for extras. Anyhow my main narrative  line is about  a search for Father  or Father­ ing, and  the sub-line deals with mother  and  the Pythoness:   jeepers,  there  was a Python  in The  Diviners, wasn't  there?  but  not  a  Pythoness.  Maybe  I'll  cut  the Pythoness.
You're  just beginning. Maybe you'll cut everything.
I'll cut you, if you don't  watch out:  you're making me preachy. This matter  of forebears is interesting, though. Interviewers  always ask about  influences and  pick wrong. The early ones were, I think, the Bronte sisters, George Eliot, Conrad, and Woolf ... superb examples I'm  grateful  to school and  library for. But we mustn't forget that  it all starts earlier than  that.  This  morning  I woke up thinking  about two books called The  Far Distant Oxus and Oxus in Summer, glosses on Swallows and Amazons  written  by Whitelock and  Hull,  I think.  I don't  suppose the books appealed  to many children because they aren't  on the shelves now, but the chapter heads were all from Sohrab  and  Rustum,  and  they took a familiar  piece of the north  of England,  renamed  its landmarks  according  to Arnold,  and  made  magic by adding  a Mysterious Boy. For THIS story, it could have been an influence.
You're  breaking  your oldest rule:  you say you won't  talk  about  anything  you write because then it won't be any good.
You may be right. The notes for The  Glassy Sea were better than  the book, and I published them in Queen's  Quarterly:   that  didn't  kill the  book. I overworked it, pushed it too hard.  BE  NEAT is a motto  that  gets in my way. I try too hard.  I round off too much. I did there, anyway.
But it's important in the course of a book to remember  why you started  out; otherwise you forget where you're headed. It gets fat and complex and  you begin to keep fancy ideas and false chapter-starts. You can see that  in Laurence  Durrell


100

ENGEL


who  has  become  more  baroque  with  age-now   HE  was a  big  influence,  the post-war person who taught  us that the English novel could be beautiful, and  not dull. When  I lived in Cyprus  I became dissatisfied with his vision; M onodromos is a comment on Bitter Lemons. I wasn't right:  it isn't a better book; but if we're talking  about  forebears,  there  is someone. In some way I share  his isolation;  in another,  his love of decoration. I'm  not sure though,  that  I would dare  to do his set-pieces. Perhaps  they're not necessary here in a country where the landscape  is too much  talked  about,  but  in this book the cities become huge, busy backdrops to very private action.
I wish I could find a little more romance in Toronto. I should start  bicycling.
The  most magic places I've found are the alleys around  Christie Pits in the snow, which give a sense of secret life. They're  a kind of Kasbah.
That's going too far. Toronto is a good city to live in because it's not romantic. You're  right.  And  romance  feeds on ignorance.  If I  knew what  was in those
sheds!  Romantics  wind up without  pensions, though  they still exist.
You seem to know what you want more than  you did six months ago. But will you get it there?
The  proof of the pudding  is in the typing. Weeks, months, days. The  proof of
the seriousness of the content is in the narrative  voice, and that's the problem here. I am not sure I have got it right.  It is too casual, too quick.  I  must stop  using contractions and informalities. There must be an air of pavanne, of sarabande.
You're  thinking   in  terms  of  music because  Durrell  has  already  erected  the quincunx  you wanted  for the garden.
Only a passing thought; there are lots of devices; you find them  in old books.
I want  a voice of dignity  and  wonder;  that  is why I was reading  Browne. And to prove I was old enough  to do so. Magic is the thin  high sound  you get when the celestial violin is tuned  exactly to the music of the spheres. When your history, geography,  psychology, and  human  feeling combine with  exactitude,  that  magic is possible; it's what  I always strive for. Others  do too, you can feel it in the good ones. It's  why sex is important in a novel, because we know in this century  that that  is what good sex is about: getting it right at the right  time and  loving, too. So it does not really matter  whether  you are  modern or post-modern,  your  work is a march of words across the paper ... they are soldier ants, they have to build a house; it is up to the writer  to decide what  kind of house, and  what  design will prevail.  My  usual  choice is to emphasize  the  elements, the  details,  and  let  the reader  decide on the  wholeness of the structure.  I am  trying  for more,  now. In Bear, I think  I found  "Less is more" but this is a more complicated  story. It  will be less loved, but say more.
Lives. I'm  putting  lives on paper. That  one was Red Riding  Hood. This one is
Snow  White  and  Rose  Red.  It's  modern,  and  very  moral,  and  very  pretty,  I


101

ENGEL

think,  because I like decoration.  I  can get  the  violin to  play if I'm  very smart, if I spend enough time on the ringing plains of windy Troy,  if I find Mrica  and her prodigies inside myself, if I polish my verbal surfaces  and  eschew  self-indul­ gence (no roses, not a one) : it's a lot of work. I got tired and closed off The  Glassy Sea. I wonder  if I  will be able to keep up  the  pace;  or if the  plan  is  too com­ plicated; if the Father  will take over.
You see, what  the outsider  doesn't  comprehend  is that  it's an adventure; one is not the first narrator; one is walking on  thousands  of graves  trying  to  make something  new, knowing  perfectly well that  the  Old  Ones  have said  it  all,  but hoping against  hope that if contemporaneity can  bump  against  the big eternities, there will be something special.
I am getting older and more conservative. I have lost my proud claim to be an experimenter. If I went to find my Foucault  now a pipe would burst and  I would never get back to it;  there would  be some other  demand, I  wouldn't  get to  the master.  In  me, however, there  is a different  master  now.  Time  has  done  some work. We shall see if it is good or ill that  has been  produced,  if impatience  has been replaced by wisdom, and lack of energy replaced  by richness. Anything could happen.  I write because I have always written.  I try again  because I don't  know what else to do. It is both a trial and a joy.







102

YES




Ah, yes, perhaps Beauty, 	is best to sit temporary   a guest
in a house on a hill
watch  the round apple  ripen     fall the silver acacia and  the eucalyptus lean into  the sea
keep vigil with a friend   over grief

Fade  as old love fades into  letters
arrange conversation   like chrysanthemums in glass bowls
crystal commentaries   brief reprieves to walk 	yes to walk 	slowly
over the stone  bridge     toward  final light.
 



Marya Fiamengo


















































103

THE COUNTRIES OF INVENTION
 





Timothy Findley





MosT WRITERS WRITE hom  a private place'  a nation or a country  in the mind,  whose landscape  and  whose climate  are  made  up  of what has been seized and hoarded from the real world-en passant.*
No one is static.  Not  even dead,  are  we static.  Stillness  is something  in  the mind  and  nothing  more:  a part  of forward  movement.  After  death,  decay  and remembrance keep on moving us forward-who  knows where?-but  certainly the living, by digging in the earth,  can make a guess. And  anyone  who reads or listens or watches is perfectly aware of the dead  who keep our  company.  This  is because we have given them a place in the countries of our invention.
We are  never still. If you live by the side of the  road,  as I  do,  you are  very much  awake to this fact  (and, sometimes, awakened  by it), since every time the shadows move it means that  someone is passing. And  my garden,  my  wall, my house, and  the cat asleep on the roof will all become  images fixed in someone's mind -part  of  their  private  hoardings,  their  collection -because  they  have come this way seeking passage.
I, too, pass. It  is only natural: making  my own  collection, lifting  my images from here and there -vistas, faces, gestures, accidents -carrying them forward with me, letting them rattle round my brain, my innards until they have settled themselves, either  as landmarks  or  as  residents.  I  am  a  travelling  country  of invention. A roadshow.
"Pay  attention."
Thornton Wilder  used to say that; "pay  attention," if he caught  you looking at  the  pavement,  trying  to avoid  the cracks.  "There's nothing  down  there  but your feet, Findley. Look around you; it's much  more interesting."
Yes -and he was right. Thornton Wilder lived in fear of missing something - not in the gossipy sense (gossip is all too common  knowledge)  -but in the sense of missing something  no  one  else had  noticed.  That bridge  that  fell  into  the chasm at San  Luis Rey.... No one else had  seen it falling.  But  he did.  Paying attention  to the landscape around  him, it is more than  likely Thornton Wilder - being a world traveller-saw the  bridge  falling  (a  ghost  bridge  only)  into  an

* This essay © Pebble Productions, Inc.


104

FINDLEY


Austrian  valley. Or,  perhaps,  it fell into the gorge at  Crawford's Notch.  Where it was first "seen" falling doesn't  matter.  All that  matters  is that, paying attention en passant, he caught  a glimpse of it superimposed on a foreign landscape:  for­ eign, at any rate,  to the landscape  where it ultimately  fell. The  fact  is, it  fell in Peru. But Thornton Wilder  had  never been anywhere  near  Peru;  never-until he went there in his mind,  equipped  with the image of a bridge  that  had  fallen through  his imagination somewhere  in  Europe  or  New  Hampshire. It  may  be the image  was prompted  by the space  between  two  peaks;  the  awesome depth of a gorge or the width of a valley and  Wilder had thought  (because he was pay­ ing  attention) : what  a dreadful  distance to  fall  that  would  be. What  a  fearful height that  is and, if  one had to walk there over  a bridge. ... And  if the  bridge fell, who  would   fall with  it? Who  would  be   fated  to  fall: or chosen ...?  And why? In  an instant,  glimpsing  his imaginary  bridge as it spanned  the real space between  two  heights,  the  basis  for  a  classic  novel  was  laid  in  place -and cemented.
Thornton Wilder's  work  comes very  close to  providing  the  perfect  example of the countries of invention: Caesarean  Rome in The  I des of March; eighteenth­ century Peru in The  Bridge of San Luis Rey; post-Platonic Greece in The Woman of Andros;  the  Ice Age and  Noah's  Flood in The  Skin  of  Our  Teeth; beyond the grave in Our  Town. Wilder was no historian, in the academic sense; neither was he a time-traveller -yet, each  of these places  resonates with  the sound  of real voices and  each of them  is -at  times alarmingly -alive  with  the textures of a life so vividly imagined  that  it  becomes life. The  countries of invention  can be more real than  any place we see and  hear in our everyday lives:  the ones we live outside of books and daydreams.
Everyone  has memories:  private  memories and shared  memories. One  of the most poignant  of human  activities is the game  that  begins:  "do   you remember
...?"  And  there  is also the sharing  of private  memories, the game  that  begins: "[  remember. ..." Both of these games are vital to the theatre  and  playwrights have employed them since Euripedes first prompted  Hecuba  to recall the wonder of  happiness  as she surveys  the  ruin  of Troy.  And  there  is no  more  magical moment in the theatre  than  Justice Shallow's "]esu!  The  days we have seen...." The  conjuring of  memory,  as  pure  device-its  theatrical   impact   aside-is equal  to the closing of the circle, whether  the circle be of fate or clarity  around the shape of a character.
The  whole of Chekhov's  impetus  as a playwright seems to have sprung  from a desire to set people loose in  a minefield of memory  and  to see which  one of them, if any, might  survive it. His plays show us one unbroken  line of men and women caught  in this minefield -some of them stumbling and certain to perish; some of them  gracefully  waving aside the danger  and  stepping  forth  boldly into


105

FINDLEY

the past  while others  are transfixed,  unable  to move  with  any  kind  of  joy into the past and, thus, unable to conjure any sense of the future  at all. Chekhov sees, perhaps  most clearly of all the great  playwrights,  the  importance that  memory plays in our  ability to survive. He  knew that  much  of what  anyone  remembers is not "real": that  memory itself is a country  of invention.  But  he also knew it was a source of solace and  the  basis of all  reconciliation.   Memory  provides  a ground-however profusely mined it might  be-on  which we can face reality, accommodate  reality and,  possibly, even survive it. If only we would believe the best of what  we recall about  ourselves and  others,  there  might  then  be  some chance to make something real in the here and  now that  is an echo of that  better person. But the countries of invention can be treacherous,  and  most of Chekhov's people are beguiled by memory and  they go to live there  forever. This  was not pessimism on Chekhov's  part. The  fact is, he saw it all for precisely what it is:  a great ironic comedy at the end of which we all, as does the old retainer  Firs at the close to The  Cherry Orchard, lie down in memory,  to pass away-forgotten­ forever.
Forgotten  forever. This, of course, is everyone's  fear:   not  to  be one of those people chosen, en passant, to be hoarded  in someone's memory;  not to be a resi­ dent in someone else's country of invention. Marie-Claire Blais has said that every writer is un temoin: a witness. One  of the things they  witness and  record  is the cryptic passage of people and events that, otherwise, would gain no place in mem­ ory. This is not only because, by paying attention, they see what others fail to see but, also, because they record what  others resist remembering. We  resist remem­ bering what we cannot understand-what we cannot  cope with -what  is ugly
-what is dangerous  to our self-esteem and  our way of life. What  we fail to see
can range from falling bridges to the peach we dare not eat. Our  survival may not depend  on falling bridges and  uneaten  peaches, but  it may  very well depend  on our being reminded of their existence:  "J. ALFRED PRUFROCK THWARTS DESTINY
BY  PAUSING TO  EXAMINE PEACH  BEFORE SETTING  FOOT ON   THE  BRIDGE AT   SAN LUIS REY!"
Paying attention  pays off.

IWAS RECENTLY GIVEN   the opportunity to reach back into the past in order  to explore my beginnings as a writer.  My publisher  thought  it was time to make a collection of my short fiction and  this meant  re-establishing con­
tact with three decades of stories. The  thing  that  struck  me first was how  consis­ tent  the images were:  they had  been gathered  by a  pack  rat  whose  tastes and interests could  be established  just by running  the  eye over  sentences  written  as far apart  as I956  and  Ig8g. The  country in my mind  has a lot of  distance  in it,

Io6

FINDLEY


but  the  distance  can  be covered  by the sound of a  banging  screen  door or  the barking  of a dog or the  voice of someone calling:  "you'll  be late,  if you don't hurry  up!" Many  of the  people -the  children  and  the  men  especially -turn up over  and  over  again  in  white;  the women wear  the  colour-blue,  orange, red, & the darker  shades of grey. Many  of the people have  the habit  of shading their eyes-which implies  a  plethora  of light.  Certainly,  there  is endless heat: summer  is the dominant season. All the roads are dusty and  the rooms are filled with  brass and  copper  lamps.  I  don't  know  why. Storms  are  important  (the weather  in  my country  is appalling)  and  they  blow up  from  nowhere.  People are  terse with one another-mostly,  that  is, till one of them  decides to talk for ten pages. Why? I don't  know;  I really don't  know-and I'm  not going to ask.
I only point it out because it tells something. It shows something.  It shows what one writer's eyes have  been scanning  for thirty and  more years and it shows that he has been looking for something,  whether  he knew it or  not  (he  didn't)  and it shows that, en passant, he has made a collection of remarkable cohesion. It also shows what the writer's  ears have been listening for-a  particular tone of voice
-perhaps a way of speaking -always for the sound  of someone trying  to say
something.  It  has  not  just  been  the  inability  to  communicate that  caught   his attention -but the  inability  to communicate  through  speech.  And  the  noises! All those screen doors -plus a lot of falling chairs and  the sound of voices rising in  argument in  a  distant  room.  These  people,  places, noises -all  these  voices belong in one country;  even though  the territory spans from  Ontario to Austria and  from Montreal to the Bahamas,  New York to Hollywood.  The  maps to the countries of invention  might be collected one day as an exercise in the destruction of reason. How can so much sameness be so disparate?
There  is nothing  out  of place in the countries of invention.  This is their  hall­ mark.  The   accidents,   the  mutilations,  the  deaths  belong  there  alongside  the people sitting behind  the screens on their porches and  the children  playing in the tall grass and  the rabbits  giving birth  on the lawn. There  are no surprises in  the countries of invention,  but  there  is amazement  and  there is bewilderment  at  the behaviour  of the inhabitants and  the treachery  of the  climate.  The  real world is not like that.  In  the real world our lives are  plagued  by surprise  and  yet we are never  amazed  and,  certainly,  no one's  behaviour  bewilders  us. We  expect  and even anticipate jeopardy  in all its various shapes and  perfidy in all its forms. In real life we are always saying:  "there, you see? I  told  you so." In  the real world we are  jaded -a  nice  old-fashioned  word  for  a  nice old-fashioned  condition.  But go and  pick up someone else's world of  invention and  the odds are, the  jade will fall away.
It  is only in fiction,  only in  memory  that  our  eagerness  to be trusting  is jus­
tified. This  is one  of fiction's-one  of  memory's  and  one  of  imagination's-

FINDLEY

bravest functions.  It is by these media  we are  urged  towards  hope  and  sanity;
maybe even compassion.
Is memory a medium?
Yes. In every sense. By promising continuity,  it gives the  present certainty  and it gives the future an odds-on chance of making an appearance in our lives. It also broadcasts and  publishes its daily reminder  of better  times and  lost causes. Mem­ ory is not only, in itself, a country  of invention; it  is also that  country's  Time and Maclean's and its six o'clock news.
We cannot  live in the countries of invention.  We can only go there  and  come back. For those who choose to go and live there  forever,  who choose it as a way of life, there is always the grave danger  of becoming  merely reactionary. This  is a dead end. The  truth  about  the countries of invention  is that  everyone you put there  is put  there  because they  are  posing  questions.  For  the  reactionary,   the questions  take  on  the  heat  of answers. For  the  visitor  who  writes -who  goes there to write-the questions are all that  matter. There  are  no answers:  none. If there were, there would be no reality.
This brings us back to Thornton Wilder's  Bridge -its imminent  collapse and the deaths of those who walk upon it. And the question.
And the question. Why?
The  answer  is not in Thornton Wilder's  country  of invention.  The  answer  is in everyone who picks up The  Bridge of San  Luis Rey  and  who reads it through to the end.











108

NOTES TOWARD A SUPREME FICTION
Keath Fraser

IWAS BORN IN INDIA  at the end of Wodd  War  II. My mothcr had  come to Calcutta in the  hope of welcoming my father  alive out  of Burma
where she believed the Japanese  had interned  him. They  had. The  Indian  army brought  him  down  in  a truck  to Rangoon  from  a hospital  near  Prome.  Then, because of a mix-up, instead  of his coffin being shipped  to Calcutta, it ended  up, after a ten-week voyage via Hong  Kong  (a slow change of holds here), in  Van­ couver. My mother  hadn't realized he was dead  until she received a cable at the American  Consulate  in Calcutta. Her husband, for reasons she later claimed were flimsy, had  volunteered  for a classified mission against  the Japanese  in Burma  a few months before Truman dropped  the Bomb on Hiroshima and  Nagasaki. As a pilot in the R.C.A.F. he knew how to parachute. He also happened  to know some Japanese  from working as a teen-ager on fishboats out of Steveston in the thirties. Perhaps he'd gone into the rain forest to broadcast false messages over the wireless to confound  the Japs.  But with his accent? My mother later  told me he sounded like George  Burns  speaking  Japanese.  His being shot  for  having  a  comedian's  accent  isn't  something  I  used  to go around  telling  people in  school  about   my posthumously decorated father.  Accounting for him, and I very much wished him to be accounted  for, required  a degree of limpid fabrication.
Well. Most of this never happened  at all.
What  has happened, today  as I sit down to write, is that  the  Nobel Prize for Literature has gone to the novelist William Golding. Listening to the Academy's somewhat  clotted  citation,   "for  his  novels  which  with  perspicuity  of  realistic narrative  art and the diversity and the universality of myth illuminate  the human condition  in the world today,"  I am oddly reassured by the rhetoric. Somehow  it exonerates the question-begging  title I have borrowed in honour  of this journal's silver anniversary.  The  rhetoric  strenuously  refuses to accept  the demise of great fiction, even today,  and  attributes  to the  tattered  novelist wandering  out  of the jungle in shock, carrying  with him his book of life, a unique  and valuable knowl­ edge. A wry smile of satisfaction  comes to the survivor's lips. He feels something of a hero. Wrought  as it has been out of the guerilla warfare characteristic of his own century, his book has not after all been laid to rest on the grander  battlefield of the nineteenth-century novel. War  and  peace, in all of  their  internecine, cui-


109

FRASER

tural, and amorous  manifestations, remain  poles of "the  human  condition  in the world  today,"  and  the  fiction  writer  today,  no  matter   how  uncertain   of  his audience in a small country like Canada, nevertheless aspires to the same knowl­ edge as his great  predecessor. And  what  is this survivor's  unique  and  valuable knowledge?
Elephant.
At least, coming out of the  jungles of Ceylon, this was Lawrence's  knowledge in the long poem he wrote by this title. His knowledge through  and through  is Elephant. We see Elephant,  we smell Elephant, we mourn  Elephant. The  writer says that  what we've done to the beast is what  we've done  to ourselves, crooking the knee to salaam  the white  man,  the  Prince,  the  pale  and  enervate  ideal.  A mountain  of blood caparisoned  at the neck with bells, tong-tong-tong, this is the human  condition suggests Lawrence. He ends up wishing he were in the pagoda, instead  of the visiting wisp of English  royalty, for  his own  supremacy  seems to arise from the knowledge that  his fiction, his ideal, is likelier to animate  the disappointed  people parading  past. The  assurance is unmistakable. Lesser writers would have said less-and if less sprawlingly, neither with so daring a knowledge. Who of these would not also have toned down  the Horse,  Ursula's  "Lightning of knowledge," at the end of The  Rainbow, indeed much of the vaulting fiction that precedes it, and  ended  up with another  book? Dickens, Hardy, Melville,  Faulk­ ner:  these are not perfect novelists, but they are inarguably  supreme. What,  if it isn't Elephant, is this supremacy founded on?
In  Canada   we continue  to believe we live in  a  large  country,  and  that  this largeness, this landscape,  not only defines us but must surely one day account  for greatness. Perhaps it will. But not I suspect before an awareness of City begins to refine this accepted  definition, and  our fiction enables us to see more completely. Man  in  relation  to  his environment  is only  half  a  vision if there's  a failure  to understand  environment  as both  Wilderness and City:  animate as well as inani­ mate  existence, multitudinous as well as reductive.  By City  I  mean  a  jungle no less various than  Wilderness, for the beast it contains  is the soul of  the  culture. Urban  and Rural  are merely shadows of this fuller, and  necessary vision.
Our  literary past, we know, has included the smallness ofT. E. Hulme's  vision, roused in I go6, when this visiting Englishman  and failed philosopher  noticed that "The  first time [he] ever felt the  necessity or inevitableness  of verse, was in  the desire to reproduce  the peculiar  quality  of feeling  which  is induced  by the  flat spaces and  wide horizons of the virgin prairie  of Western  Canada." The  sort of laconic  poems he began  to write stimulated   Pound  who  founded   Imagism.   (I always think of the last three lines of Hulme's  little poem, "The Embankment," as Canada's dubious  contribution   to Modernism.)  The  odd  feeling  Hulme  got from the prairies was of a "chasm" between himself and  God, "the  fright  of the


I 10

FRASER

mind before the unknown." Interestingly,  his response was to return  to the  City
(Brussels) and study more philosophy.
Less familiar  is the journey into western Canada  three  years earlier by another would-be poet, a failed reporter,  from New York City. Like Hulme  he was trying to find himself, but instead  of stopping  on the prairies he came farther  west, for a month  of hunting in the  B.C. Rockies. The  importance of this  journey on his next fifty years is evident  not only in the frequency  with which  he spoke of it to his daughter in the weeks before he died, but also, I believe, in his poetry. Like Hulme,  Wallace Stevens discerned the tension between Wilderness and City, and an entry in his diary from  the summer of I 903 shows this tension becoming  part of his imagination.

There are certain areas of spruce and fir in the forests that take on the appear­ ance of everglades. They are filled with a brownish gloom, still, mysterious. Here the city heart would emit a lyric cry if a bird sang. But we have no music here. The wells of song would freeze overnight.
Lying in one's tent, looking out at the sky, one's thoughts revert to New York:
to the trains stopping at the L stations, to the sinuous females, to the male rubbish, to the clerks and stenographers and conductors and Jews, to my friend the footman in front of Wanamakers, to Miss Dunning's steak, to Siegel and his cigars.
Here come the ants -heads, feet and bellies.

The  poles of Stevens' thought  became many, and  here we can notice the seeds of  his interest  in  North  and  South,  Cold  and  Tropical,   Familiar  and  Exotic, Wilderness and City. What  we also notice is the precise and  natural  way his mind transmogrifies what  it sees into omniscient memory. There's  a quality  of wonder about such looking, crucial to artists, which I want to return  to. Stevens, we know, returned  to New York City;  indeed living elsewhere he spent  the  rest of his life returning to New York City, and  he evolved slowly into a poet. In  the spring  of
I 904, now away from the Wilderness, he wrote of "how  utterly  we have forsaken the Earth,  in the sense of excluding it from our thoughts.... The  rivers still roar, the  mountains  still  crash,  the  winds  still shatter.  Man   is an  affair  of  cities." Stevens seemed  to be dedicating  himself to revealing what  he called the giant's face at  the window,  to understanding the  proper  association  of Wilderness and City, for even man's  "gardens & orchards  & fields are  mere scrapings,"  he  con­ cluded, in the face of this Gulliver. Over forty years later in Transport  to Summer  he published his greatest poem whose title I've borrowed for these notes. His poem i5 the distillation  of a lifetime's  thought  about  the nature  of poetry  (It  Must  Be Abstract,  he wrote, It Must  Change,  It Must Give Pleasure). Unwisely, perhaps,
I should  like now in my thirties  to offer no less didactically  than  Stevens in  his
sixties my own, rather  dissimilar subtitles in search of the elusive Elephant  Stevens glimpsed in this country eighty years ago.


III

FRASER

It Must Be Autobiographical

IWAS BORN   FACING WEST,  in  Perth. This  was the  stepping­
off city of the  world, according  to my mother,  who  along  with  my father  had
gone there by freighter from Colombo, where they'd  encountered each other after his release from the Japanese in Singapore. He was English, she American.  A few months  before the  war  they'd  met in London  where  my  mother  went  in  1939 to find out if she could get an entry into Wimbledon. (In  San  Francisco she was City Open  Champion.) She ended up instead  with  an invitation  from my father to keep in touch. He lived in Chelsea. They exchanged  letters. The  war intervened and  he forgot  her.  Her  later  voyage to Colombo  on  the  chance  of meeting  up with him again was a westward act of love, and a sudden  begetting. In Perth  they had sun and  no winter,  regretted  this at  last, and  moved  to the  world's  second stepping-off city, as my mother called it, Vancouver.
Most of this never happened at all.
What  then  is its use, this failing  to understand the  conventions  of expository writing, this failing to account for parents, this being arch  with metaphor?
Suppose you were to write a travel book full of lies; or  perhaps  a  novel that was libellously true.  In  the first instance,  if discovered,  you would  be called  an impostor;  in  the second,  possibly called into  court.  The  travel  writer  could  do well not to count  on sales, since no one trusts a liar. Depending on his libel, the novelist might sell out and  be reprinted.  In  his case we have someone pretending to tell lies, and  in  the traveller's  case someone  pretending  to  tell the  truth.  It's quickly evident who is more admired and read : the one with the smaller imagina­ tion,  in  my  example  the  novelist. But  reverse  the  situation,   return  it  to  the
conventions of genre, and you end up with the travel writer's  reputation restored. His stock is back up. And the novelist? With  no libellous roman  a clef to sell, he
should probably forget about  money, especially if it's his first or even third  novel.
The imagination is distrusted. As readers of fiction we may all be guilty at one time or another  of wondering  how much  of what  he writes "happened" to  the author.  The question is on the tongue of every talk-show host who has ever inter­ viewed a novelist. Built into this naive question  is the underlying assumption  that form  and  content   are  separable.  This  assumption   leads  to  such  meaningless, unspoken questions as How much credit should I give this writer for "making up"  what  he's written?  How interesting  is this writer,  really?  The  question  of auto­ biography is a fundamental one because readers,  once  out  of childhood,  do  not take so easily to made-up  worlds. They  want  their  fiction rooted in a reality they recognize and  can  "learn" from.  (Melville's  English  publisher  had  to  be con­ vinced that  the  travels in  the South  Seas  related  by Melville  in  his first novel


112

FRASER

Typee  had  actually  happened. At  least John  Murray   published  the  book. An American  firm rejected  it because it seemed "impossible that  it could be true"!) It should  be clear  that  I  am  attacking  the naive view of autobiography that pervades even our  more critical  thinking.  Fiction of any  quality  above the level of Harlequin Romance and Potboiler must be autobiographical by its very nature. This  is to say that  writing  fiction is an act inseparable  from  the mind  that  con­ ceives it. The act of imagining is a real event. It happens. It happens to the author,  and it happens  to reveal his quality  of mind,  depth  of vision, deftness of  touch. (If I record the image of being born in a story, what is the difference between my
memory  of the image  and  my memory  of the event that  took  place  in  Lima?)
Fiction when it is true is idiosyncratic, and when it is supreme,  profoundly idiosyn­ cratic. It's  unique.  It particularizes  and generalizes concurrently.  Its knowledge is Elephant. It is a continuous attempt  to account for the author's sense of both man alone in the world and  man  in society; of what it is to suffer long and to experi­ ence oases of joy. (It  differs from non-fiction in a way worth  returning  briefly to later.)
By autobiographical fiction I do not mean fiction written in the first person any
more than in the second or third.  Neither do I mean a reminiscent style set in the past any less than  a dramatic one set in the present. Each of these types can be just as self-regarding,  self-indulgent,  self-justifying as another,  and  therefore  false, or at least stuck in adolescence. (I wouldn't, as Eliot evidently did, claim there's necessarily something  suspect  about  writers who write  best about  childhood,  so long as there  is a perceived evolution from  rawness to worldliness, from  Wilder­ ness to City.)  The  supremacy  of fiction depends first and  fundamentally on the thoroughness  of its autobiographical voice. Hence  the  meaninglessness of such remarks as these in one of our national  magazines:  "... in his second novel, Lusts, Blaise begins to push the boundaries  of his fiction  beyond the autobiographical"
-when a few lines later  we read,  "... if I'd  been handed  a  page  of this book without  identification  I'd  have  immediately  recognized  the  Clark  Blaise voice." Can  you have it both  ways? Potboilers and  Harlequins  are  cynical and  voiceless works because  the  author   sets  himself  up  (especially  if  he's  only  writing  for money)  as a mind  apart  from  its product,  instead  of one engaged in  argument with  itself. No fiction  worth  writing  has ever been undertaken, it seems to  me, without  the writer's  doubting  his ability to complete it in the way he dares hope. Every completed story or novel should be a miracle, at least to its author,  if it has any chance at all of conveying the wonder of its being alive.







113

FRASER


It Must Subvert
 

MY MOTHER IS WATCHING a biography of Bette  Davis  on

60 Minutes. When  it's over my father switches  channels to the  middle  of a docu­
mentary on Bolivian tin miners.  Two  miners  aged  thirty-two and  twenty-five are dying  of T.B.  contracted in  the  mine.  The younger   man's in  pain  in  hospital. When  he can't afford  the bed any longer  he goes home,  back  to the mine.  There's a light  on  his helmet,  lights on  all the  helmets,  slipping deeper  by  tram  into  the South  American mountain. "This is the  price  of your  tin can," says the  narrator. We  watch   an  impoverished  family  trailing  after   a  casket,   round   brown   faces empty  of expression.  Before his death the father brought home  two  dollars  a day. "Now the family  has to move out  of its company-owned slum," the  narrator  says. Unionize? Last time the miners tried  that  the army  shot dozens.  Increase the  price of tin cans? "Here we're the threat," the narrator tells us. "We'll just turn  to more aluminum and  plastic."  This  poverty's  a cycle. The average miner  dies at  thirty­ three.  At seventy-two  Bette Davis in California is thinking of making a comeback. "Her spunk  really seemed spunky," my mother says to my father, "till you changed channels." My  father looks  moved   too.  He  says  we'll  do  exactly  nothing for Bolivian  tin  miners,  Cambodian refugees,  starving Somalians.  "What begins  at home  anyway?" he asks.  My  mother  says,  "What ends?"  She  picks  absently   at the  hole in  her sleeve. Of  the  three  virtues,  among those  we  had  any  chance of practising when I was young, ours was always Hope.
When  we remember our  parents  they are seldom  revolutionaries. It is the same with novels. Thinking of English  and  American fiction,  say, we notice  that  inno­ vation  has  never  prospered  when  form  was in excess of content, as form  often  is today   in  what   we  sometimes   call  "experimental" fiction.   True   innovation  is inseparable from  content. And  the content of Supreme Fiction  is subversive. I am talking about fiction  that  overturns expectation by  juxtaposition,  nexus,  disloca­ tion.  I am   talking   about   fiction  that   aspires  to  an   understanding  of  cultural anorexy; fiction that  creates the complexity  capable of engaging our  imaginations; fiction  capable of perceiving  the  many  ways that  our  received  culture, for  all its splendours of cohesion, for all our  diplomacy, is suffering  from  edema of the soul. It's  too easy to accept  the  belief that  the  great  themes  are  now  in the  keeping  of dissident  writers  in totalitarian countries, and  thereby to fall into  a decadence of technical obsession. For us it may be salutary to remember that  the valuable writer  in St. Augustine isn't  the one of The  City  of God, but  of his more  earthly City  in Confessions.
By overthrowing the predictable, which  must  always  be boredom itself, fiction will offer  fresh  ways of seeing  the  relationships between  people.  No less the  rela-


II4

FRASER

tionship  between  a man  and  woman  as the one  between  cultures. Cries  for  tech­ nical subversion, which  ignore  the figures of life, are merely  rhetorical. The lament  over  technical old-fashionedness in  fiction  is  usually  an  indulgence  of   magpie  jotters of isms and  withinisms. Such  jotters, who confuse  fashion  with  innovation, seek a hearing (why  so often  from  within   universities?)  not  a  vision.  Elephant isn't  one of their  critical terms.  They  forget  that  a truly  subversive  mind,  as the title  of one  of Stevens'  poems  has it, is "A  Weak  Mind  in  the  Mountains" -in the Wilderness, where  "The wind of Iceland  and  j The wind  of Ceylon" are what "grapple" for mindfulness. Not, manifestly,  hot air.
The   fiction  I am  arguing for  aspires  to  wide  appeal and   thus   to  cliche.  It
wants   to  be  used  up  by  familiarity, swallowed   up  as  idiom,   gobbled   up  and digested  as proverb. This  is its hope. This  is its subversion: the  unexpected  result­ ing  in the  unforgettable, worn-out smile  of the Mona  Lisa, the  opening  bars  of Beethoven's Fifth, Hamlet's To  Be speech.  It's  the task of succeeding generations of artists  to refurbish traditional ways of seeing, to reinvigorate worn-out idioms, to subvert  the familiar. The  novelist's  hope is to make  his own  unfamiliarity dan­ gerously familiar to the generation that succeeds him.

It was the  best of times,  it  was the  worst of times, it  was the  age  of wisdom,  it was the age of foolishness, it was the epoch  of belief, it was the epoch  of incredulity, it was the season of Light, it was the season of Darkness....
Call  me Ishmael.
All  happy   families   are  alike  but  an  unhappy family  is unhappy after  its  own fashion.
As Gregor  Samsa  awoke  one morning from  uneasy dreams he found  himself transformed in his bed into a gigantic insect.
. . . and  yes I said yes I will Yes.

If the skeleton  of fiction  is narrative, then  fiction's  flesh is a complex  of nerves, brain  cells, muscles, features, and  senses. The  interdependency of all these is taken
for granted until  the  backbone, say, is dislocated, and  the  mo lity                            ./ condition becomes  increasingly apparent, important. The  fig{ires of fiction,  both              / fat and starving, stand  in awe  of the  brooding  face of death. The resulting  juxta-
position  is what  transfixes us.


It Must  Be Wonderful

BY WHAT IN   FICTION are we redeemed if it isn't  the  writer's love of life, growing out  of his  awareness  of death? No  fiction  will  be supreme
unless it is haunted by Death. This  is another way of saying it must  be haunted by

FRASER

Time. We do not, as Julian  Huxley argues, have memory  because we are  aware of civilization. We have it because we are always facing death.
Death in many forms. The kind of death  affecting us least often is the death  of people. Even for Charlotte  Bronte, whose brother,  sisters, and  mother  all died off like broom  blossom, the fact of human  death  was only one death  among  many. She, like us, faced  deaths of far less dramatic kinds:  the  death  of holidays, the death  of years, the  death  of seasons, the  death  of meals, the  death  of days, the death  of dreams, the death  of visits, the death  of books, the death  of flowers, the death  of altruism,  the  death  of smells, the  death  of enthusiasms,  the  death  of silences. In fiction as in life an awareness of death  is the measure  of perspective. Maturity is having learned to appreciate  the didactic  nature  of memory. Growing up in Death's  brooding face, our imaginations are educated. This leads to  com­ passion. It  offers redemption.  The  more experiences  we have,  by which  I  mean simply the more we notice of the world, the more deaths  we live through. It  was patently  wrong  of  Wittgenstein  to  say death   is the  experience  we  do  not  live through.  Autobiographical (unlike Harlequin) fiction is full of death, death  that is lived through, and  it's in this way the  novelist distinguishes  himself  from  the historian. How to remember what he is looking at is the novelist's obsession. How to look at  what  he can't  remember  is the  historian's.  The  perspective  we value more,  the  perspective  we must  value  more,  is the  novelist's. His  memories  are created in the face of their deaths.
In  several  of  Wallace  Stevens'  early  poems,  writes  Richard   EHmann  in  an essay, the poet insists "that  without death,  love could not exist." This  is similar to saying that  the way we look at something in the present is determined  by how we have educated  ourselves to see it simultaneously  in the future.  The  subversion  of the  present  is the  inevitable  consequence  of  possessing memory.  What,  for  ex­ ample, do we mean by Here and Now, and what if any are the moral, the cultural,  implications  of There  and Then?  (What  is Selfishness exactly?)   Our  interest  in fiction accrues in ratio to the wonder we feel it expressing of the Here  and  Now as an ideal. The supremacy of fiction resides in its capacity  to inhibit Time.
The   Other  Worldness  of  great  fiction  makes  everything   happen,   or  so  it seems, for the writer's mandate isn't to change  the world but to show that  within the imagination, capable of evoking both the sublime and darkness together, exists a metaphor for God. The fiction we value more is inclusive rather  than  exclusive. It offers no answers except the order and  multiplicity  of its vision, the nuances of its humblest  details, the miraculousness of its language.  It offers a sense of Earth. But it offers more  than  this, for it is a  benevolent  and  finally  human   God, in­ terested in understanding the relations of man  and  nature  in the  broadest  sense of man  and  man. This God, this imagination, this fiction is Wonderful,  for  there

116

FRASER

ino getting  through  or around  the authority  of its vision and  the intuitive  logic of its means.
To  be born  without  a sense of wonder, the supreme  novelist tells us, is to  die
without  knowledge. And this knowledge is finally metaphorical. "All knowledge," Kafka  says in one of his stories, "the  totality  of all questions  and  all answers,  is contained  in the dog." Elephant, dog. The supreme writer enters his imagination, as Stevens tells us in "Notes  Toward  a Supreme  Fiction,"  and  "The elephant / Breaches the darkness of Ceylon with blares." Stevens conceived of his theory and his fiction as inseparable.  His metaphor became  him. The  hunger  of the  writer peering into the darkness is always such a becoming.
Dwelling  simultaneously  in  Wilderness  and  City  the  writer  has  visions and revisions to account  for his place in the world. Perhaps  I was born  the  day  my mother died, the day my father  died, the day war ended. Who can say what mat­ ters more than  the sheer accident of one's birth? Who can say the wonder of  being alive is not the writer's entire  theme? Elephant, he speaks, Elephant.
I was born.














STILL LIFE

Len Gasparini


Imagine a red-and-white-checkered cloth on a wooden  table, and  on the table
a bottle of homemade wine, a dish of
black olives, bread,  and  Gorgonzola cheese.
Now try to imagine my octogenarian grandfather ringing  a bell as he pushes his handcart
through the streets of our neighborhood, sharpening people's  knives. Imagine him returning home at noon to this still life,
and  partaking of it with the gusto of an artist.




















118

WHO JISKED ME TO BE  Jl REJIDER OF ENTRJIILS?

Robert Gibbs

He asked  me what  the signs were of a late spring 	a hot summer 	dearth
I said  I could  not tell though  they
were all around I was sure

He asked  me where  I'd look    Was there
an almanac of sorts or did we have our own
Old  Indian	I 	said there  must be one of each  from  what  I'd  heard

He asked if there  were still new moons fish days 	fasts    on the drugstore calendar	Were  the wormcasts  heavier than  usual?   The sun warped

one side or the other?   Did  the river stink  more pungently?   The eels slide out of it deliberately?   Who had laid  the woodchuck on his side

in such  a deep  remission?    Were  the ravens racketeering in glossier encopements?   Why did  the sky blacken  again  without
intention?	I had  no answer and  told him so

I who scarcely  know my right  hand  from my left 	Who  asked me to be a reader
of entrails or unraveller of dreams?
He pointed to the earth 	He pointed  to the sky

He called  the moon  bloody 	and  so it was He stopped on my threshold  and  would not come in 		took sips of tea outside  but refused meat 	wasted 	As for me

what  would  I do when winter  days came on? I would  keep my two ears warm 	unnip
my nose 	and  muffle my feet 	I would walk
around my neighbourhood with no falls


119

POVERTY LINES

Kristjana Gunnars


Bji:irg downstairs with  long braids, must  have  been  in her  eighties  & wore  peysufot  on  Sundays.  I used  to  go  down  for  a  cup  of  coffee when  I was nine & we lived on  Th6rsgata, the  old  town  in  Reykja­ vik,  right   under   the  school-cairn  hill  where   the   British   barracks were  during the  war.  They   say  you  could   see  the   rats  crossing between  barracks whenever  you  looked.  Bjorg  told  me

when   the  Black  Death came   to  Eyjafji:irdur, Helga  from   Grund stayed  in  the  mountains until  it was over.  Looking over  the  district below, she claimed  a heavy  fog  lay over  the  valley  the  whole  time. In 1784, during the famine, Dinus  & Th6rlaug in Fnj6skadalur  lost eleven  of their  sixteen  children. It was  hunger.

They  say poverty  is relative.  Poverty is deprivation. An empty  table. Empty hands.  No curtains. The park  here  in  Winnipeg is covered with  leaves,  maple   I  think,   brown, orange. Some  garbage  blown over, old newspapers, cardboard  cups.  A man  with  white  hair  (later I know it's Pietr)  on a bench  wearing a big navy  coat  at least  as old as the war.  I can't tell his age because  his face  is buried in  his lap.

Civil  servants  are  trying  to establish the  presence  of  poverty  by the use  of  income   data. P.  Trudeau  claims   you  have   to  define   the poverty  line first. People  get paid  a great  deal  for  this  kind  of work. There are many such lines

along  the crib, bars of infant Dea's jail, & where  the door  should  be, two  by fours  leaning   into  the  other room,   nails  hanging loose,  & along  the floor, crooked  lines smeared over.  The child  Fyo  is a line as he leans on what  was to have  been a closet, hands behind  his back, looking  at  nothing.

Bjorg  was a grandmother to me  at  the  time  since  I had  none.  She cooked  for  herself & old  Magnus in  a big pot,  big apron, big smile, always  ready with  something to say. Some  priest  or other started the rumor of Hunger the cook. God  has  a cook  who sweetens  the  food. His name is Hunger.





120

GUNNARS


There are  also  lines  across  the  window.  In  this  tenement from  the thirties they  form  a  cross & the  window  sill is made  out  of  apple boxes.  The child   Tanya couldn't be  more   than   six,  sitting   right under the  pane,  arms  folded  over  her  chest.  She's  a  patient  girl. Most  likely  it's  her  grandma Dobrila,  the  thin  one  with  very  short hair  behind the  ears,  spooning  out  noodle  soup  from  a  pot  on  the gas stove.

She  reminds me of one  of Bjorg's  stories. Erlendur the  rich  invited J6n  the  poor  to his feast.  He was fond of the old  man's gentleness  & asked  him  after   the  meal  whether he  had  ever  tasted  better   food. J6n  said  yes he  had.  Erlendur surprised   asked  where  was  that? It was during the famine, J6n  answered, when  I licked  my skin  jacket
& ate  it dry.

The lines are also scribbled  on walls & turn  into graffiti.  Deprivation. No sheets  on  the  bed.  No light  bulbs. The infant Dea  sleeps  under Pietr's navy overcoat & there's  no gas to cook the thanksgiving turkey with.  The turkey  was a gift. One  of Fyo's ears  is leaking,  there's no money  to take  him  to the  Winnipeg clinic  with.  The mother  Heph­ ziba stands in the dark  with sunken  cheeks & a brown  scarf  over  her head.

Once the  famine in  Vopnafjordur got  so  bad   that   the  governor decided on a last resort. They  herded  all the  poor into  the mountains north of  Heljardalur & left  them  to  live  or  die.  They   began   by throwing out  lines  for  salmon  in  the  river.  Bjorg  supposed   all  but one of them  died.  In  the evenings  I played cards  with  her & Magnus. They   didn't have  much,  but  there  was  a  pack  of  cards,  a  suit  of peysufot  & a  candle. This  was in  the fifties,  the  barracks were  torn down  & everyone  had  a home  by then.

They  say you have  to define a home  first. Protection from  the  cold, privacy, sanitary facilities.  There are  home  lines as well which  make the  place  you  live  in  not  a  home  after  all.  Lines  across  the  glass, what  used  to  be called  venetian blinds.  The little  girl  Tanya is in the  window   looking  after   me.  I'm   leaving.   She  has  eaten   noodle soup  & her  grandma Dobrila's hands  can  be seen on  the other side.









121

TWO POEMS

Ralph Gustafson

THE RO]ID BY THE L]IKE


Cars pass along  the road.
The  moon is caught in the branches of the birch
Bare of leaves, only the lower right  arc
Thin as an edge is visible, the  rest
Imagined so that  the weight  in the branches
Is heavy and is bent gold.

Over  all the scene is a quiet
Despite  the road's  intrusion. It is an emotion
Not unusual  if a lake is there
And  hills, some few to contain the sadness, The  sadness of life (for life is sadness Whether the city or the successful hills).

Melancholy is not unavoidable
But there are certain  things: the certainness
Of what is heard; the commonness that  changes
Name only. The  mist that  is come Over  the moon is an example of what I mean -but that  is not it:

The  present commonness and  the cost­ Great agreements spent on the trivial  - Men who speak of what  is easy-
And who honour it and  the force of violence-
0 all who travel  this lakeside  road
And are under  the diminished arc of this moon.

I would have common kindness  and  high art, Not what all would understand
At once but could strive for, awakening
To wonder  and  achievement, and  a certain honour
For those who only love  -a quiet
Road  beneath whatever moon.




122

GUSTAFSON

JIT THE ZOO

0 for all the blind, sadness!
For all men, reminder, reminder, Light is done, eyes do not see, Girls walk by grace of others, Hands reach  out, rain falls
And  leaves do not show silver, the eyelid
In its workings clears nothing. Praise,  those who count  suns.
Children. Children. I think  of children
Not  used to it, a happening
Of birthdays felt only,
Neither red,  nor yellow, nor white Candles -except the heart  convey it. In that  smelly yard, small
Hands discover  the elephant, the entire
Enormous building, rumpled skin
Going  up forever  standing still,
The soft snuff dangerous but the moveable
Ears  flopped  with withdrawals not really. I watch  the stupendous information. Elephant is said to be there.














123

LOCAL CULTURE AND THE NATIONAL WILL
 





Don Gutteridge





ONE OF  THE THINGS THAT MAKES any d c=ion
and national culture difficult is the elusiveness of the terms themselves, and  in the face of such difficulty a tendency  to simplify complex  and  evolving  phenomena. As a writer of poems and  novels who has spent some part  of twenty-five years in exploring the extremes of the national and the local (Louis Riel and my own grandfathers, Nootka Sound  and  Point  Edward), I  have  formed  some opinions about each, about their nature and their value as culture.  What  follows is a sketch of these ideas, an argument  if you like for the sort of book one rarely gets around to writing.
We begin by defining local culture,  the  root-flesh  from  which  all subsequent culture  is derived. Without  it, nothing  happens.  In  its radical  form  local culture (and  by extension all culture)  consists of those human  products,  communal states­ of-mind and explicit and tacit communications  whose principal  purpose is to help establish an individual's  place within the group.  The  group  may be as small as a family or as large as a clan  or a geographical   region.  What  keeps it  local  and radical are these distinguishing features : the time and space, history and  perspec­ tives, legends and dialects that infuse the objects of culture -and  whose general acceptance  demarcates  the existence of local  culture-are  mutually  shared  by members  of the group.  The  amount  of translation  needed  between  the subject­ matter or elementary form of the object and that understood by the "audience" will always be minimal. Theme  will dominate  variations, performance be valued over composition. This  is the culture  of tale, folk song,  jig, communal  quilt.  Its  well­ springs are dream,  collective memory, character, ideolect, love, existential  terror. Its  purposes  are  always  clear-cut:  the  reinforcement   of  group  and  individual  identity through  coherence, bonding, and integration. Coherence  through  history
-family, village, clan-actual and invented;  bonding  with the living members, the generations, the fantastic figures of legend; integration with these latter agents and with the exigencies of immediate  space inhabited but  not so easily mediated as time and history. Integration, of course, is the hope of both  the group  and  the individual  constituents. The  need to belong -to be able to mediate  between the existential objects we are born next to and  the phantasma of our  private-but-no­ less-existential dream  world-is particularly  human  and  particularly  hazardous.


124

GUTTERIDGE


To  surrender  utterly  to  the  phenomenal  datum  means  the  death  of dream,  to unleash the incoherent  energies of dream signals the end of social harmony. Hence integration  may  be at  times too strong  a word;  perhaps  accommodation  better fits as both individuals  and  the  collective strive to balance  the  forces propdling them. In  this sense the social group,  so ubiquitous throughout human  history, is both  the reason  for, and  the  necessary condition  to, the  formation  of a culture and its effects. Until very recently, local culture and the regional social group were close to being synonymous. Each tribe of us, as it were, was more than a mere sum of its cultural  objects  and  habits;  our culture  was a  proce:rs with  renewable  by­ products;  it was as much  the impulse to create demonstrative  and  binding signs, symbols, and  rites as it  was to  conserve the  manifest  stories,  iconography,  and drama   that  resulted  therefrom. Often  the  impulse  was  collective, emphasizing group values; occasionally it was individuated  to remind the group  that  language is after all a colloquy of separate  voices speaking from the common dark. Looking back, as we often do, at the surviving objects of an extinct tribe and attempting  to reconstruct its culture is a risky enterprise for many reasons, not the least of which is the fact that  sagas, sculptures,  runes-once  removed from  the living  context which they inhabited  and  hence robbed of their unspoken aboriginal  magic, their capacity  to incite and  spawn  tacit  patterns  of connectiveness-are dead  objects whose resuscitation  can  only  be achieved  in a present-day,  far-removed  context entrammelled by its own cultural  necessities.
While dynamic  and  elementary,  local culture in order  to survive must strike a balance  between  past  and  present,  between  conservation  and  necessary growth. It lives constantly with the danger  of ossification if the forms become overly rigid, if time is not  merely slowed  but  stopped,  if  variations  are  seen to  threaten  the theme. The  result is what  we might  call static local culture, the source of much gratuitous  criticism aimed  at regional craft traditions  or artificially revived  enter­ prises like totem-pole  reconstruction  or the disinterment  of folk song  collections. The  latter  phenomenon, however,  ought  to  be viewed with  sympathy for  it  is probably  symptomatic of a deeper  malaise. Many  of our  regions in  Canada  are too new, too polyglot, or barren  of any continuous traditions,  and so they import
--in desperation  and  holus-bolus-an intact  regional culture  from somewhere
else on the planet. The  most egregious example of what  I call ersatz local culture is the adoption  of country  music from  Nashville by large  segments of the  rural population, many of whom once had a thriving  local music. They  appear  to feel more at home  with  a foreign  regional culture  than  with  the  mass cosmopolitan culture being served up to them by their betters. While pathetic  in a way, such behaviour  does point  up  the  powerful  need  for  communities  to feel they  have adopted  their own kind of culture  for their own purposes-identity and bonding. It hdps  explain why a local balladeer in Woodstock, Ontario, can sing the praises


125

GUTTERIDGE

of a hometown belle in flawless Tennessee  twang. The long,  arduous process  of reintegrating and  reinventing a genuine  local  tradition may  indeed   have  begun. I find this sort of aberrant local culture painful but  heartening.




l:ERE IS,  HOWEVER,  ANOTHER  VARIATION of  local  culture which  is perhaps the  most significant  one. Within thriving, genuine communities bound  by cultural necessities, an artist  rises from  time  to time  who  fashions indi­ vidualistic  works whose effects are too powerful, too true for the group to accommo­ date. Such  an artist  uses the very dialect, symbolism, and  psychological geography of the  place  in  order  to  speak   (in  part)  directly   to  his  group.  Often  he  lives, creates,  and  remains in  the  community. I  think   of  David  Adams Richards  or Greg Curnoe among many of our regional  geniuses. Sometimes, however,  the local community does not always fully appreciate the results,  precisely  because  the  per­ ceived balance between  individual and  group identity has been  tipped. The  artists may  go  underground; sometimes  they  are  adopted  and   lionized   outside   their region  and  move  into  exile  or  join  a  larger  configuration  of  communities. But what  has  happened is irreversible: nurtured  by  the  resident   local  culture or  in opposition  to its stasis, utilizing  the mythology, iconography, and  psychic  history of the  locus, an  artist  of  extraordinary talent-a  visionary  with  a  command of craft  who  is driven  to  re-create the  community through the  imagination of one of its individuals-produces works of such  power  that  they  provide  the  basis for
a new kind of culture itself:  the transformational.
Transformational culture is often,  even  wilfully,  confused  with  so-called  "uni­ versal culture" and  then  set simplistically  and  deliberately against  "local  appeal" as if the  two  were  antonyms in whose opposition lay some  profound  critical  and anthropological insight. "Canadian writers  will never  be considered for  the  Nabel  Prize  until  they start  writing  books about  universal themes!" How  often  we have been  compelled  to listen  to such  nonsense  in  its various  guises. When  a  work  of transformational power is produced, it is grounded in the  local,  but  that  ground is thereby  raised  to the allegorical  perspective. To  the  local  "reader" the  symbols will feel  familiar but  strange, their  configurations  novel  and  scary   (I think   of Winghamites coping  with  Alice  Munro's stories  or  the  valleyfolk  puzzling   over Buckler). Such  works are addressed  by the artist  to himself and  to anyone  else who can  translate, penetrate, and   respond   to  the  ideological surface.  While   instru­ mental music  and  abstract painting may  "travel" more  readily,  literature, objec­  tive painting, folk song, and  the  plastic arts-where subject and  formal elements  are  locally  rooted -will  travel   only  as  far   as  their   surface  depictions,  their referents, and  the underlying mythos can be understood by any would-be responder

GUTTERIDGE


(all  three  factors are  operative, not  just the so-called  "universal types"  somehow visible beneath the interfering clutter  of the surface).
Furthermore, transformational culture is likely to be the  result of an accidental but  wondrous integration, in  the  mind  of an  individual artist,  of  his own  local impulse  with  all  his worldly  experience. The  transformational artist -far  from hibernating in the local  bush-soaks up foreign  impulses of all kinds but  always drives  them  downward and  inward to  himself  and  his own  space  and  time - reformulating the local mythology in terms that  ( 1)  illuminate, for those constitu­ ents who can stand  it, the locale in fresh, frightening, abiding ways,  ( 2)  allegorize both  its substance and  dialect, its surface  and  depths,  its mores  and  neuroses,  and
( 3)  revalue  it  through the  individual imagination and  waft  it abroad to  any  of those other  communities or individuals "out  there." Regionally transformed such knowledge is, but  never  fully  universal; that  is a  contradiction in  terms.  Those outside  the immediate culture (region, province,  country, continent)  can  respond to it only as far  as its particular paradigms can  be understood. All culture travels and  has in the process to be translated. For example,  to put  the case crudely,  what remains of  Hamlet   when  translated  into  Russian  or  read  in  the  original   by  a grade-twelve student  in  Regina on  a  snowy  Saturday? Quite a  lot,  we  think, though not  all  and   certainly not  the  same  everywhere.  Even  though  it  is  not universal, Hamlet  does travel. Indeed  its record  of successful  travelling is what  is fascinating from  the  perspective of cultural analysis. There is no official translation for a work that  transformed its own culture and still has the  potential to transform the culture of communities not yet realized.  Like all products of local culture that rise to the  level of the  transformational, it was  prompted by local  historical  cir­ cumstance and  is even  now  moving  through historical   time  and  subject  to  its ruthless  emendation.  Each   community  who  adopts it-each   individual   who opens  his mind  to it -must  affect  a new translation, and  unless some  parody of cultural activity is in vogue,  must  integrate it with  his own  genuinely  developed experience. The  idolatry often  associated   with  the  response  to  "great" foreign  works is always  a perversion of culture, as is much  of the  literary  criticism  which attempts to fix such works "once  and  for all time."
One  is still willing to make  an effort  to read  (i.e., translate) Donne's Songs and Sonnets  because  the locus of its feelings and  "statements" lies in relationships we can  still understand and  be deeply  moved  by. Nonetheless,  to deny  that  the  con­ ceits, ornamentation, and  political  references  are  not  partly  impedimenta!is  both untenable and  perverse.  Donne's literary  conventions, dialect, and  politics are not our  own,  in  particular or  in general. It appears that  no  one  is willing  to  admit this obvious  cultural, one  might  even say anthropological, fact,  for  fear  perhaps that  the  great  artists  of the  past  will either  be instantly debated or  automatically devalued vis-a-vis the  local  and  contemporary. That is patently  absurd. Our  re-


127

GUTTERIDGE


sponse to art doesn't work that way. Many individuals,  even communities,  will be happy  to respond to Hamlet  despite the layers of translation  necessary and  even find it more rewarding than  the latest Canadian melodrama downtown.  The  two kinds of response -to the foreign and the local -and  the myriad  variations  in between are  not mutually  excluding.  What  one may  be forgiven  for  thinking  is that  many  teachers  and  cultural  imperialists  fear  that  if  the  illegitimately  for­ mulated  mystique of the "great  work" is allowed  to deflate,  their  student/client responders will either reject the work out-of-hand  or enter  into a  genuine,  trans­ formative and dangerous liaison with it.



IF ALL  GENUINE WORKS OF  cuLTURE emanate  through  trans­ formations  from  the local, what  then  can  a national  culture  be? Given  the  size and multi-regional  nature  of most modern  nation-states, it is not unfair  to claim
that there are few, if any, monolithic cultures at the level of the nation-as-a-whole. Certainly Canada fails to qualify on ethnic, linguistic, and  geographical/historical grounds. However,  if we define a genuine  national  culture  as a multi-communal one, then we can see more clearly how local culture  gets transformed  to regional, provincial,  and  national  configurations   (not  syntheses) . In  this  latter  view,  a national  culture  would be characterized  by the shared,  non-threatening exchange of cultural  experiences, values and artefacts -within  a federated  state like Can­ ada -between the consenting member-groups. Ideally a set of affinitive local cul­ tures would exchange cultural  effects in order  to allow the tension  along the axis of individual/group or  small-group/large group/foreign  community   to  initiate positive responses, and  to promote  accommodation to,  and  integration  of, new forms and  new knowledge where risks are  bearable  and  growth  assured.  In  an ideal multi-communal culture,  transformational  artists  would  be encouraged  to send their works abroad  and in turn  be open to influence  from  reciprocal  artistic experiences. Here, too, the accidents of history and  circumstance can be accepted and continually  transformed  into the vision of  ourselves we need to survive.
Obviously  Canada is not  an  exemplum  of such  a  culture.  Here,  as in  many other western nations, we are victims  (or impressarios)  of a  pseudo national
ture  which in its virulent  forms breaks  down  the  will of local  cultures  through
deliberate  social  policy or  the  mindless  intervention   of  modern   technological systems that  leave the regional community  mesmerized,  exhausted,  or happily drugged.  It  would  require  another  paper  longer  than  this  one  to elaborate  the complex ways in which the modern  nation-state  has adopted  and  deployed  tech­ nology to disrupt  and destroy the luxuriance  of local culture  (not  to mention  the intimidation   and  outright  annihilation   of  transformational  artists  everywhere).

GUTTERIDGE


However, it  may  be  sufficient  here  to  point  out  that   the  main  features  of  this technology   (a  true  antonym for  local  culture)  are  these:    ( 1 )  mass  media  and mass communication systems  which  allow  bogus foreign  culture to inundate the regions;   ( 2)  a  consequent increase in  the  pace,  volume,  and  repetition of alien "structures" (bogus  or genuine) which  induces  anxiety,  narcosis,  or at  best aber­ rant  imitation; ( 3 )  an  irresistible temptation to use these  instruments to control,  to propagandize, to purvey  an "official"  view of culture, or merely through neglect to allow a metropolitan culture (like Montreal or Toronto) to overwhelm. As we have  noted,  the  growth  of local  culture and  its transformation  and  dissemination require time, stability, trust,  and  the means to communicate its quiet  news.
As a  nation   we  have  in  Canada an  ideal  conglomeration of  communities in
which  to foster  a genuine national culture  of the multi-communal type. So far  we have  remained relatively uninfected by the more  totalitarian perversions  of  mod­ ern  technology. We  may  ignore  our  own artists,  but  then  we don't  torture  them either. We are  a federated state  and  intractably regional.  Nonetheless, technology as an  instrumental system  and  as a way-of-thinking has  arrived on  these shores. Technology itself  is inimical to  the  preservation of  local  culture. The  effects  of mass  TV  and   radio -despite  the  well-meaning  distortions of  the  CBC -are already apparent. The importation of ersatz foreign cultures is accelerating apace. Our  national government is more and  more seduced  by the efficiencies of centrali­ zation; soon it may  be hungry for a representative transcontinental pseudo-culture to peddle  abroad. For  the moment  it seems content  with  province-bashing at  the political  level  and   at  the  cultural  level -when  it  thinks   of  it  at  all -seems pleased with the collocation of frozen folk-cultures it piously labels "multi-cultural"
-surely  an  unconscious parody of a  multi-communal national culture wherein each of the regional groups  (including of course ethnic  communities) would  have a living,  developing anima  of its own -fostering, tolerating, or  flinging  abroad transformational  works  to  those  mutually  committed  enclaves   who,  for   these moments in time at least, have  decided  to try to become as capacious a community as their  imaginations will allow.
Culture is both  a transformational and  a conserving  phenomenon. Without it
no community or nation long survives in any terms  we would  call human. Because it is local,  psychological, and  grounded in time,  it cannot  be manufactured. As a nation  this country has been singularly blessed to be able  to nurture local culture, encourage transformations within it, and  absorb -if  it  is at  all  possible-the terrifying incursion of the  technological into our lives. Some  understanding of the imperatives of local culture and  the shibboleths of cultural industrialism may  help us in the  critical years  ahead. As a nation  of federated communities we will also need more  will and  determination than  we have shown  thus  far.



129

OU SONT LES MJINTEJIUX

Philippe Haeck




Une   femme.   Ecrire   commence  souvent  ainsi.   Combien  ai-je   de manteaux  pour   nous  garder  du   froid, eloigner   la   tristesse.  Ton oreille  est  encore  obstruee. J'ai  connu sept  annees   de  joie,  autant de  detresse.  Un   homme.   J'ai tant   soif  et  desir   que   mon   regard devient lointain. Quand  le sommeil vient   je  murmure des  airs  de joie, j'embrasse  roes genoux, reve  qu'au matin j'aurai trouve le  pas de !'amour.

Une  femme  pleure  a chaque jour: sa maison  est dans  la sienne.  Ou
sont  passes }',eclat des visages, la douceur des  mains.

Un  homme  sait  les spirales  de  la  fatigue, leur  fureur. II  ne  nomme pas  Dieu:  il est en paix  au  milieu  de la cruaute de la tristesse.  Mon corps  est plein  de  trous  qui  veulent faire  !'amour avec  le vent.  Un homme a  deux   manteaux, l'un  vert,   I'autre  rouge;  comment  en
donner un  .a celle qui  pleure. Mon  corps  barde de  boucliers  craint
!'amour avec  une  femme.


2

Perdu dans  une  chambre d'hotel, a travers les vitres  sales,  un  ciel sali  de nuages  informes.  Il  ouvre  au  hasard, il a  peur  de  s'endormir egare:  ":Ecoute-moi,   et  11eponds-moi!  J'erre a
chagrin et  je m'agite." Personne n'ouvre les Psaumes qui  entre  dans cette chambre a un  lit une  television, le livre  est neuf.  L'homme se
jette sur la phrase,  met Dieu  sur sa langue; il ne goute  rien, l'enfance dans  de grandes cgliscs remonte, il n'en  pense  rien.  Perdu dans  son chagrin il a froid, sa vie s'affale, la  jeune femme de ses noces marche
dans  son  esprit -les yeux  sees  du  miroir   pleurent. Qu'une  jeune
Sulamite vienne  rechauffer ce  qui  lui  reste  de  corps,  a quoi  bon  a
quoi  noel sale noel. Le  visage defait erie.


3

Un  enfant parle  bas, maman papa crient qu'ils  ne s'entendent  pas. Doucement  par   la  porte   de  derriere !'enfant  sort   jouer   avec  ses

rgo

HAECK


petites  autos  et  sa crainte. Le  mal  se repand sur  la  nappe, chacun fuit  de  peur  d'etre emporte par  les crayons,  les aiguilles  qui  volent dans   la  piece,  fteches  introjetees  par   toutes  les  peaux; les  esprits
enfletristent. Les  manques a vivre  des parents crient au  travers  des
corps   des  enfants. "L'homme  est  le  seul  etre   vivant   qui   mente. Voila  ce qui  rend  si difficile a !'enfant !'adaptation a cette  partie de
son  environnement."


4

Un  homme  au  carrefour de  la  vie et de  la  mort,  de !'amour et  de la  violence.  II est la depuis  longtemps, il y a planre  son  lit, sa  table de  travail,  quelquefois il  se  leve,  vient   pour   s'engager  dans   une route,    toujours  la   meme.   Visiblement  c'est   un   homme    excite, extenue, extreme. Lorsqu'il emboite  le pas  au  jeune  homme  nu  qui vit  avec  la  violence  de  la  mort,  il le suit  de  pres,  aimanre par  son style;  au  moment oil  il  va lui  coller  ala peau,  il  perd  l'equilibre: le   jeune   homme  continue  sa  marche  avec   un   masque ironique. L'homme retourne a sa table de travail.

L'homme se sent vieux de buter  sur des corps  invisibles: une femme aux   yeux  revulses,  a  la  bouche   crispee,  son  visage  gonfle  lui  est
familier; un cure  de campagne a la parole  nette: "nous sommes  des
pecheurs"; un   petit   gan;on   blond   au   baiser   franc  qui   joue   aux
camions; des branches d'arbre, des couronnes d'epines; une panthere des  neiges  au  milieu  de  ses preparatifs amoureux; une  femme  avec deux  manteaux, l'un  de verite,  l'autre de sang; deux  medecins, l'un maigre, I'autre gros, avec des paroles d'un autre age sur la folie de la croix,  la  beaute de  la  naissance; un  glas  immense   sur  un  timbre­ poste.

Apres  sept  annees  l'homme plie  sa  table  de  travail. II  se demande s'il  saura encore   mettre sur  ses epaules   le  manteau de  !'abandon, manger le solei! commun, dormir dans  la  maison  de !'amour de  la VIe.


5


Les  frontieres ne  sont  plus  certaines entre   un  homme une  femme, un adulte un enfant, la realite  la bonne. L'enfoui revient  a l'inconnu
qui  vient.  Un  homme  avec  le gout  de !'innocence au  milieu  de  son discours  demande: qui  va m'enseigner la critique avec  Ia bonte.

MERE  SELF

David Helwig



I believe in one God the Father  Almighty, Maker  of heaven  and earth  ...


IHRAR  THE  WORDS from  all  around   me. Above  the  alt..-, light shines through  the stained-glass  windows.  In  the  central  panel,  the  usual
Christ -long hair, a beard, a conventionally  handsome  face-stands on a bank of clouds, his arms spread  in invitation  and  blessing, a  golden  halo  around  his head. In  the other  panels, lilies and grapes, the dove and  the cross. The  eyes are lifted toward colour and light.
At the organ, invisible behind my back, stands my friend Bill, who brought  me here. Much of the time he is blinded by the haemorrhage of retinal cells damaged by diabetes. Sometimes the bleeding stops and sight returns.  He has been diabetic since he was a young man,  and  the disease assaults his body  in  a  multitude of forms.  Feet  become  infected,  the  infection  spreads  into  the  bone  and   blood poisoning  rises up  the  leg, his body  defended  and  assaulted  by  vast  doses of antibiotics.  Surgeons excise small  bones from  his feet. I  have  heard  him  preach on the nature  of God's providence, where it is to be found  in the face of ills that will not be cured.
The  men  and  women  of  the  choir  who  stand   near   me  are  decent,  kind,
respectable  people. I have always loved to sing, and  I love to sing here. Around me I hear their voices.

I believe in the  Holy Ghost, the  Lord
The Giver of Life  . ..

The catch is, I don't.
Then  what  am  I doing  here, an  unbeliever  among  believers, a  detached  ob­ server at the solemnities of prayer and eucharist?  Initially,  I came  because I  was asked. Bill had been an organist at a number  of churches, and  I had a peripatetic  career as guest soloist or additional  voice in choirs from Napanee  to Sharbot  Lake. When  he settled at St. James in Kingston,  I settled  with  him.  I'm  at  home in a church  choir, joined my first when I was a boy soprano,  and hymns were the first poetry I knew passionately and intimately.

HELWIG


Christ  whose glory  fills the skies, Christ  the true, the only light, sun of righteousness, arise, triumph o'er the shades of night.
Dayspring from on high, be near;
daystar in my  heart appear.
(Charles Wesley)

My parents  and grandparents sang in church  choirs, and  I have in my  posses­ sion a hymn  book given to my grandfather when he was a member  of  the male quartet at the Dovercourt  Spiritualist  Temple,  where the liturgy included prayers for eccentric prophets  like Swedenborg  and special mention  of  the workers of the world.
I am doubly out of place here. My family tradition,  on both  sides, is the tra­ dition  of  opposition  to  the  established  churches.  My  ancestors  were  German anabaptists and  English non-conformists;  I call myself an agnostic;  I  am singing in an Anglican church  choir.
It's  impossible to spend  hours  in a choir stall,  reading  the  liturgy,  hearing  a variety of sermons, without  being forced to contemplate  the great  religious ques­ tions and  to define one's  belief and  unbelief. Jung,  I'm  told, says that  after  the age of forty, human  beings become preoccupied  with questions  that  can  only be called religious. Perhaps  it is that sea-change in myself that  I am observing.
I'm  not sure that  I was ever a Christian, even as a child. My parents attended
a United  Church  with some regularity, and  the church  was an  accepted  part  of my life, but  God was never,  I think,  more than  a word.  Once  when  I was very young, I asked my mother about God; I don't remember the question, but I do remember the answer.
"God," she said, "is inside you."
I remember  her words, remember, even, the place in our Toronto  home where
8he was standing.  I don't  recall  just what  I felt, but the moment  is vivid enough that  I must have been shaken  by what she said. I felt, I suspect, invaded,  as if I had  been  told  I  was  the  host  of some  powerful  and   mysterious  parasite.  Or perhaps felt a sense of guilt that  God was there and  I had  never discovered him.
My mother was no theologian, but her explanation  has its roots deep in the protestant  tradition. From  Bunyan  to Kierkegaard,  writers in that  tradition  por­ trayed  man  as a soul struggling  in solitary terror  with  a  driving  and  insatiable inner  need.  Perhaps  that  is only  how  I,  with  my  puritan  sensibility,  naturally took her words. She  might  equally  have  meant  that  God  was inside  me as the source of all beauty and pleasure.
God, if he is inside you, is not God. He is conscience or inspiration,  energy or wisdom. He  is Freud's superego.  He  is the  higher  powers of the  human  mind.


133

HELWIG

The  identification  of the divine with the higher  human  powers is the core of the attitude  called  humanism,  which  had  a  certain   vogue  earlier  in  the  twentieth century.  After  Hitler  and  Stalin,  it  seems  dated   and  shallow.  Better  worship nothing than worship a part of ourselves.
Why worship at all? Why not simply do one's sensible best in a pragmatic  and secular life?
There  is, in most human  beings, an impulse to praise, to honour,  to reverence, that can't  be fulfilled by taking as its object anything  merely human.  "Reverence rather  than  freedom  is the  matrix  of human  nobility," George  Grant  observes. Life without  reverence is impoverished. We are left in the barren  landscape  of a cautious meliorism. Or the more terrifying one of absolute valueless freedom, articulate in the intellectual as nihilism, inarticulate in most people, a fearful emptiness underlying all the chatter
Most  of  us live  in a  day-to-day  world  of  pragmatic  judgments,  valium  the solution to our distress, domestic affection the highest form of love. The popular­ ity of astrology, science fiction, parapsychology  is the  product  of our  hunger  for mystery, for escape from the world of what works not too badly.
Without  a  view toward  some transcendent object,  thought   tends  to  become imprisoned  and  circular;  man's  mind  ponders only the  products  of man's  mind. God is the necessary object of the highest  contemplation, and  the  possibility of transcendence  a step  toward  an  escape from  solipsism  and  banality.  The   Old Testament  is full  of stories of men  and  women  forced  to  enlarge  their  under­ standing  when  confronted  with  the arbitrary acts of God.  There  is no  explana­  tion for these demands-the demand  that  Abraham sacrifice Isaac, say-and the stories are  not moralized. David  is not  a good  man,  only a man  intoxicated by the idea, the presence, of God.
Human judgments  leave emptiness in  their  wake.  At  the  end  of The  Quiet
American, Graham  Greene attributes  to his narrator-not  a Christian, though Greene  certainly  was at  the time  he wrote  the  book -the  wish that  there  was someone to whom  he could say he was sorry.  Each  of us performs  life for some imaginary  audience,  carries on a dialogue with some imagined  interlocutor, and life is shaped  by the audience  we play for.  For  many,  the  audience  is friends, neighbours,  business associates; the  other  voice is the  voice  of  public  opinion, and  the dialogue  will seldom rise above the level of banality.  The  stoic performs for some austere higher self, debates his life with his own right reason.
The  higher  the  nature  of the other  in whose sight  life is lived, the  more  pro­ found the living. The  book of Psalms is one of the most accessible and  powerful books of the Bible because it is the record of a man  in dialogue with a high God;  fittingly enough the psalms are attributed to David,  who danced before the Lord, leaping so nakedly, so wildly, that his wife thought  it shameful.


134

HELWIG


Sing  unto  God, 0 ye kingdoms of the earth:
0 sing praises unto  the Lord, who rideth in the  high  heavens  which  are of old.

All this may sound  like an exercise in Christian apologetics,  but  nothing in life teaches  us  that   we  will  get  something only  because  we  need  it. The   need  for transcendence doesn't guarantee that  a  transcendent reality  is real  or  accessible. Christianity offers a  particular set of doctrines about  the  nature and  availability of the  divine,  and  for me,  these doctrines  challenge  belief.

Men go to God  when  they  are sorely placed, pray him  for succour,  for his peace, for bread, for mercy, for them sinning sick or dead.
All men  do so in  faith or unbelief.
(Dietrich  Bonhoeffer, tr. W. H. Farquharson)

What is belief? What is it that  those  in the  choir stalls  around me  possess that
I lack?
We sometimes  regard  belief as a kind of knowing; what  we believe  is what  we hold  to  be  true,  and  for  truth, most  of  us require  evidence. Belief and   unbelief meet in a debate on the  nature of the evidence -on the one  hand  human life as we experience it, and  on the other, the claims made  in the gospels. Is Christianity; the  question goes, a set of conclusions  that  concerned human beings  can  or must draw  from this evidence?
At  the  other  extreme, there  is the  insistence  on  faith   as  a  leap  in  the  dark. Pascal  talks of it as a wager.  If you are  right,  you win  everything; if wrong,  you lose nothing. Tertullian cried  exultantly that  he believed  in  the  Christian  revela­ tion because it was absurd, impossible.


IT WAS P.  K.  PAGE, in  answer  to  a  question  after   a  poetry reading, who  made  me  aware of  yet another way of  understanding belief.  The
etymology  of the word,  she pointed  out, links it to the same  root as the word  love. Belief is the  attitude we offer  to a vision of reality that  we can  love.
That's the  definition of belief  that  I find  most  useful,  and  I am  not  a  Chris­ tian  because  there  are  too  many  central doctrines  that   I do  not  love,  the  most important being  the  existence  of a life after  death. It's a doctrine that  has always struck  me  as dishonourable to both  man  and  god.  Life  has,  on  the  whole,  been good  to me;  to demand more  would  be insufferably  greedy.  But  to suggest  that  an  afterlife  is some  sort  of consolation to those  less lucky,  the  tortured child,  the starving mother, is dishonourable to God.  Yet  if the  doctrine  doesn't  address the world's injustices, it has no  point.  Pascal's wager  is not  as one-sided  as he would


135

HELWIG

suggest. To believe on those terms is to abnegate  human  responsibility. The  same objection can be made to Jung's suggestion that we ought to believe in an afterlife since it leads to sounder mental health in old age.
Most  human  beings cling to life, but  the  life they  cling  to is the  life of the fallible,  earthy,  individual  personality,  and  that  is  not,  presumably,   what  the Christian  afterlife offers. The self, perfected, is no longer  the self.
The  other  crucial  and  related  doctrines  are  the  divinity  of  Christ  and   his resurrection.  It would take an excessive scepticism to maintain  that  Jesus had  no historical  existence, but it is Northrop   Frye -an  ordained   minister  and  presu­ mably  a  Christian-who suggests that  the  Bible is concerned  to  conceal,  not reveal, the historical Jesus, that  what it provides is a narrative of a  central  meta­ phorical kind. The meaning of the Bible is found in its metaphors. The  question of what actually happened isn't a relevant one.
Frye's  intellectual  tradition  is that  of Christian  idealism,  and  his standard of
truth  is usually that  of internal  coherence. To say that  Jesus was the Son of God means something  within the whole redemptive  pattern  of the  Biblical  narrative. Truth, which for some of us is at least partly gained  by an act of outward  atten­ tiveness, is gained, for Frye, by an act of inward  attentiveness.  The  argument  of The  Great  Code seems to me to be circular  and  agnostic.  The  resurrection  be­ comes, not an event, but a necessary, though revolutionary, metaphor.
If one asks what,  as a matter  of fact,  it means  to call Jesus  the  Son  of God, most answers fall into what a religious friend of mine once called Christolatry, the belief in Jesus as some kind of magician.  It is not, I think, obscurantist, to prefer mystery to doctrine in such a case.

I tell my sons the stories of the  gods, of Christ coming  up out of the earth, Balder  young and beautiful from the sea.

Those lines come from the last  page of Atlantic  Crossings, the  long  poem in which I tried some of these themes dramatically. Obviously  as metaphor, I don't find resurrection difficult. That  there is something  of love and  goodness that  does not die is a belief that does have a redemptive  power. Still, any attempt to imagine resurrection  and  ascension within a quotidian existence  (and  Christianity would have it that  these were real events that  happened in  a  real  world)   is likely to founder in comedy. The ascension in particular-Jesus as rocket ship-is highly difficult  except  as  metaphor.   Similarly,  any  detailed   attempt   to  imagine   the eternal  existence of particular  human  personalities is likely to provoke  laughter. I heard  of one woman  who didn't  believe in  heaven  because  there  wouldn't   be room for everybody.

HELWIG


What makes life poignant  and precise is its evanescence, its swiftness, its danger, the knowledge that  each individual  and each moment  is unrepeatable.
The  service  moves  on.  I  hear  the  soft  drumming   of  murmured  words  as decent, well-meaning  people kneel to beg forgiveness.

We  acknowledge and confess our manifold  sins and wickedness, Which we  from time  to time  have committed,
By thought word and deed, Against  thy Divine  Majesty.

Sin:  it's a word that  many  in our time find uncomfortable; how much  is this an objection purely verbal? A poet's question:  how much  of belief is altered  by a change  in its form of expression? How much  of the power of the liturgy is in its style? What  does T.  S. Eliot's  Christianity  share  with  Gamer  Ted  Armstrong's?
The  word "evil"  is one I find accurate  and  useful, but  I bridle  at sin and  its derivatives.  Perhaps  this is a symptom  of modem  sentimentality,  but  the  word does have overtones  of both  complacency  and  melodrama. Most  human  beings are capable  of great  evil-witness Auschwitz, Treblinka, and  the rest-but  in the lives I observe, achievement  and failure exist in a reasonable balance. A glance at history suggests that  definitions of sin are many, varied, even contradictory.
And yet. There is something  about the confessions in the liturgy that  is refresh­ ing. Of all the forms of prayer, confession comes most easily to my lips, and  not because I  think  myself particularly  wicked. Like any conscious human,  I spend much of my life having to be the judge of my own actions. All of us must struggle with our own bias, our subjectivity and blindness. One function  of  confession is to produce  a  change  of focus from  the  tangled  foreground  to  the  wide landscape  beyond it. Such a change of focus, even if it is momentary,  does open doors for the mind  locked in  the  struggle  to see and  know  itself. This  is  perhaps  one  of  the functions  of art  as well, but  the liturgy attempts  it more  directly,  leading,  once again,  toward  the  possibility of escape from  the  mere  self. If I  call  myself an agnostic, rather  than an atheist, it is because I can't be at home in a world without mystery, without the possibility of meaning.

The idea  of God  is the  most  splendid  single  act  of the  creative  hu­ man  imagination ... all his multiple facets and  attributes correspond to some need and satisfy some deep desire in mankind.
(Katherine Anne  Porter)

Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts, Heaven and earth  are  full of thy glory. Glory  be to thee, 0 Lord Most High.

Many years ago, I heard  that  wise rabbi, Emil Fackenheim, present the argu­
ment that agnosticism was an untenable  position. His argument -an existentialist


137

HELWIG

one -was  that  we always act  on the  basis of some  chosen  assumption  about reality. The  moment  we act, we no longer suspend  judgment.  We act  as if God existed or as if God did not exist; we act as if life had  meaning  or as if it did not. The American novelist, John Updike, has said that  he has no trouble repeating  the words of the creed since what  they finally express for him  is that  there  is some­ where, somehow, a meaning to the world.
Fackenheim's argument  has echoed in  my mind  for  a long  time.  It's  true,  I
suppose, that  I often act as if life had some significance beyond what  I give it by my own choices;  but  not  always. The  argument, of course,  was presented  by a devout Jew, whose religion has a multitude  of laws of behaviour  and  a plethora of theological speculations, but no creed, unless one counts the simple and absolute statement  of  monotheism-"Hear, 0 Israel,  the  Lord  thy  God,  the  Lord  is One."  When challenged  to explain himself, the God of Judaism  says only "I am that I am."
The borderline between a reverent agnosticism and the belief in such a God is a thin one.

0 Lamb  of God, that takest away the  sin of the  world, have  mercy upon us.

0 Lamb of God, that takest away the sin of the world, grant us thy peace.

The  communicants kneel to take  the  bread  and  wine.  Observing,  I  have  no way of knowing  what  it means to those at  the  communion   rail.  Do they  break through,  here  or  at  some other  moment,  to  a  world  drenched  in  light?  I  am moved by the commitment  of worshippers past and  present, from those who kneel here,  to  Bach  dedicating  each  manuscript   to  the  greater   glory  of  God.  I  am touched  and  refreshed  by the  words and  meaning  of the  liturgy,  but  I  remain outside it all.
Bill announces  the tune  of the recessional hymn  on the  organ,  and  the  choir rises. I rise with them, too self-willed to share more than  four-part harmony.  On the final verse of the hymn of exultation,  the tempo  is slower. The  choir,  begin­ ning to leave, sings unison while the organ  creates  harmonies,  counterpoints.

Wide  as the world is thy command, vast as eternity thy love,·
firm as a rock thy truth shall stand,
when rolling years shall cease to move.

Exit, singing.

AVENUES OF RESEARCH SUGGESTED  BY THE FLETCHERS CASTORIA  BOX

Paul Hiebert
5OME YEARS AGO  I  RECEIVED from  One of the mnalk< uni­
versities in  Ontario a letter  from  a student  telling me  that  he  was doing  post­
graduate work in  English  and  that  he had  chosen as  the  subject  for  his thesis "The Lesser Writers of Canada" and  could I give him some biographical  infor­ mation.  I recall at the time a great surge of sympathy  for this student, knowing from my own experience  how unspeakably  dreary such  theses can  be, having  at one time or another  been reader of such theses on, of all things, Theology, English, and  finally the one for which  I felt least qualified, Chemistry. But the academic world is, if nothing  else, at least wide and  tolerant  and slightly  "bushed," as we say in the West.
What  I have always felt about  such theses is that  they lacked human  warmth. As knowledge, literate  and  formal,  they attract  nothing  but  dust. And  perhaps it was because of this very deft sureness with which this naive student  had selected me as one of the "lesser" writers of Canada  that  my heart  went out to him. The biographical  information he had requested happened to be bare bones of a life singularly  deficient in incident  so I  decided  that  I  would  call  upon  one  of my favourite  great-grandmothers  who  as  a  chair-stealer  for  one  of  the  Czars  of Russia and  as a cabbage-picker for one of the  Borsch festivals of that  country, had endeared  herself to her countrymen.
She was a  remarkable woman,  this great-grandmother of mine.  From  her  I had  inherited  my own  ability  to steal chairs from  the  neighbours  whenever  my wife gave a garden  party for her church group on the back lawn, or to regale my own relatives with a soup which all agreed "had  body to it" though  it may have lacked in quality what it made up in quantity of cabbage. But what I really wanted to show this student  was that  my literary roots lay deep in Manitoba, that  I was a true native of the West, despite the fact that  one of my forebears  had  been from Outer   Mongolia,  certainly  a  fine academic  point  and  one  which  should  lend distinction to his thesis.
I pointed out  to this lad  working for his Ph.D.,  that  although  I had  a rather tenuous  relationship   with  Louis  Riel,  the  first  Premier  of  Manitoba, my  real


139

HIEBERT

connection  was through  this great-grandmother. She had  been in her girlhood  a daughter of one of the lesser chieftains of Outer  Mongolia,  a princess in her own right,  but  had  been captured  by some of the  Czar's  Cassocks one day  when  she was out  picking  violets. Because of her  surpassing  beauty  and  recognizing  the danger  of keeping such a treasure  in  their  own  possession, the  Cassocks  imme­ diately presented her to the Czar who adopted  her at once as a member of  his own household.
In the course of time, however, the Czar tired of her and using as an excuse the fact that  she had  been discovered by one of her rivals sitting  on one of the  royal chairs, she was banished  to Siberia.  (An  interesting  footnote  could  be inserted here in the thesis that chairs at that  time in Russia were very scarce since it was taken for granted  that  all had  to stand  in the  presence of The  Little  Father  the Czar of all the Russias and that only those of royal blood were ever permitted  to sit down at all.)
After being banished to Siberia,  this great-grandmother of mine, a woman  of great  resolution, escaped from Siberia by making  her way over the  polar ice-cap into  northern   Manitoba   where  she  was  adopted   by  the  Crees.  She  was  well received by this northern  Manitoba tribe and  supported  herself by giving lessons in Mongolian  bead-work.  And  although  she  always  spoke  Cree  with  a  strong Russian accent she was finally adopted  as a member  of the tribe  and  married  to one of the lesser chieftains of The  Birch branch,  as distinguished  from  the  other chief division who  were known as The  Beavers.  ( Sonship  in  The  Birch  family was considered to be something of an honour  in that  region.)
Of  this great-grandfather of mine our  family  knows nothing  beyond  the fact that he was pure Cree and Son-of-a-Birch, but  his name,  if ever known, has long been forgotten.  Our  interests lay more  in  the  one  descendant   of  this  union,  a daughter, also very beautiful,  whose Indian  name,  Wowie-wowie-and-howie  (I think I have it right), translated  into English meant  "Sitting  Duck."
It  was Sitting  Duck who was my grandmother, and  although   I  never  knew
her personally she was very much a living figure in our family because she married one Oofus Angus MacAngus, a Hudson's  Bay Company  Factor,  my grandfather, through  whom I traced my deep roots in the land of this country and the prairies of Saskatchewan.
I pointed out furthermore that our family was very proud of having descended from one of the Hudson's Bay Company  Factors despite the fact that  although  the Factors  in  those  days  were common  enough  they  still  socially  represented   the highest in the community and that  in our own family we always referred  to him as the Highest Common Factor, a very contrived  pun which although  representing the lowest form  of humour,  I thought  this particular student  might  possibly use as a mild leavening agent in his thesis.


140

HIEBERT

I never heard from this student  again and I have an idea that  in his pursuit  of the lesser writers of Canada he was simply too successful in acquiring  material - in numbers if nothing  else. I would personally always have been pleased to think of my grandmother's memory  gathering  the dust of centuries  in some university library  "unhonored and  unsung"  as John  Swivel, the  Great  Dean  of the  Sas­ katchewan   School  of  Seven-and-a-Half,  says  of  himself  and   his  works,  but Sitting  Duck  did  at  last leave to the  Cree  civilization  a fairly  respectable  soup made of wild cabbage  and  prairie dill, by which she will always be remembered.



BUT THE  POINT OF  ALL  THIS is to call attention  to the splen­ did opportunity recently presented to the academic  world of Western Canada for the introduction of life and  warmth  in the  otherwise dry-as-dust  Ph.D.  Theses. The  fortunate break  in  the  binder-twine  which  for years had  been  holding  to­ gether  the  Fletchers  Castoria  box containing  the  material  of  Sarah  Binks' pre­ P.R.  period  scattered  so much  rich  historical data  on  the  floor of the  Binksian Museum and  in such a manner  that it had to be put back right away and  could no longer be ignored. This was particularly  true since it had to be separated  from other material  which had accumulated on the floor.
I should  imagine  that  a small thesis of the  M.A.  calibre  could  result from  a
study of the unfinished  efforts of Sarah  and  Mathilda  to  translate  in all its com­
pleteness Schiller's  "The Song of the Bell."
The great success of their combined efforts in the translation  of Heine's "Du  bist wie eine Blume"  had  led them  to more ambitious  ventures  but  "The Bell" had apparently proven  to be too much for them.  Moreover,  though  Sarah  may  have known  something  about  love and  flowers, she knew  nothing  about  bell-casting with the result that  her translation  seems contrived  and  lacks the  poetic flow of the original :
Freshly plastered in the soil, Stands the casing, burned of lime - Today must the bell be burned­
Fresh, My Hearties, be on time! From the forehead hot
Sweat must run, must it not!
Though the work the masters praise
Blessings are up-top, always!

One can quote only fragments  of such translations in an article such as this but it is obvious that  in the Departments of Modern  Languages such tit-bits would be more than  welcome for academic  discussion. Of more profound  interest from the standpoint of scholarship  would be a study of the work of Sarah  Binks herself.

HIEBERT

Why, it has often been asked, could a simple country  girl like Sarah,  without any great formal education,  not only write about  such a wide variety of subjects but write about subjects of which she had had no experience  whatsoever yet with complete  confidence?  Why,  for  example,  could  she  write  so  realistically  about "Storm  at Sea" with all its tragic consequences when she had  never seen a body of water larger  than  Lake Waskana  which in her day  was much  smaller and  of which she could say without  too great poetic licence, "I could spit acrost it."  So too her visualization of the Roman  occupation  in Saskatchewan which  research has since proved to have been not Roman  but  Ukrainian, can  easily enough  be explained  by the confusion in the teacher's  mind  concerning  British and  Cana­ dian history, both of which were at that time taught  in the Saskatchewan schools. And her knowledge of the Indian  and  Mound  builder,  though  at times faulty, is simply her poetic projection of what in fact  was local lore. But her wider knowl­ edge and her occasional use of exotic phrase and idiom can only be accounted  for by the fact that Sarah was an inveterate  reader  and  that  everything printed  upon which she could lay her hands was, to use a term from  her biographer,  "Grist  for her mill."
Like many people who read a word again and again  and  never happen  to hear it pronounced she would accent the word wrongly. We find, for example, in the Fletchers Castoria  box a fragment  concerning the weather  in which our humidity is rhymed with pretty. Thus:
Come cold and sleet we're sitting pretty, In rain and relative humidity.
The reverse could also be true. She had heard, for example, the word hurricane, pronounced  as she thought  "hurricale," and  had  treasured  it as a good word  in connection with the eternal feud against the Saskatchewan wind, and when the occasion finally arose to use the word she had  used it in terms of derision :
Despond not, though time be bale, And baleful be,
Though winds blow stout -a hurricale, What's that, what's that to you and me!
Incidentally  this verse can be used to exemplify Sarah's style of achieving  her effects through  repetition;  "What's that, what's  that," she states and  this particu­ lar  literary  trick,  though  not  as obvious or  effective  as  that  of  "Boom,  Boom, Boom," in the poetry of Baalam Bedfellow of the Saskatchewan School of Seven­ and-a-Half, is in Sarah's  hands nevertheless very effective.
In my little book, in my little book, I write verses,
Sometimes they don't rhyme­ Curses!

HIEBERT


This is the classic example,  but one can find the same trick in "The Duck Hunt," and in the repetition in "I'm a genius, I'm a genius."
But  it  was  Eaton's  catalogue   in  particular   which  opened   the  vision of  this
simple and  unspoiled  country  girl to the outside world. Sarah  may  have  picked up the odd  word  of German  from  her  association with  Mathilda, but  certainly never French.  And yet we find her using in her description  of the wedding dress such words as petite  (rhymed  with tight)  and chick  which was her version of the French  chic  and  which she took from  her experiences with  the family chickens, to mean cute.
Quite  apart  from  the  Fletchers  Castoria  box so invitingly  rich  in  material, more  than  one scholarly  thesis for the Ph.D. could  be written  from  a  study  of Sarah's already  published  works. Her  influence  upon  the  Saskatchewan  School of Seven-and-a-Half who succeeded her, for example, the fact that  Purge Potatok, D.P., takes the same attitude toward  winter as did Sarah. Sarah  had  written after remarking  on the discomforts of the season in terms of chilblains, dripping  nose, and scratchy underwear that there still must lie

though drifts conceal
Some hidden good for man's descry,
Some secret bounty for his weal,
Which man should shovel out -or try

whereas  Purge,  the simple  D.P.  (Displaced  Person)   wntmg at  the  encourage­ ment of the Saskatchewan government  in the Ukrainian  dialect in  the hopes that he  may  do  for  Saskatchewan  what  William  Henry  Drummond  once  did  for Quebec, says about  Sarah's unshovelling of the province as "'Dis country  good" and  like Sarah  expresses his opinion  of winter  which  both  regard  as a  mistake. The  country may be good according  to Purge, but he adds without any hesitation:

Dis country good, I like him here, Potato crop can hardly lug her-
But when at Christmas winter comes­
De cold! Boy, she's one bugger!

Perhaps I am tying here a rather  tenuous thread.  Potatok's one-time home had been in southern  Russia and  Sarah  was only one generation  removed from South Dakota,  but it would still make an interesting point in a thesis.
One  can find many  traits  and  tendencies in Sarah's  works:  her love of nature as exemplified in that sweet little poem in which the kindly sparrow  "got  behind the  toad  and  shoved"  or,  in another  case, her sympathy  for  the  "helpless  and infirm" worm in the apple whom she had thoughtlessly destroyed.
Above all for deep study and subject matter suitable for one thesis after another is Sarah's philosophy  of life.  I  have  no doubt  that  a  parallel  could  be  drawn

HIEBERT

with  the  sombre  outlook  of  the  Great   Dean  of  Western   Literature,  the  late John  Swivel, with his repeated  emphasis upon  the  passing of time and  the  com­ plete annihilation of all human  achievement,  not even  excluding  the  "elevator's  pride"  which  was always the  glory of  the  prairie  west.  But  one  feels  that  in Swivel's case his resignation  to the disappearance of  all  things  was  induced  by his sale of life insurance followed by the writing  of the In Memoriam poems with which he encouraged  the later sale of tombstones  which  he felt complemented  his sale of life insurance.  But in the case of Sarah  her  inborn  optimism  continually shines through. Hers  was, without  ever  becoming  too  explicit,  an  eternal  phi­ losophy of hope and one need only read her "Hymn to Rover" to find it expressed. Sarah might reflect upon her own demise as "Beneath  this marble slab lies Sarah, a poetess though  prematurely  dead,"  but it is not a bitter  or a despairing  thought  as in the case of Swivel. Swivel, buried according  to his own wishes, on his father's  farm and ploughed over to be one with the soil he loved, could say:

No bricks outline his resting place, No rhubarb grows upon his grave­ Harrow and plow alike efface
His one-time gilded architrave­
And save for gopher now and snearth, He lies unhonored and unsung
Who sang of prairie sky and earth, And gave to prairie wind a tongue.

Whereas Sarah, despite her misgivings when, as she says, "This  makes me scratch and ask, when shall my powers fade?" still has no doubt  as to her place in  litera­ ture. Literature, she declaims, "is mostly doleful choral, and grief the poet's steady stock in trade," but such expressed sentiments  never seem to dampen  her bound­  less optimism and her confidence in the future.




IT MIGHT BE  INTERESTING  to ask ourselves at  this point why Sarah,  on  the  occasion of her  award  of  the  Wheat   Pool  Medal,  should  have dedicated  a poem of what appears at first sight  to be one of frustration "To  My Father,  Jacob  Binks." But the truth  is that  it is not a  poem of frustration at  all but of eternal hope.
One must remember that the wheat farmer,  particularly in Sarah's time, was a
perfectionist. No crop, regardless of how good, was the perfect crop;  no crop ever reached the ideal. And Jacob Binks, perhaps even more than  most, having left the fertile  plains of South  Dakota  for the  more  hopeful  ones of Saskatchewan,  was

HIEBERT


no exception. The  perfect crop, the ideal crop, had always eluded him, and Sarah had been brought  up from early childhood to hear her father's  opinion of farming in general and  his repeated  assertion that  he would quit  it forever if at least one good crop would enable  him to do so. Sarah  herself may even have echoed these sentiments  at times, but  she was quite  aware  that  both in the case of her father and  herself the love of the land  would  never  permit  them  to leave even if they were to starve. "To My Father, Jacob Binks," is an exposition of character which she shared,  and  her final lines of that  splendid tribute  to her father  in which she says, "And  if, perchance  the crop is ever yielded, You'd  never see the farmer  for his dust,"  is not an expression of intent  but of the eternal  hope which springs in every human  heart.
Poetry is undoubtedly  Saskatchewan's highest  contribution   to  Canadian  cul­ ture, a fact which the government  of that  province was quick to recognize by the awards of the Order  of Merit  upon all the members of the Regina School of  poets who  met  in  Willowview  Cemetery  to  celebrate  the  twenty-fifth  anniversary   of the death  of Sarah  Binks. (The  Half-Order awarded  to the unknown  voice of the so-called "Muse" on the tape recorder, which was given so that  they might  be at least half a point  up on the Group  of Seven in Ontario, might  in itself prove to be a rewarding  subject  for  a  Ph.D.  thesis.)  But  the  interesting  thing  about  its poetry is that  it seems to have been drifting  into  northern  Manitoba even to the point where the native, or at least the near  native, has been touched  by it. Cul­ tural  drifts are  not unknown  in literature and they cannot  be explained  as easily as, for example,  the  introduction of the  wild  pumpkin  into  northern   Manitoba by the casual matings of the snearth with the Manitoba  magpie in his brief detour into  that  province on  its return  from  the  Arctic  Circle  where it  has  hibernated  through  the  winter.  (It often  carries  a  small quantity  of the seed of the  Arctic pumpkin to sustain it on its journey back to Saskatchewan. There is the possibility for a thesis here.)  Apparently it is all in fun -this brief mating  of the snearth  with  the  Manitoba magpie  has so  far  resulted  in  no  hybrids  and  beyond  the interest  it  has  drawn   from  bird-watchers   it  has  attracted  little  attention, but when it comes to poetry we have more subtle and deep-rooted  influence.
A case in point is a poem which  just reached  me from  Pickerel Landing. It  is
not poetry of the highest quality  but it is a big departure from the Hi, Yi, Yi, Yi, going on for hours like a musical evening on the CBC which is the type of lyricism the  brave  of Sarah's Skin  Age  could  seldom  surmount. The   poem  is entitled "Goosie" and was written  by Mary Woodtick, one of the more advanced  students of the local school at Pickerel Landing.  In this poem Mary Woodtick  pays tribute to the idyllic life of the north,  but  in addition  renders  her gratitude to a  kindly government  in meeting  local needs as the occasion arises, in this case the  intro­ duction of electric power to promote the sale of vacuum cleaners :


145

HIEBERT

GOOSIE

Up near Island Lake there lived a Cree girl whose name was Goosie,
She lived with a Scotch trapper  in a little cabin which he always referred  to as his wee hoosie,
It was made of spruce log and was ten by twelve and smelled sprucy. Needless to say their little boy was called Brucie.
Well, one day Goosie was making a bannock for dinner,
She was feeling all in because she was going to have another baby which made her feel all-inner,
When an agent came to the door and said, "How  would you like to buy for dis nice cabin a nice wacuum dinner?"
(Up in Island Lake they dont always speak very good grammer)
Well, at first Goosie didn't  think circumstances  would allow her
But she bought one anyway and  now everybody in Island  Lake is getting  paid  by the hour,
Because the Government is putting  up tower after tower,
That's because they now feel there is a local demand for power.

"Goosie" is a charming thing  and  is but one example of the ever-growing forest of poetic  writing in Saskatchewan. Its fibres extend  into  the School  of  Seven-and­ a-Half  which  in turn  has its cultural roots in Sarah. The  connection is apparent; the  fact  that  Goosie's  cabin  is specifically  described as  being  ten  by  twelve  and  made  of spruce  logs is also characteristic of Sarah's tendency to be specific  in  her measurements without losing  herself  in  poetic  haze.  She  visualizes  herself,  for example, as lying "seven  and  a half feet deep" after  her  death, and  it is the  half foot which  is significant. And  again,  she allows,  even  in  speaking of the  farmer's kingship,  for  the  "odd" acres  which  the  government of  the  day  specified  in  its titles to the  quarter section,  to ensure  itself against  mistakes  of the  surveyors.  In "Spreading Time" she details those necessary articles of farm life which  are going  to be overlooked  and  buried  in snow  throughout the  winter: "the shovel,  and  the stone-boat, and   the  barrow." An  outstanding example of  Sarah's attention to detail  occurs  in  "Little Papoose" where  the  Algonquin mother's concern  for  her daughter's evening  meal is itemized: a  pickle,  bread  and  molasses, stewed  dried  apples,  sardines, two cups of  tea, fifteen crackers, and  a double handful of saska­  toons. Ample  and generous,  but given with  methodical precision. So also the  term "dodecahedral"  which   Sarah  had   heard   somewhere, is  used   to  describe   the many-sidedness of  the Indian character on  the  part  of Moon-in-the-Eyes in  con­ trast  to the off-squareness of Patrick O'Connell.
One  can cite many examples,   but it is the business of the research  student to dig them  out. The  rewards in prestige and  scholarship are great  and  the opportunities presented by the Fletchers  Castoria box should  not be missed.

PJILINODE
 


Dary!Hine


Orient yourself in time
Toward the prepossessing dawn. Disenchanted by the past,
Turn your back forever on
The decadent and splendid West
And  all your yesterdays in flame.

Tomorrow is a promised  land Inevitable as success Following the era you
Wasted in the wilderness. All the prophecies are true
And  their  fulfillment is at hand.

Tomorrow seemed  a sinecure Available by force or guile. After  your years of servitude Endured beside the dirty  Nile, What were you able to secure But exile, want, and solitude?

Disorient yourself away
From the disappointing East. Forget the fair,  unfortunate, Fake embellishments of day, Those  phoney  promises. The  last Disaster has not happened yet.






147

THE END OF EMMA

Hugh Hood


(for  Louis Dudek)





LIKE EVERY OTHER  FORM  OF   ACTION,   narration finds  its sources in the structure  of being-as-such, and  cannot  violate that  structure. It  is axiomatic  that  grace  builds upon  nature  and  will  not  scar  or obliterate  it,  nor reverse its pattern  of growth.  No matter  how sweetly graced,  a  hollyhock never turns into a beaver  or a Chevrolet. Some of us, of animistic  tendency,  hope and believe that  when  our cars get sick, if we leave them  alone  and  avert  our  eyes, they will get better. This never happens.
Furthermore, later  nature  never  violates or  washes  away  earlier  nature;  the elephant  resembles but  is not  the  mastodon.  Photography didn't   drive  out  the painted  portrait; indeed there are many situations  in which a careful  drawing  is more acceptable  than a photograph  for the purpose of later study when the object is absent.  A portrait  painter  may work from  the  presence of the sitter,  or from pictures  of the  sitter,  or  from  sketches of  him.  No  mode  of  witness  expels  or expunges another  valid mode, but some modes of witness have had effects assigned to them which it is impossible in nature  for them  to have. If you photograph an object from  the front, you cannot  get around  behind  it and  photograph it from the rear simultaneously  with the same camera; only the surface  presented  to the lens will be recorded  on the film; this is a consequence  of the three-dimensional location of physical objects, and the witnessing consciousness, in time. When  a television camera  pans slowly around  an object, as much of that object disappears from the frame  as is brought  into it. Yau can't  see all sides of a thing at the same time. That's a  pity;  we wish it were otherwise,  but  it is the  case, and  fact,  we know, is the sum  of "what  is the case." It  is a fact  that  none  of us can see all around  anything,  and the fact has had  immense  and  visible consequences for the plastic arts.
Even when  all attempts  to make a mimetic  representation of the  appearance of the visible world have been given up, as ostensibly in the work of Mondrian, or sometimes in Klee, or in the ap-art  movement  or among  the hard-edge  painters, the action  painters,  or any other form  of abstraction, the  problem  of viewpoint remains  (as  you  wouldn't  expect it to on  the  premises  of abstractionism) and

HOOD

bedevils both  the  painter  and  the  onlooker. The  most  abstract  design  requires to  be seen,  and  is ideally  seen  from  a  specific distance.  There  is  no  point  in examining  the  work  of  Klee,  for  example,  from  a  distance  of sixty  feet.  Nor should  you stand  too  close to  those large  liver-coloured  Rothko  panels  in  the Tate.  The  room  those panels are  in is a bit too small for  them,  as a matter  of fact;  they ought  to be looked  at from  about  thirty-five feet away  to be seen at their best. Since you can't  do that  in their present exhibition  room, you can't  get a good look at them, as we say. Any work of plastic art, whether  purely abstract, or purely representational, or somewhere in between, has a certain  viewpoint from which it is best seen, because it is a "thing-to-be-seen." That  is what  a  work of plastic art is, a "thing-to-be-seen."
In  those works of Magritte which  consist of four  panels of equal  dimensions
arranged symmetrically  on a single canvas, in which  minute  changes  appear  in the objects  represented,  from  panel to panel, most of the function  of the picture is to exploit  this "being-seenness."  Our  eyes flick restlessly back  and  forth  from one part  of the canvas  to another,  trying  to spot the man  in  the  act  of putting his pipe in his mouth,  or the cloud beginning  to float into the drawing-room,  or the armchair mysteriously disappearing. The  painting  is about  how we see, and how we draw  inferences from  what  is seen. Magritte  has made  an  intense study of the  relation  of consciousness to  happenstance; the  wit  of  his  art  consists in the exploitation  of their  discontinuity.  Bannard,  more than  any  other  painter  of the century, has investigated  the phenomenon  of how it feels to see. That  is what the extraordinary late work of the 193o's and  194o's concerns itself with. Those peculiar  networks of diamond-or-lozenge-shaped forms which  conceal themselves in Bannard's designs, appear  to have been for the painter  a kind of visual short­ hand,  something  like  a  geodesic  grid,  for  the  movement  of  the  eye  and  the function  of the optic nerve and  our other equipment  for seeing, as we apprehend space receding from consciousness. Perspective, in the later work of  Bannard,  has nothing  to do with line or geometrical  form, as in the  comparatively  arid  treat­  ment of similar matters in Cezanne.  Bannard  renders depth by colour relationships and  their brilliant  evocation of our blurred feeling-of-seeing; the picture  is essen­ tially  a  varying  and  deepening  of   perceived  atmospheres,  what  is in  the  air, grasped by a viewer who is as nearly as possible in the picture. Of course Bannard  is too wise to paint  the nose or the toes of this viewer somewhere  along the edge of his two-dimensional  space, for  that would be to violate the nature  of pictorial representation. All  plastic  art  depends  upon  viewpoint  and  sight,  sculpture  as much, perhaps more, than painting.
Every sculpture  is best seen from the viewpoint selected as the most favourable by the sculptor, usually the point from which he did most of the modelling of the form.  In  rendering,  say, a human  torso in three dimensions, the sculptor  cannot


149

HOOD

work on all sides of the form at once. He can see approximately two-fifths of the figure from  any given standpoint, and  he invariably  selects, consciously or  not, the best angle from which to approach  the given plastic problem.  It is remarkable how many works of sculpture betray immediately  where the sculptor  was standing when he felt most at ease with the form.  Many,  many  sculptures  have  received very sketchy treatments  of their "other  side" or back  parts. Most sculptors  fudge the assholes of torsos. I know. I always check.
Similar,  or  perhaps  strictly  parallel,  conditions  prevail  in  all  the  other  arts, indeed  in  every human  activity.  In  music  there  is a  perpetual  question  in  the artist's  mind  about  how much  his listener can  hear.  Some  listeners simply can't hear inner  voices in music; some have no apprehension of rhythmic  movement. Some are deaf to differences in timbre, but can notice changes in pitch or volume. Musicians spend  their  lives finding  out  what  can  be heard.  Probably  the  most important development in European  music, the gradual  adoption  of the tempered scale, enshrined and celebrated in Bach's great cycle of keyboard works, has caused generations  of musicians with  perfect  pitch  real  discomfort,  because  of the  way in which  the various scales treat  enharmonic sounds  as the  same  sound  for  the purpose  of easy modulation  from  one scale  to another. They  are  not  the  same sound:  C-ftat in one scale may be several vibrations  per second  removed  from B in an adjoining scale, which nevertheless treats  the two tones as identical.  If your ear is good enough,  the failure  of the  two  tones  to  coincide  can  cause genuine physical distress.
I remember  trying to invoke a musical analogy  in conversation  with a veteran literary theorist. I put the idea forward  that  the novelist Iris Murdoch, by giving to certain  minor  characters  very occasional  lines of dialogue  at  different  points in a long fiction, was able to suggest in the reader's mind  a continuing  impression of how those minor characters must behave when not onstage. The literary  means is familiar  enough;  but  when  I said  that  this was strictly  analogous  to the  way your thumb, say, or the little finger on your right  hand,  can strike very occasional notes in a keyboard  piece by Bach,  and  that  these  notes  then  give rise to  the continuing   gestalt  or  impression  of  an  "inner   voice,"  I lost  my  hearer  com­ pletely. This  was because he simply never heard  inner  voices in music. What  he heard was a uniform wash of sound, or at least that  was what  he reported  to me when I asked him to describe his musical experience. My MurdochjBach analogy fell at once to the ground, which seems a pity because it is fundamentally accurate.
The composer is constantly thrown  back upon the range of what  can be heard by a representative  cross-section of his potential  audience. Mozart,  writing to his father  from  Vienna,  commented  about  his easy  piano  concertos,  K413, K414, K415, that  they were pieces which should  find  popularity  amongst  uninstructed listeners, "but  there are things in them  which  will please the long-ears  too."  He

HOOD


was able to write for distinct  audiences, in the awareness that  uninstructed listen­ ers might with application find their way into the long-eared  community. But he wrote no work which was scored for those dog-whistles inaudible  to  human ears. A work of music is always  dependent   upon  what  can  be  heard  by  somebody, connoisseur, fellow composer,  the  great  public, and  the  composer  is invariably faced with a series of decisions about  what is audible  and  what  is not. The  most fundamental choice  lies  between  the  creation  of  a  smooth  seamless  wash  of sound,  in which the listener  is aware  that  there are individual  parts,  but  cannot easily discriminate  them,  as in much  late  nineteenth-century orchestral  writing, and  the linear  contrapuntal style of Bach  or  Haydn  or  (a  much  lesser artist) Reger.  The  options  correspond  roughly  to  the  distinction  between  linear  and painterly treatment of pictorial subjects originally proposed by Wolfflin and much exploited afterwards. It is a distinction which seems to correspond  with the actual conditions  of visibility and  audibility.  Paintings  must  submit  themselves to  the conditions of sight, music to those of sound.




LITERARY COMPOSITION IS  SUBJECTED  to strictly  analogous conditions.  In  writing  it is useless to attempt  to realize  the  unrealizable,  to tell the tale of the ineffable. Some happenings are simply inaccessible to literature: musical thought,  perhaps  metaphysical  thought, sexual rapture, the interior  world of conscience, private  judgment.  Poetry, fiction, and  drama  can  deliver the  see­ able,  audible,  the  recognizable,  but  not  the  private  world  of  another,  as  we shall see.
This  is because  nature   resists violation,  and  what  is  contrary   to  nature   is contrary  to art.  For  example,  nobody can  paint  two hills without  a  hollow  be­ tween  them.  If there  is no  valley between,  there is only  a  single  hill;  I  give a frivolous example  intentionally, but  I  can  provide  others  not  so  frivolous. You can't  write a story about  two persons who are indiscernible, whose bodies occupy the same space at the same time. For according to the principle  of  the identity of indiscernibles, if two  beings were identical  in every respect,  they  would  be the same  being. As it  happens,  I  know  of no  attempt   to  write  a  story  about  two persons who  are  indiscernible  in  the  philosophical sense,  precisely  because they would  be a  single  person,  and  in  nature  even  identical  twins  are  different  in many  respects, always  at  least  in  one. There  are  stories  about  identical  twins, and  Siamese twins, and  about  children  lying in  the  maternal womb,  but  none about  twins who are coinstantiate, none about children who are their  mothers.
Cloning  is impossible, for if the most exact  replica conceivable  of some entity were to be produced, it would not have existed during the same period of time; it

HOOD

would be much  younger. My clone can never be born at the same moment  as me, and even if only moments intervene our histories, our  experiences,  will be totally different. Tiny  divergence at the outset leads to immense opposition  in the  end. Only consider family life !
Nor is it possible to write a story in which  time  runs forward, backward,  and
sideways, that  is, with multiple modes of temporality. I know of stories with flash­ backs, but as soon as a flashback takes place, time  begins remorselessly to  run  in its familiar  direction. There is that hilarious tale by Stephen  Leacock, "The Retro­  active Existence of Mr. Juggins," in which the unlucky Juggins grows younger and younger, to the point where, as Leacock admits,  "he  will back  up clear  through  the Curtain  of Existence and die, or be born, I don't  know which to call it. Mean­  while he remains  to me as one of the most illuminating  allegories  I have  met."  The story can only make its comic point against  a  background  of temporality  in which everybody  but Juggins  is getting  older,  as  in  fact  we all are.  We sure  as hell aren't  getting any younger, and if the fact is denied there will be no story and no comic  point. Juggins  is exactly an  allegory  of the  fact  that  existence is not retroactive,  and a subtly suggestive allegory at  that,  worthy  of juxtaposition  with the closing pages of Le Temps retrouve, where related  paradoxes  are propounded. But of course time moves in all stories as it  does in life. Story is vested in before/  after  relations,  whether  the most relentless  work of literary  realism, or the  most ingenious fantasy  of Borges or Nabokov, or  the  most tiresome  "post-modernist" nonsense by Robert  Kroetsch or somebody with  similar  opinions,  in  which  time seems to stand still because of the intensely boring quality of the writing. Here  the illusion of timelessness is not sought by Kroetsch,  but comes unbidden  and fatally, having nothing to do with the underpinnings of story.
A story then  is necessarily a sequential  relation  about  entities  which  obey the
laws of nature,  never, for example, violating  the  principle  of non-contradiction. A few  of the  sillier deconstructionists  have  suggested  recently  that  the  law  of non-contradiction is only a prejudice  of the  metaphysical  tradition  of the  West, which ought,  on the whole, to be repealed. "A thing  cannot  both be, and not be, in the same way at the same time."  Try  to repeal  that,  and  see what  it gets you! It will buy you an atom of nonsense, a grain of perplexity, a hint of vertigo, and at length a soup on
Certain  literary  laws follow hard  upon an understanding of these fundamental truths about  actuality.  Nobody can take a bath  for you. More  generally,  nobody can have your experience in life or art.  No fiction  writer,  no matter  how gifted, how richly endowed  with sympathetic  intuition, can  do more  than  guess  imagi­ natively  at  the  inner  truths  of another   person's  experience,  nor  can  any  other artist or scientist do more. The  writer  who constructs  literary contrivances  which he  proposes  as  likenesses of some  other  person's  "stream of  consciousness"  or

HOOD


"interior monologue"  isn't doing what he believes himself to be doing, though  he may be doing something extremely well. Nobody would give up Molly Bloom's soliloquy because Joyce wasn't  doing what he pretended.  What  is present in that celebrated   passage  is a  superbly  poetic  family  history,  never-sufficiently-to-be­ praised, of what  Molly and Poldy and Blazes and Rudy and  Milly and the whole grand  gang  were  doing  over  the  previous  decade,  yes,  yes, yes, but  the  only interior  actuality  delivered  by the passage is that  of  James  A. Joyce. "Madame Bovary, c'est moi," admitted  Flaubert. "Madame  Bloom, c'est toi, jimmy."
It is an unshakeable  axiom of human  experience that  no other  being but  God has direct access to the secret heart.  My personal experience cannot  be inspected by any commissar,  by any interrogator or confessor. It  is only given to me, and can only be witnessed and  testified to by me. It would be useless for the interro­ gators  to remove the top of my head  to look inside to see what  I'm  thinking  or feeling. All they  might  see would be a couple of pounds  of  squirming  wet grey wormy stuff;  they won't see me. Nobody can take a bath  for  me or make up my mind for me, or know what it feels like to be me, or judge my "motives,"  choices, and actions, except the Creator.
When  this is understood,  the desperate  psychologism of the  twentieth  century dries up and  blows away, the second gravest error of the  time immediately  pre­ ceding our own, say between  I87o and  I970, from the death  of Charles Dickens to the end of the horrible  I 96o's. It was only in the I 97o's that  critics of  narration began to notice that  the distinction  between the first and  third  person,  workable and necessary in grammar, was illusory and false in narration, since any sentence in a narration is framed  by the implied statement  of the  person telling the story, "I witnessed this."  Narration is a testimony to witness before it is anything  else. If, then, it succumbs  to the  psychologism of the age immediately  preceding  our own, it must either become autobiographical in form or pretend  to an  awareness which it cannot  have, the awareness of "the psychological novel."


IREMEMBER WHEN  I  wAS  IN COLLEGE  around   I 947,  I 948, I949,  that  many  of my professors told me that  the novel in English, during  the course of its steady evolution  through  lower forms to higher, had  advanced  from
the novel of Dickens to the novel of George Eliot and Henry James, a claim which struck me then, as it does now, as indefensible. "That can't  be right," I told myself as I listened to these statements. It was so clearly a retrograde  step from the work of Dickens to that  of George Eliot and  Henry  James, so clearly an  enfeeblement and a wasting of the power of the genre.


I 53

HOOD

It's a step backwards and downwards  from Dickens to Eliot and James. Think of it,  the  only writer  in  English  worthy  to  be  named  beside  Shakespeare,  the creator  of Todgers  and  Rosa  Dartle  and  Miss  Wade  and  the  Circumlocution Office, the  great  Dickens, somehow  or  other  to  be  placed  below  George  Eliot and Henry James. Though  I didn't  know it, when I first listened to this nonsense inI 947, my professors were simply repeating  the pieties of David  Cecil's book on the Victorian  novelists, in which he describes George  Eliot  as "the  first modern novelist" because of her "acute  psychological insight."
The same sort of person will praise Titian  and Rembrandt for their "acute psychological insight," when the gift these painters  have in common  is the art  of applying  paint to canvas, or preparing  underglazing,  of the  placement  of the dot of Chinese white in the represented pupil of the eye. Neither  would pretend  to the least acuity of psychological insight.
Dickens  was the  first practising  writer  not  in  the  secret  to  spot  the  female authorship of Scenes From Clerical Life, and  he acknowledged  the  accomplish­ ments of its author  repeatedly  in correspondence,  in charming and  honest com­ pliment. He was to the end of his life unsparing  in his admiration for the work of George  Eliot;  nothing  he wrote  about  her  suggests that  comparison  or  rivalry between  them  was conceivable  to him,  and  we do  well  to follow  Dickens'  ex­ ample. You cannot  compare oranges to potatoes with any  profit.  Neither  George Eliot  nor  Henry  James,  nor  Flaubert  for  that  matter,  possessed a  tenth  of  the understanding of how fiction works, what  its  premises must  be, of Dickens, nor did any of them  produce anything  which  bears  comparison  with  his best work, indeed  his good average work. To  put  the matter  clearly, there  are  no novels in any  literature   better  than  Bleak  House  and  Little  Dorrit,  and  at  most  half  a dozen worthy to be mentioned in the same breath, in any literature. It was Dickens who effected  a permanent  change  in  mankind's notion  of what  a  novel is, not Flaubert, not Henry James.
Tolstoi, Dostoievsky, Wilkie Collins, Henry  James  himself  (in The  Princess Casamassima and  elsewhere),  Proust, Conrad, Graham Greene,  Faulkner, Mark Twain, P. G. Wodehouse, Stephen  Leacock, Kingsley Amis, Evelyn Waugh, D. W. Griffith for the matter  of that,  all bear the stamp  of Dickens in a hundred  ways: the first great novelist of the urban  underworld, the greatest  literary  portraitist  of the criminal  and  aberrant  in  human  life  (from  Bill Sikes to John  Jasper),  the unmatchable creator  of scene and  atmosphere,  the superb  imagist, the  master  of spoken dialogue, simply the greatest  writer  of comedy in  western literature, and the subtlest writer of religious allegory in the English tongue. This  is the  novelist from whom it was considered that we must advance  towards  the work of George Eliot, "the first modern novelist."
George Eliot and Henry James and their celebrated  examinations of "motive."

HOOD

Around  the  year of Dickens'  death  in  I 87o, when  George  Eliot  was preparing the excellent Middlemarch  for publication, two beginning novelists were working towards their earliest genuinely  novelistic conceptions, Henry  James and Thomas Hardy. When  Hardy's first major  work appeared  in  I874,  Far From the  Mad­ ding Crowd,  Henry  James  reviewed it  in  the  terms  of  sharp  disapproval;  he recognized the beneficent example of George Eliot in the dialogue scenes of rustics and yokels; the rest of the work he dismissed as vulgar and inconsequential.  Later in life James would refer to Hardy as "the good little Thomas  Hardy," wondering, in  correspondence  with  R.  L.  Stevenson  and  others,  how  the  clumsy  Hardy  managed  to stumble  upon  his effects. This  isn't  a caricature of James'  opinion:  he put these views on paper  himself, about the author  of The Woodlanders, that intensely poetic, exquisitely  realized evocation  of charmed  lives in that  singular enchanted wood.
I have no wish to use against Henry James  (whose work I admire  immensely) any  weapons  not  supplied  by himself. This  historian  of  fine consciences, upon whom  nothing,  he  hoped,  was lost, was in  this instance  losing everything.  He could not apprehend what  Hardy  does in prose fiction that  makes him as good a novelist as the English language  has produced since the death  of Dickens. Proust admired The Woodlanders almost excessively, and for these qualities which make us blink in  wonder.  Hardy   nowhere  pretends  to dissect "motive" or  trace  the history of the fine conscience. He gives us Marty's  haircut,  her  tears at  Winter­ bourne's  grave  (and  ours), what  can be seen, heard, smelt, touched, tasted.  He delivers what it is in prose fiction to deliver, appearances, not  motives.
Nobody can know anything  of any motives but his own, and  these only dimly
and  with  extreme  difficulty.  When  you examine  your  notion  of  "motive," "a motive,"  "my  motive,"  you find that  it dissolves like quicksilver  in your  hands. Is not the label "motive" a necessary fiction much like the word "red"? So many different  hues can  be labelled  red that  we wonder  what  it is that  they  have  in common. We can observe actions but cannot trace their springs. I have lived with my wife for more than  a quarter of a century,  and  I have  no more idea of the impulses that  agitate  her and  the springs of her actions than  I did before we were wed.  What  is a motive  anyway?  Is it something  like what  happens  when  one billiard  ball causes another  to move, something  like the transmission of physical motion  (itself  pretty  mysterious  if  you  think  about  it)   as  the  term  "motive" suggests, what moves one to action?
In  contemporary Canadian writing there is one author  who is identified  more often  than   any  other  as  our  greatest  psychologist in  fiction,  Alice  Munro.   It seems  just  worth  mentioning that  when  I read  the  following  lines from  Book Seven of The  Prelude to Alice Munro,  in the dining room of our house in  Mon­ treal in the summer of I 974, she began to weep.


155

HOOD

As the black storm  upon  the mountaintop
Sets off the sunbeam in the valley, so
That huge fermenting mass of humankind
Serves as a solemn background, or relief,
To single forms and objects, whence they draw, For feeling and contemplative regard,
More  than  inherent liveliness and  power. How oft, amid  those overflowing  streets
HaveI  gone forward with  the crowd, and  said
Unto myself, "The face of everyone
That passes by me is a mystery!"
Thus haveI  looked, nor ceased to look, oppressed By thoughts of what  and whither, when  and  how, Until the shapes before my eyes became
A second-sight procession, such as glides Over still mountains, or appears in dreams; And once, far-travelled in such  mood,  beyond The reach of common  indication, lost
Among  the moving  pageant,I  was smitten Abruptly, with the view (a sight not rare) Of a blind beggar, who, with upright face,
Stood,  propped against  a wall, upon  his chest
Wearing a written paper,  to explain
His story, whence  he came,  and who  he was. Caught by the spectacle  my mind  turned round As with the might  of waters; and  apt  type
This label seemed of the utmost  we can  know
Both of ourselves and of the universe; And, on the shape of that  unmoving man, His steadfast face and sightless eyes, I gazed,  As if admonished from another world.

I will not  offer  a gloss on such  lines,  but  I think I know why  Alice  Munro wept.
When it  is done rightly, the  writing of  fiction is not  an  act  of  analysis of  the motives of others, "psychological fiction." It can't  in  nature pretend to  any  such power. So good-bye Emma Bovary, and  hello  Alice  Munro! Fiction written on  the premises of the  heirs  of Flaubert and  James is necessarily autobiography,  and   the historian of fine consciences is in truth the  historian of no  conscience but  his own, which is why  Henry James' policemen speak in  the  accents of Henry James. Nar­ ration, and especially prose  fiction, must  concern itself  with  the  mysterious  blind  beggar and the  sign  on his breast, and  neither more nor  less.
My  own  motives are  mysterious to  me.  I can't extricate them one  from an­
other. And  about your  motives I know  nothing. But  I can  see  you.

VJIRIJITIONS


D. G. Jones




Donna  che si lava le gambe

then  hyperbole
marbles fountains Marino in a foam  of pearls

Sampson in the temple his desire
holy in that  crumbling erection
baroque, a Cecil B. De Mille production

meanwhile the lady towels her feet


11

the women  washing in
the river's  mouth, between
Castries and  Soufriere

splashing sunlight
like the palms,  compose a bourgeois text

something between  Rousseau bright  linen
drying on the stones and  Arbeit  Macht Frei
Corot  framed
for Hilton's visitors


157

JONES


lll

The way a woman  bends weighing  the wash
towels, jeans, shorts

then stuffing everything these bits
into  the machine

outside dismantled trees

the lake like tin

then  straightening, re- members  the original


iv

Let it hang on trees on human haunches

what  we desire
is something that  desire obscures

the body moving equal to necessity
a kind of style

id est, a motion meshed, articulate in November's

moving artifice, other and  alive


v

Diana in the bath,  a woman shaving. This
is an ad. What's his name

158

JONES

will put  on horns
Actaeon, yes
be torn  apart by creditors

The model
is untouchable, at least on agency  time

Caressing the leg, she too wonders
what's under the shine another commercial

Vl

The girl washing  her feet is aware of trees
bent  in the wind, she shivers
The light  on the bathroom tiles breaks  like spray
waves on the breakwater

Bare, she remembers
the spray  on the mountain ash, the high

cranberry. She  too will distribute the sky


Vll

Pascin, once Pincas takes off his hat
to paint the girls, Mireille

Ginette, traipsing about in their  slips. Ah
the drive  to the country

a raft  of housewives without a house. "Tiens!" The wine. "Jules!

159

JONES

Tiens les bas!" washing her feet for the ride
back. He left them, comme c;a

sitting  at the table, walked through jazzland, sad Edens  of Cuba, of Texas

of Louisiana, noted
the dark girl barefoot  in a yard the sun like dust

New York to gay Paree. He hanged himself. The streets go on. The girls

The war. "Ah,  notre Jules ce foutu  Bulgare
il nous a fait lumiere!"


Vlll

Mostly it's banged  shins encounters with bedboards fence  wire

memories of a skinned knee, a thorn
in the pink flesh

then faithful servants  become master, demanding
attention -to be shaved

oiled, decked out
inviting, punishing, every lese-majeste


IX

Kid,  you gotta  stop hiking  your skirt over bald knees. Don't

16o

JONES

sit right  in front of my eyes like some
sermon  on the ogival

arch, a
reminder of Marino, his holy imagery

You know fucking well
such  biblical  knowledge doesn't make angels


X

Michael Snow's  Walking  Woman
is a cliche or
Ia bourgeoise as

the three  Fates  in one, snick, snick, like The Nude  Descending

a Staircase, the girl next door  passing
a picket  fence

whitewashed, blank, some anonymous skirt or
cutout from TIME-LIFE


Xl

Diane de Poitiers, see her painted at her toilet bosomy, with  two

plump children looking on or as the chaste
Diana with a stag. She taught

the king delight, rumpling his high  bed. Free
the sun glancing from  the bath


161

JONES

Diane  conceived
arches in the Cher, a long salon, latticed stone

structuring light and  air
Even her rival, Catherine
de Medicis  approved. Voltaire

enjoyed  it. In the war
the wounded  lay like pawns on the checkerboard tiles

were bathed in the flow
of light from clouds, light from the waves, light

once broken  from  behind  the eyes of a lady in her bath
at Chenonceau


Xll

Death is dust. The sun comes and goes
The crows come. They  clean

the street. The animals with guns make love in the dust

The babies sound  like young crows

I saw a zoo once  (I'm not a young woman) , this

is a bad zoo

If the animals were wild they'd  get out

Enough there's  water,  I can wash my feet

JONES

Xlll

Gada invierno una terraza sobre el ano
-Paz

I think  you said Vishnu looking  down  saw
a thousand ladies washing  in a stream

It was paradise

Naturally he couldn't resist nor they, being divine
he took them  all

at once. Now there  are millions and  no stream not
fouled. The god has returned

to the terrace, winter
his mistress and  his dream








LE JARDIN REVE


NaimKattan





LA HANTISE  DE   L'IMPURETE,  de  Ia contamination, de  Ia pollution est un des traits les plus permanents  des civilisations de l'Orient semite et de !'Occident, du  judaisme, du  christianisme  et  de  l'Islam.   Lois dietetiques,
imposition de !'ablution, bapteme ressortissent du  meme fonds -le retour a une
innocence  originelle,  a une  purete  pre-natale.   La  mort  est  la  supreme  salete,
l'ultime contamination. Aussi, toute vie en est deja  empreinte. Que la purification soit !'ablution quotidienne   des mains  au  debut   de  la  journee  prescrite  par  le judaisme ou le lavement  au seuil de la mosquee  exigee des musulmans  avant  la priere,  devient  dans  le christianisme  le symbolique   bapteme,  et  l'eau   benite  a I'entree de l'eglise, ils'agit toujours d'un meme point de depart: proteger la vie et faire reculer la mort, la purification etant  la naissance  recommencee. 11 est done
question d'un  retour, condition de la reprise. Retour  a quai?  La Bible et le Coran
sont bien precis. Les Juifs retourneront, s'ils meritaient la recompense, au  jardin dont leur ancetre  et premier geniteur £fit chasse et les musulmans  retrouveront  ce meme jardin comme compensation de leur action, leur lutte  pour !'affirmation  de la loi divine dans ce bas-monde.  L'Eden  est done  un  jardin,  concret,  reconnais­ sable, bien que lointain. Le christianisme decrete la resurrection  des ames. La vie se poursuit dans une eternite et le paradis est plus un etat  de l'ame qu'un  lieu ou les corps renaissent. Aussi le jardin n'est-il pas le lieu par excellence, fantasme  et attente,  qu'il  occupe  dans l'orient  semite. Certes,  pour  les  nomades,  parcourant l'infini desert du monde, le paradis est la nature amicale et accueillante,  embau­  mant  le parfum  et prodigant  la fraicheur,  oasis et  rivage, lieu delimite,  decoupe dans  l'aridite du  desert.  Dans !'Occident  europeen   le  jardin  n'est  plus  le  reve mythique. Appendice  d'une  ferme ou extension du chateau  -le retour  ne prend pas la direction  d'un  lieu reve et  mythique,  mais celle, specifique, d'une  nature,  amenagee  pour  le bien-etre, domestiquee  a l'usage  de l'homme.  L'Eden  originel c'est  la  nature   premiere,  terre  sauvage,  non  contaminee, dont  la  durete   n'est qu'un  gage d'innocence.
Le  retour  a la  nature  est  une  constante  de  la  culture   occidentale.  Dans  le
desert oriental,  un  tel retour  apparaitrait comme  une  douloureuse  plaisanterie. Quelle  nature?  Celie a laquelle  on cherche  assidfiment  a echapper?  Aussi est-il
evident  que  la  purification  ne  peut  ni  dans  le  judaisme  ni  en  Islam  etre  un

KATIAN

bapteme,  un symbole. La  nature  alterne  entre  le desert  assassin et le rivage  ou la vie est arrachee. Adam  est chasse du  jardin  et Noe est ultimement  sauve  du deluge. S'il s'enivre c'est pour celebrer, fut-ce dans l'exces, une vie precaire. La sensualite  qui  impregne  la  Bible et  le  Coran  est  un  choix,  certes,  mais  quasi impose par la fragilite  de la vie. L'Occident entretient  avec l'environnement un rapport  d'alliance, de celebration  mais aussi de restreinte  et de  mefiance. Dans leur  contradiction, les dieux  grecs attestent  des liens ambigus  de l'homme  avec la  nature. La  resurrection   n'est  pas  un  retour  a  une  nature   enfin  amicale  et douce mais le debut  d'une  vie autre,  au-dela de l'espace. Le retour  ala nature  a done  pour  objet  d'imposer  des restreintes  a la sensualite  qui  atteint  la  vie par l'exces et abime la nature  par l'abus.  Le jardin n'est pas le paradis  perdu  mais la foret vierge et une ferme d'une  perpetuelle fertilite. 11 faut  done  proteger la terre qui nous est donnee, retrouver  son innocence, la sauver de 1'alteration.
Tout  derangement de l'ordre  apparait comme  une  menace  a  une  purete  de­ gradee,  aux  prises avec  une machine  infernale  qui  inscrit  sa  perte  comme  une marque  du progres. La science, qui des le dix-neuvieme siecle, semblait dotee d'un  pouvoir magique  apte a controler,  a juguler les melafices de la nature  etait !'anti­ dote et donnait  au progres une image acceptable. Non pas du retour  a une purete premiere  mais  comme  l'arme   dont  dispose l'homme   pour  venir  a  bout  de  la dimension hostile de la nature, sa part cachee, ses dechets, ses saletes, ses microbes afin de lui donner  une  purete  nouvelle. Comme le corps, la  nature  pouvait  etre guerie de ses maladies,  debarrassee  de ses saletes. Et quand la  machine  a investi l'environnement, le retour  ala nature  est devenu un refuge du  reve. Les roman­ tiques etaient  des revoltes, des rebelles et, a l'endroit  du  progres impose, des pas­ seistes. La nature  non edulcoree, le bon sauvage etaient devenus l'ideal  et surtout un chant  et un  theme  litteraire.  Amenager  un lieu de  refuge,  fut-il  reve ou  re­ trouver,  dans  le  retour  sinon  la  retraite,   une  vieille  complicite,   une  alliance malaisee.  Ce  retour  a  la  nature  etait  la  grande  entreprise  d'un   Occident   qui commenc;ait a entrevoir le bout de la route et qui redoutait  que celle-d ne fU.t  une impasse. Le retour etait surtout  une tentative de conservation.

LA PREMIERE  GUERRE MONDIALE a transforme la crainte  de
!'Occident en doute.  Et  si le  progres etait  aussi celui  de  la  machine  de  mort?
Le soupc;on s'est  des lors installe. Sur  la  voie du  progres  les embuches  etaient volontairement posees par des ennemis malefiques, capitalistes,  juifs....  Chaque ideologie decouvrait  l'ennemi  a abattre.  Si le communisme  promettait   un  futur jardin,  empruntant a  l'Orient semite  la  vieille quete  messianique,  le  nazisme adopta  comme  dogme  et elabora  comme  programme  le retour  a la  nature.  Or cette marche  vers la  purete  perdue se faisait au son de la ferraille,  au  pas mili-

KATTAN

taire. C'est qu'entretemps, alors que l'Orient se degageait  peniblement  des male­ flees d'une  nature hostile, maladie et misere, !'Occident finissait de mettre en place une nature seconde, la machine cedant laplace a l'electricite  qui a son tour ouvre laporte a l'electronique eta l'ordinateur.
Chasse du  jardin,  l'homme  occidental  a mis des siecles pour  contrer  la  male­ diction biblique: il ne gagnera  pas son pain  par la sueur  de son front. Systema­ tiquement,   il  trouve  dans  la  nature,  grace  aux  ressources  de  son  esprit,  une energie qui lui evite l'effort et qui decuple  la sienne. De la roue a l'avion,  de la charrue  au  robot,  l'homme  a  reussi a domestiquer  la  nature.  Or,  celle-ci existe toujours, autonome,  ou dans un recoin de l'esprit.  L'environnement  etant  en tous points secoue, la nature  de la vie quotidienne est seconde. Le son est electrique, et l'on ne sait plus dans le champ  visuel ce qui est !'imitation: l'image electronique  ou les routes et les edifices qui en sont le decalque.  Les lieux  prefigurent  l'ecran
qui a son tour les reflete. A force de vouloir se liberer des servitudes domestiques on
a fini par  manger  des produits  de fabrication industrielle  qui,  par  rapport  aux
fruits  et aux  legumes sont des succedanes.  Meme  la, la  chimie  a transforme  les produits de la terre en produits d'une nature seconde.
La puissance de recuperation  du commerce est telle que meme les produits dits naturels, contre-partie d'un  abus d'alimentation chimique,  ont fini par etre incor­ pores au circuit  industriel.  En Amerique  du  Nord,  la residence secondaire,  a la montagne,  au bord de la mer ou a proximite  d'un  lac ne pouvait  plus mener au seuil de la nature.  La porte est largement  ouverte  et l'on  retrouve  a cette  cam­ pagne amenagee  une dimension de la ville. Ce n'est  meme  pas une evasion dans un lieu autre  fut-il partiellement le produit  du reve. L'Europe en est encore  a ce stade -a  la  sortie  du  bureau,  au  terme  de  la  semaine,  se  precipiter   dans  la voiture pour aller enfin respirer, pendant  un ou deux  jours, l'air  pur de la nature.  En fait,  on  n'accomplit  qu'un  deplacement  et  l'on  croit  au  changement, a  un depart, a l'arrivee a un lieu autre, a un ailleurs.
L'Amerique semble epuiser le soulagement  que l'on trouve dans ce mouvement. Et si on evitait  !'agitation? Si on restait  dans  un  appartement en  ville avec  les derniers outils de la technologic du son et de l'image?  Avec les plantes  d'interieur on peut  meme introduire  Ia nature  dans la maison.  Et l'on  se met  a  parler  aux plantes, domestiquant  ainsi une nature  dont  on  a a  jamais saccage  la  virginite. Et la quete  de !'innocence  perdue  reprend  de  plus belle. Les intellectuels  ne se contentent  plus d'aller  au bord  d'un  lac pour  un  week-end.  lls  quittent la ville. La campagne sera la vraie nature, ils s'installeront sur une ferme, rehabiliteront le sol delaisse par des paysans a l'affut  des dernieres  decouvertes  technologiques  de
!'industrialisation de !'agriculture. Or  on  ne peut  plus  revenir  a la charrue   des ancetres  et  dans  les fermes les plus excentriques  on  ne retrouve  plus la  nature sauvage.  D'ailleurs,  les citadins  ne  peuvent  faire  vivre  leurs  fermes  qu'a   coup

166

KATTAN


d'argent gagne a Ia ville. Et Ia, ils ne se privent ni du telt phone,
Ce nouveau  retour  a Ia terre qui entend  se situer au-dela  du  reve romantique ou  des  prescriptions  ideologiques  apparait derisoire.  Cette  nature   qui  se  veut reelle, n'est qu'un lieu de travail, volontairement  archaique mais qui ne l'est qu'en apparence. Une nature seconde produite par Ia machine et bientot par l'ordinateur est venue s'y superposer,  pour enfin, l'encadrer  et Ia releguer a un souvenir et, au mieux, a une survivance  nostalgique, un rappel.  Une  voiture  conduit  a Ia ferme ou l'on dispose de tracteurs,  d'appareils  menagers,  de television et  un  jour  pro­ chain d'ordinateur.
Le jardin reve pourrait  etre s'il ne l'est pas deja le produit  de Ia meme machine
qui le rend onirique.  On revient de cette nature comme si le retour, sans structure ideologique n'est qu'une illusion momentanee.  Or, le mouvement  ecologiste tente de donner  a cette  impulsion,  a cet instinct  de conservation,  un  cadre  coherent. Meme si ce mouvement  fait elire des deputes au  parlement  europeen  et presente un candidat a Ia presidence de Ia France elle se heurte a une impasse. II est tout a fait evident que l'idee du progres continu a fait son temps. Toute  invention,  toute decouverte  meme celles qui guerissent des maladies ant  une dimension  negative. On a beau dire que Ia technologie est Ia pour rester et qu'il  nous appartient a Ia controler, on en est aussi les jouets et les victimes. La resistance a l'envahissement technologique   peut  en  retarder  le  mouvement  sans  l'arreter, nous  rendre  plus attentifs, plus vigilents, sans nous donner Ia maitrise du nouvel environnement.
Comme les precedents, Ia nouvelle technologie de l'ordinateur, annonce-t-on  de
toute  part,  va  bouleverser  toutes  nos habitudes  physiques et mentales.  Est-ce Ia relance de l'idee du progres? Les armes de plus en plus sophistiquees incitent  a Ia prudence.  Des voix s'elevent pour esperer et reclamer le controle  par l'homme  de Ia technologie  qu'il  a  mise au  point. Devant  !'impuissance,  le  peu  d'espoir  d'y arriver, on transforme certains ingredients, divers sous-produits de cette technolo­ gie en jeu. Le reve est relance.  Des films, des jouets electroniques utilisent l'ordi­ nateur.  On  peut desormais jouer tout seul aux echecs et tenter de battre  le nouvel adversaire  plus redoutable  que taus les autres:  l'ordinateur.  Des robots nous sont presentes a l'ecran, grand  ou  petit,  et l'on  assiste a  de  nouvelles guerres,  dans l'espace, sur des planetes imaginaires ou des monstres en acier agissant sous !'im­  pulsion de l'electricite  tuent  et sauvent,  detruisent  et  protegent  les habitants de notre  planete.  Une  nouvelle litterature prend  forme.  La science-fiction n'est  pas uniquement un  innocent  divertissement.  C'est  une  tentative   parfois  desesperee, malgre  ses apparences ludiques,  d'aborder le reel,  de l'integrer  a  une  existence quotidienne qui  prend  de  plus en  plus  Ia forme  d'une   repetition,  d'une   piece condamnee  a n'etre  jamais  jouee ou d'une  metaphore  qui  renvoie a elle-meme, ultime redondance qui ne masque pas le non-sens.
Le reve d'un  jardin, d'une  nature autre, innocente et vierge, non touchee encore

KA'ITAN

par  cette nouvelle barbarie  technologique  persiste. Ceux  qui  en ont  les moyens vont le chercher dans des iles lointaines, plages ensoleillees et vestales soumises qui n'ont  pour  fonction  que  de  danser  et  de  laisser  entrevoir   une  sensualite  non­ encore ensevelie sous le poids de l'electronique  et du beton.  L'industrie touristique s'est emparee  rapidement  de cet espace de reve. Des clubs sont  amenages  pour l'encadrer, pour  que  }'illusion soit  delimitee  et  surtout   pour  qu'elle   devienne lucrative.  Et au  coeur de l'univers  de beton  proliferent  les  plantes  vertes. Tout  nouveau bureau  ou les fenetres ne s'ouvrent  plus et ou, meme en plein soleil, l'on
ne peut plus eteindre  Ia lumiere, des plantes sont posees a des endroits  designees,
comme des jalons d'un  reel que l'on fait surgir  du coeur du beton, afin que  notre
impulsion de travailler,  de mouvement  et de depense  ne nous apparait pas,  par­
faite redondance,  metaphore  vide, totalement  futile.  L'on  se prend  a toucher  ces
grandes  feuilles  vertes  eparpillees  dans  le  nouvel  espace  ferme  pour  s'assurer
qu'elles ne sont pas, comme le reste, en plastique, un autre  produit  de Ia machine. Les plantes vertes sont necessaires pour que  nous  puissions respirer  l'air  confine. Elles nous rappellent  que le jardin, notre reve antique  et  persistant,  n'est  pas un vestige archeologique  mais existe encore, fut-il soumis au  regne de l'electricite  et du beton, dans un environnement  vivant.
La technologie nous dispense en contrepartie de ses menaces et de ses promesses, nos reves et nos jeux. Nous crayons en  jouant  avec  de  nouvelles  machines  que nous nous  jouons d'elles alors que  nous acceptons  une  fois sur  deux  d'etre  ses jouets. Notre reve d'un futur  radieux alteme  entre  le jardin  sauve, perdu  dans le beton  et  l'electricite  et le monstre  electronique   devenant   notre  robot  serviteur.
C'est Ia fuite en avant  ou le refuge dans un retour  a l'inalterable. Nous sommes
assaillis par l'ephemere  dans un mouvement  si rapide  que  nous ne parvenons  pas a en capter  ni le sens ni Ia direction. Nous crayons  nous retrouver,  par  le retour a une  permanence. La  succession vertigineuse  d'images,   d'appareils, de  reves
fabriques  n'elimine  pas l'oubli  mais le rend  acceptable. Le  jardin  nous apparait alors comme l'ultime  lieu ou le repos est encore  possible. Autrement, nous nous
adaptons  au mouvement de chaque  nouvelle machine  et nous nous condamnons a
une perpetuelle agitation qui n'est qu'un amenagement de l'oubli.
Dans  le desert  premier,  l'homme  reva  d'un   jardin  ou  repos  et  oubli  etaient depasses. Dans  l'Eden,  le temps est aboli  et  le  travail  inutile.  Ce  jardin,  a-t-il existe sauf dans le reve, l'un  des plus vieux que  l'homme ait  enregistre?  Le reve le plus persistant aussi puisque Ia promesse d'un  paradis  est continuellement renouvelee. Chasses du paradis, nous nous battons  pour  preserver  notre memoire et pour  redecouvrir  un lieu, semblable au  jardin  perdu  ou nous retrouverions  le repos. Notre desert est-il different  tout peuple qu'il  est de machines  et de beton? L'aire  du  jardin  reve se retrecit,  devient  une  dimension  de  notre  esprit,  jardin secret, mais une promesse toute aussi puissante que l'Eden  premier.

168

KATTAN



UNE INCURSION  EN   EXTREME-ORIENT  ne fait  qu'accentuer dans  notre  esprit  la specificite du  jardin  en Occident.  Ne a Bagdad,  je me suis tau jours considere,  du  mains  de  par  mes origines et  de  par  les sources de  rna culture  comme  un  oriental.  Me  trouvant   a  Xian,  en  Chine   j'ai  demande  de visiter la Mosquee. Surprise  double  et double revelation.  La  Mosquee  ne se  dis­ tinguait  des edifices chinois que  par les inscriptions sur  les murs  du  texte  cora­ nique  en arabe.  Pour  le reste, c'etait  la Chine.  Meme  le minaret  n'etait  qu'un  toit chinois avec les extremites  en bois et les couleurs des palais, des residences et autres  pagodes. Deuxieme  revelation:  mes hates s'adressant  a moi, me traitait  en Occidental. Certes,  Canadien  d'adoption  je le suis mais,  lisant  dans  la  langue d'origine  des sourates  qu'ils  ne  pouvaient  pas eux-memes  dechiffrer,  je tentais d'affirmer  mes origines. Or  pour  les Chinois,  j'etais bel et  bien  Occidental  car pour  eux !'Occident commence  en  lnde.  Outre  la  relativite  des notions  et  des concepts d'origine  cette revelation  m'apprit a revoir  man  jardin.  Une  visite a la ville jardin Su Sho m'en donna !'occasion. Lars de rna visite j'entendis  un touriste europeen  s'exclamer: les Chinois  n'aiment  pas la  nature.  A  premiere  vue,  tout lui donne raison. Toutes  les apparences.  Voici le pavilion de la contemplation  de la  lune  et Ia derriere  une  fenetre,  un  arbre,  des  branches  penchees  sur  un  jet d'eau.   Un  ruisseau  qui  coule  sinueusement  emettant  un  bruit   doux  dans  sa lente chute. ]'en suis separe  par une cloison. Trois fenetres en formes differentes, hexagonales,  carrees  et  rondes  m'offrent  une  triple  vision de  l'arbre. J'avance comme dans une succession d'images, un film qui se deroule dans une prehistoire du cinema.
Le grand  art, en Chine a pour element la nature. Des coquillages, des stalactites, des branches, des fleurs et des fruits seches. Le tout arrange  avec une dexterite qui n'a  d'egale que la patience  dans cette constante  refonte de la nature.  La il n'y a de nature  que  manipulee. Si le jardin  d'Eden  existait il serait  tout  autant  qu'en Occident  le produit  de l'imaginaire et du desir mais son point de depart  serait le point d'aboutissement biblique.  C'est un Adam  disposant  de toutes les ressources de la connaissance et de la ruse qui en serait le fabricant  et le metteur  en scene. Le gTand art c'est d'enfermer dans un cadre entre un carton et une glace, fleurs et plantes decoupees, sechees et qui offrent une vision de beaute  ou tout  est pense, fabrique ou rien n'est a l'etat  sauvage, ou rien n'est laisse au hasard.
La nature  est un spectacle.  Un  spectacle fabrique  et l'on  amenage  des lieux, des promontoires, des pavillons pour le contempler. On  n'aime  la nature  que domestiquee,  refaite,  reconstituee.  Le  jardin  n'est  done  pas  un  reve de  la  pre­ histoire,  un  Eden  qui  pre-existerait  a  l'homme  et  a  la  destruction   d'une  paix premiere, d'un  calme d'origine. Le jardin est l'apogee  du travail  et de l'effort, la

x6g

KATTAN

proclamation  de Ia victoire de l'homme,  de son asservissement de Ia nature  a son confort et a son imaginaire.
Dans sa nouvelle Le pretre du temple  de Shiga  et son amour,  Yukio Mishima
ecrit:  "Vue  comme  un microscope et projetee  a l'echelle  des astres, Ia fleur  de lotus peut devenir le point de depart  de toute  une theorie de l'univers,  de fournir le moyen par lequel  percevoir Ia Verite. II faut  d'abord savoir que chaque  petale compte quatre-vingt quatre  mille nervures et que chaque  nervure  repand  quatre­ vingt quatre  mille lumieres."
J'ai  visite a Tokyo  un temple shintoiste et un temple  boudhiste.  La  encore  Ia nature est domestiquee, amenagee. Par Ia contemplation infinie d'une  fleur, on echappe  a l'espace,  on ne le transforme  pas  en  imaginaire, mais  on  epouse sa realite qui est depasse par son apparence  et l'on  atteint  l'au-dela  en s'integrant a Ia substance  de Ia fleur, de l'etang,  des arbres.  II n'est  pas question  de symboles. Car l'univers n'est pas l'au-dela  de Ia nature  mais Ia nature  elle-meme qui dans sa substance  reelle est l'au-dela.  L'univers  n'est  pas l'ailleurs,  c'est le lieu amenage, refait afin que Ia contemplation  puisse trouver son foyer, son point de concentration et eviter Ia dispersion.
Je  n'ai  pas  voulu  etudier  les religions ni  les cultes  qui  ordonnent   cette  con­ templation  et lui octroient sinon un sens du mains une continuite.  J' ai cru que  je pouvais connaitre  ces religions et ces cultes en  les etudiant,  pour  decouvrir  une difference, peut-etre  et sans doute pour Ia confirmer.  Mais avant  de reduire  cette nature  a Ia contemplation  a laquelle on me conviait,  je voulais,  naivement,  can­ didement,  epouser Ia simplicite du geste qui  en obeissant  au  culte, lui echappe.  Je ne connaissais ni le culte, ni ses exigences gestuelles. Je  me suis mis a cote des autres qui devant  le temple de boudha  jetaient  une monnaie  puis frappaient des mains et se courbaient  Iegerement. Mimetisme  ou puissance d'une  tradition qui  a traverse  l'epreuve  des siecles pour  acquerir   une  existence  propre  et  autonome? Je frappai  des mains et m'inclinai  Iegerement. Je  ne  pensais ni a man  Dieu  ni a une divinite. Le geste se suffisait a lui-meme.  Le lien suscitait l'environnement et j'en faisais partie. Cette nature  n'etait  pas Ia mienne mais l'espace  d'un  moment,  mes mains claquaient. Je l'accueillais et je croyais qu'elle repondait  a man accueil.




TWO  POEMS
 


JoyKogawa



IN THE FOREST

in the forest  the tree perfectly  balances  its hours in the time of its branches no branch is accidental

in the forest our arms perfectly balance the breeze in the time of our departures no leaving  is accidental

in autumn
in the bare  room
by a crack  in the window a curtain moves

as the woodsman arrives precisely beyond  time








GRIEF POEM

o that  after  all no thought breaks
the mind's cold spell

chill these bones their language lost

in this fresh silence weather hides all odours  of decay

KOGAWA

by freezing  time I travel through this numb day

look look my small
my beautiful child

the icicle here how it shimmers in the blue sun

my small
my beautiful child look once more
into  the shimmering

















IIHAS ANYONE HERE HEARD OF MARJORIE PICKTHALL?"

Discovering the Canadian Literary Landscape


Henry Kreisel

ICAUGHT MY   FIRST GUMPSE of Canada  m May  I!J40 fmm
the  deck of the  Sobieski,  a  Polish ship  that  was bringing  hundreds  of civilian
internees  and  prisoners of war from England  to Canada. The  civilian internees, myself among them, were German  and Austrian  refugees who'd  been interned  by Britain after the Nazi conquest of France.
During  the journey the Sobieski developed some engine trouble, was left behind by the convoy of which she was part,  and eventually  limped  into  harbour  at St. John's,  Newfoundland, for some emergency repairs.
We thronged  the deck, glad to see a harbour, and wondering  if we were going to disembark  there.  Newfoundland was not of course part  of Confederation   in
1940, but it was a British dependency.  I was not sure  at  the time  of its precise political status. I knew that it was close to Canada.
About  Canada itself I had only the vaguest of notions. It  was terra incognita, at most a large block of red in the atlas I used when I was a schoolboy in Austria. If I thought  about  Canada at all, I thought  of it vaguely as a huge, but sparsely populated  country,  rich  in  natural  resources, though  I would  have  been  hard­ pressed to say what exactly these resources were.
Once,  after  the Nazi annexation of Austria in 1938, I was talking  to a friend who knew everything.  We were talking about  possible countries  we might escape to. He ruled out  Canada, because it was virtually impossible to get a visa.  Can­ ada's  doors  were  tightly  shut.  Perhaps  that  was  just  as  well,  he said,  because Canada was a cultural  backwater.  There  were no theatres  or opera houses there, no serious music was played there, and there was no literature worth talking about.  Canada was much  worse than  the United  States, he said.  The  United  States  at least was a vigorous country,  though  quite barbaric.  On  this point I argued  with him, for I had read a few American  writers  (Upton  Sinclair, Whitman, Heming­  way, Steinbeck), and  thought quite highly of them. But since I knew absolutely nothing  about  Canada and  had at the time no desire to find out,  I accepted  his superior knowledge.


173

KREISEL

And now here I was, without  a visa, and  under  rather  strange  circumstances, looking up the steep, rocky cliffs at the city of St. John's and  wondering  what  it was like to live there.
The  Sobieski lay at anchor for a day or two, in the mouth  of the harbour. We were not taken ashore, but during  the day dozens of small  boats came  out  from shore and circled the Sobieski, and the people in the boats called out to us as we stood on deck. Suddenly  that large, abstract  red mass on the school atlas  became real for me, a human  landscape.
Who were the people that lived there? What  songs did  they sing, what  stories did they have to tell? As soon as I saw the  people, it was impossible for  me  to believe that they had no music and no literature. My all-knowing friend must have been wrong.
We did not disembark in St. John's. Repairs completed,  the Sobieski sailed on,
into the Gulf of St. Lawrence, and  then up the great  river, a romantic  landscape stretching  away on both sides. So this, then, was Quebec,  the French  part  of the vast unknown country. People along the shore saw us and occasionally they waved. Again I wondered  what songs they sang and  what  stories they told.
At Quebec  City we at last disembarked,  boarded  trains and  began the long internment. For a year and a half (I  passed my eighteenth  and  nineteenth  birth­ days there)   I knew the country  only from  the  confines of internment  camps  in Quebec  and  New Brunswick and  came  in  contact  only  with  the  officials who administered   the  camps  and  with  the  members  of  the  Veterans'  Corps  who guarded  us.
With some of these guards I struck up something  resembling a friendship.  One
of them, a short, somewhat  rotund  man  asked me to write  a letter  for  him, for writing, he said, did not come easy to him. So we sat  down  at  the long table  in the middle of the hut where my bed was, and he began to dictate  the first of many letters I wrote for him. "Dear Wife," he said and stopped.  Then slowly, hesitantly, he formulated some questions, about  his wife's health,  about  what she was doing, whether she had heard from their daughter,  from their sons. He had not much  to report  from where he was, he said. The  food was good,  the  work not  too hard, wmetimes he was bored.
The word got around  that  I was good at writing letters and  three or four other
guards used my services. I found out where they came from, places and  provinces I had never heard of, from Kenora  in Ontario, from  Gimli in Manitoba, from  a small village on the Nova Scotia coast. The great  red expanse on the map  became humanized,  though  the letters I wrote revealed little of the Canadian  psyche.
Once  I asked one of the guards  if he knew of any  Canadian writers,  but  he
looked perplexed.


174

KREISEL


So for eighteen months I lived in Canada  and yet was not really in the country. We did get copies of the Fredericton  newspaper,  but one could not  discover the presence of a literary life in the city or in the country from reading it.
After several months  we managed  to get some books sent into  the camp.  We could even request some titles. I asked for some Canadian books of fiction or of poetry. None was ever sent. When I inquired  why, I was told that  unless I could give the title of a  particular book or the  name  of a specific author, it was  im­ possible to fill my request. A classical Catch-22  situation! I didn't  know any titles of Canadian books or the names of any Canadian writers, and  so I  couldn't  get any books to find out. I asked one of the officers if he could  help  me. Officers, I thought,  were supposed to be educated  and might be expected to know something about  their  national  literature. But I  drew  a  blank. So I  went  back  to reading European writers. In  the camps, therefore, my quest to discover  what  Canadian writers might  have to tell me about  the people of the country  I  wanted  to know ran into the sand.



WEN I  WAS AT   LAST  RELEASED from  internment in  No­ vember of I94I, I went to Toronto and enrolled in Harbord  Collegiate to prepare myself for the Ontario grade XIII examinations.  English was of course one of the major  matriculation subjects.  Now at  last, I  thought,  I  would  learn  something about  Canadian literature, for surely in the last year of high school some of the major figures of the national literature  would be studied.
That was certainly the case in the Austrian schools I knew. We studied some of the great  German  writers, but  the important Austrian  writers were studied  as a matter  of course. No one ever thought  to question the fact  that  students  should study the national literature.
To my surprise that  was not the case in Ontario  in I 94 I. When  I looked at the reading  list, I found an anthology  of poetry, mainly British, Shakespeare's  Henry V, and  Lorna Doone, an  interminable mid-nineteenth-century novel  by R.  D. Blackmore.  I  still sometimes  wonder  who  decided  to  inflict  this  novel  on  the long-suffering students of Ontario and why.
Harbord Collegiate  was known  as a school with high  academic  standards,  its students  among  the  best in  the  province.  But  when  I  asked  some  of my  new friends  if they  could  recommend  some  Canadian books  I  might  read,  no  one seemed able to tell me, and I was too busy trying to make up for four lost years of study and prepare  myself for the final examinations to pursue the matter  with any kind of urgency.
When we had finished at last with Lorna Doone, we began to read a few of the
poems in the anthology.  There were some narrative  poems by Alfred  Noyes and


175

KREISEL

John  Masefield, a few lyric poems by Keats and Tennyson, sonnets by Shakespeare and Wordsworth, and a poem by Marjorie  Pickthall.
I remember  reading the poem before class and  being quite  taken  by it. Its sad tone,  its Weltschmerz, its vague  religiosity appealed   to  my  youthful,  romantic sensibility.
When  we began  to study  the  poem in class, the  teacher  asked, "Has  anyone
here heard of Majorie Pickthall?"
Silence. No one raised a hand. No one spoke.
"Well," he said, "she's a Canadian poetess. A very fine Canadian poetess. She has a great  command  of language.  Listen to  these cadences."  And  he  read  the poem, and read it very effectively.
For me it was an important  moment. At last a figure had appeared  in the liter­
ary landscape  that  had seemed quite  empty  and  barren.  The  teacher  told  us a little about  Marjorie Pickthall. She  had  been  a rather  fragile  woman,  and  had died  young  in  1922.  (That was the  year  I  was  born,  and  so  I  felt  at  once  a connection  between  us!)   He  told  us about  the  devastating   blow  her  mother's death  had  been for her. It was all very touching.  I could  relate  to her suffering. I believed that  one could not be a poet without  suffering.  A teacher  in Vienna had once told us that.  Poets suffered  more than  other  people, he had  said, and that's why they were poets.
Marjorie Pickthall  was thus the first Canadian literary  voice I  heard.  I asked the teacher  once after class why we didn't  read  any other  Canadian writers.  He seemed somewhat  taken aback.  No other  student  had  evidently  ever  raised  this point. He said something about Canada being a very young country  that  had  not yet produced  a significant literature.  This  was the first, but  by no means  the last time that I heard this curious line of reasoning.
But were there not at least some writers worth  reading,  I asked. He mentioned four names:  Leacock, Haliburton, Carman, and Roberts.
I thanked  him and wrote the names down.
I began to frequent  Toronto  bookstores, and  there at last the literary  landscape began to open up. Whenever I asked for some Canadian books I was directed to a little ghetto called "Canadiana." It seemed to me then, and still seems to me now, a curious practice of segregating our writers. But at least they were there. I began by reading Leacock and Haliburton because my teacher had  recommended  them, and read them with great enjoyment.
In  the fall of 1942 I enrolled in the honours  course in English  Language  and Literature at the University of Toronto. Now at last, I thought,  I would  be able to get a systematic  overview of the  national  literature, for  one  of the  first-year courses was "American  and Canadian Literature." It was, alas, a misleading description.  The  Canadian part  of the course consisted of three  or four  lectures


176

KREISEL


at  the  end  of the  academic  year. These  lectures  were given  by  Claude  Bissell. They  were very good lectures, but there was not very much  that  he could do in three or four hours. R. J. McGillivray taught  the American material.  When I saw the reading  list for the course, I expressed my disappointment because there was so little Canadian material  on the list. McGillivray said  that  if I was interested, I  could  write  a major  term  paper  on a  Canadian  writer.  He  suggested  A. M. Klein, who had  recently published  Hath Not  A  few, and  whose background  was similar to mine. So the very first term paper  I wrote at the University of Toronto was on a Canadian poet. It was a great  experience for me. For  the first time I heard a modern  Canadian voice and began to wean myself away from the poetic vocabulary  of the  Romantics and  Victorians.  Klein's  was also the  first  urban­ Jewish voice I heard,  and  this was very important for my own development  as a writer. Through Klein  I came  to A. J. M. Smith and  F. R. Scott  and  the other poets whose work appeared in New Provinces.
Most of my fellow students  were not much interested in Canadian literature,  or were at  best defensive about  it. Canadian writers were  never  "as  good as" any number  of British or  American  writers. This  always seemed  to  me  a ludicrous way of arguing,  because the  proposition  was based on totally  wrong  premises.
When  I  went  to school in  Austria  nobody ever said  that  Grillparzer,  say, or
Stifter  was not as good as Goethe  and  Schiller  and  therefore  we  needn't  study them. We studied Austrian  writers because they had important things to say about the country.  Then  why shouldn't Canadian students study Canadian writers who might  have important and  interesting  things to say about  Canada? The  image  I got after listening to some of my friends was that of a literary foot race, where Shakespeare  always came  in first, followed by Milton  and  Chaucer, and  one or two thoroughbred British classic writers; after them came  two or three American writers, and,  then,  bringing  up the  rear  (always  the  rear), came  two or  three Canadian writers, destined to be forever last.
At  the same  time  there  were  writers at  the  University  of Toronto who  were much admired  by students  and professors alike. E. J. Pratt  was at Victoria College
and  Philip  Child  was at  Trinity. Northrop  Frye  at  Victoria  was  beginning  to exercise his extraordinary influence,  and  Marshall  McLuhan was beginning  his explorations  at St. Michael's College. Many  people were telling me about  Earle Birney, who had  recently  published  David  and Ot'her Poems, but  who had  left to join the army  just before I arrived on the scene. The  stories I heard  made him seem  a  dashing  and  exciting  figure,  and  when  I  finally  got  to  know  him,  in Vancouver  in  1950,  he lived  up  to  his legend.  There  were  also professors like Norman  Endicott,  not himself a creative writer, who were tremendously  interested in  the creative  work  of their  students  and  offered constant  encouragement and help.

177

KREISEL

So  I  found  a  paradoxical  situation:  a  defensive,  hesitant  attitude  towards Canadian literature as manifested  in its relegation  to  the  bottom  of the  official curriculum  on  the  one  hand,  and  encouragement  and  a  desire  to  foster  that literature  on the other hand. As an outsider  I found  all this strange,  because the little that  I found time to read of Canadian literature seemed to me very interest­ ing indeed,  and  nothing  to apologize about.  The  literary  landscape  was in fact much richer than  I would ever have expected it to be.


IN  1943 1 MET  ROBERT WEAVER  and  James  Reaney.  Up  to now Canada had been for me the confines of internment camps, and  then the two big cities-Toronto and  Montreal.  The  rest of the country  barely existed in my
consciousness. Reaney,  both in his inimitable  conversation  and  in  the  evocative things he wrote, introduced  me to the world of small-town  Ontario, and  Weaver, who  was more  interested  in  prose  than  in  poetry,  introduced   me  to  modem Canadian fiction. It was Weaver who told me about  Morley Callaghan  and Philip Grove and got me to read some of their novels, and  it was Weaver  who told me about  a new writer, Hugh  MacLennan, who'd  published  his first novel a couple of years earlier,  and  lent  me a copy of Barometer  Rising.  Weaver  didn't  have much money, but  he always managed  to buy books, or else he got review copies.
Weaver also knew a lot of literary gossip, and  I found  it absorbing  to listen to his stories, as I still do whenever I see him. He made  the literary landscape  come alive. He  also knew some of the writers  who  were writing  for the  CBC,  people like Lister Sinclair  and Len Peterson, and  he introduced me to them.
Once  he  told  me  that  Philip  Grove  usually  came  to  the  public  library  on College Street on Wednesdays and always sat in the same seat, in the rear of the reading  room. So I went down  to the library  one  Wednesday,  and  behold,  there indeed  was Grove,  dressed in  a  very  old-fashioned  suit,  and  wearing  a  high, starched  shirt collar, sitting very erect, reading  and  occasionally  making  a  note. I watched him for a while, trying to make  up my mind  whether  I should  go up and talk to him. I'd  just read Fruits of the Earth and I tried to think of something
I might  say to  him about  it. In  the end,  I didn't do  it  and  just walked  away without speaking to him.
In 1944 Weaver, Reaney, the late Robert Sawyer, and I thought  that  we should get together once or twice a month to discuss modem  literature and  perhaps  read from our  own writings. So we launched what we called The Modern  Letters Club. Weaver arranged for places where we could hold our meetings, usually in the common room of one of the residences. It was all very informal.  We never had a constitution, or by-laws, or anything resembling an organization. Word got around and we usually had twenty or thirty people at our gatherings. These  were always

KREISEL


lively. People could read anything  they liked-poetry, fiction, dramatic sketches, or  critical  articles.  Some  professors showed  up,  too;   Norman   Endicott   quite frequently, Northrop Frye  and  Barker  Fairley  occasionally, but  they never  im­ posed their presence on us.
I used to look forward  to our meetings because we all had  the feeling that  we belonged to a community  and  that  literature  was the most important activity  in the world. The debates went on until we were told to leave, and  the talk continued out  in  the  street  and  in  coffee shops near  the  campus.  We  never  published  a journal  ourselves, but quite  a few of the pieces first read  at our  meetings found their way into print.
For  two or  three  years  the  club  was  going  very strong.  Then  the  meetings became  less frequent, the  atmosphere  was less electric,  and  so we  just stopped. In  I 947 and  I 948 most of the original members graduated and  drifted  apart.
In  the fall of  I947  I  got a  job at  the  University  of Alberta,  and  at  last  the
immense part  of the country  that  was still terra incognita for me became real.
I discovered to my surprise  that  even though  Edmonton  was a much  smaller city than Toronto and the University of Alberta much smaller than  the University of Toronto, there  was  a  lively regard  for  literature. W.  G.  Hardy,  who  had written  some very successful historical novels, was in the Department of Classics, and  F. M. Salter,  my colleague in the English  department, had  for some years been giving a course in creative  writing  that  had  become famous.  In  the spring of I947, W. 0. Mitchell,  one of Slater's  prize students,  had  published Who  Has Seen The Wind. Many  other  writers, among  them  Christine  van  der  Mark  and later  Rudy  Wiebe,  were his students.  I myself showed him a draft  of The  Rich Man, and he was very helpful and very encouraging.
Salter  was  a  Maritimer and  he  talked  enthusiastically  about  the  writers  of Atlantic Canada, and so illuminated  for me another  part of the literary landscape. It was also Slater  who also introduced  me to the work of the writers of the West, to people like Robert  Stead  and  Martha Ostenso, and  Sinclair  Ross.
And  yet, when  after  two  years or so I  asked  my senior  colleagues why  we
didn't  offer a course in Canadian literature,  the  paradoxical  attitude  I  had  first encountered  in Toronto surfaced  again. Canada was a young country, there  was not sufficient material for a full-year course, our literature  wasn't  yet quite  good enough.
To my image of the literary  foot race I now added  the image of a town crier, or a CBC announcer, calling  out  one day, "Hurrah! The  great  day  has at  last dawned! Canadian literature is now good enough to be taught  in our schools and universities!"
One man  at least was already  doing it in  I947· Desmond  Pacey, a New Zea­
lander, was offering a full course in Canadian literature  at the University of New


I79

KREISEL

Brunswick, but Pacey was at that time regarded  as something  of an academic maverick.  Yet increasingly, graduate students  were  writing  theses on  Canadian literature,  but it was not until the Ig6o's that formal courses in our own literature became standard offerings in our universities.
My own discovery of the terrain  was at  last completed  in  I950  when  I  went to British Columbia for the first time and met Earle Birney and Roy Daniells, and through them Alice and William McConnell, who in turn introduced  me to Ethel Wilson and  to Dorothy  Livesay and  to Marya  Fiamengo.
The  great landscape  was full of life, full of interesting  writers. There was one great gap. Quebecois writers remained shadowy  for me, and  it was not until  the mid-Ig6o's that  I began to read them.
In the  I 95o's Wilfred and Sheila Watson  came to Edmonton  and  became  the inspiration  for many aspiring writers. They  were marvellous  friends.  Eli Mandel, Robin Mathews, and Henry Beissel became my colleagues and my friends. Robert Kroetsch and  Rudy Wiebe were students  here and  became  my friends.
The  Ig6o's  brought  a wonderful outburst  of literary  activity.  It  was no longer possible to keep abreast of everything that was going on. The  old attitudes  lingered on. In 1961, the late Douglas Grant, then editor of The  University  of Toronto Quarterly, asked me how long I thought  Canadian  Literature  could keep going. He thought  the material  for articles would soon run  out.  And from  time to time some of the older  cultural  pundits  bemoan  the  fact  that  few Canadian  writers have  truly  international reputations.   I  am  always  tempted   to  ask  how  many Dutch or Yugoslav or Brazilian writers they can name.
The  young writers I know are fortunately  not much  bothered  by this kind  of soul-searching. They  know who they are, they  know  where  they are, and  many of them are puzzled by Frye's famous question, "Where is here?"
As for me, I could hardly  have imagined  when  I  caught  my first glimpse of
Canada in May of 1940 how marvellous the voyage of discovery would  be.






18o

JIDVICE TO MY FRIENDS

Robert Kroetsch


1   for a poet who has stopped  writing

if we could  just get a hold of it, catch  aholt, some kind of a line,
if the sun was a tennis ball or something but  it ain't, the impossible thing is the sun

if words rhymed, even, we could catch a holt
(a bush)  and  start  the stacking,  words lined  up,  I mean, like, in the old days wood behind the kitchen  stove

but you take now your piecemeal  sonnet wow, certain of these here poets,
these chokermen can't even count  to fourteen and  as for Petrarch, well, I mean

I've  been  to bed with some dandy  and also skilled ladies, sure, but  would  I a ballyhoo start
for the keen  (and  gossipy)  public?
I'd  be sued or whatever, maybe killed

but  (now  and  then) you've got to tell somebody
and  a reader has I guess, in spite of all, ears


2 	to Eli Mandel, setting  his new alarm

time was elapsing, sure, but when does it not and  always elapse?
and  hauling out, we were, the logos from  the forest  of earthly delights

you and  Dennis, Smaro and  I, holus-bolus drinking wine at the dining  room table,
Eli:  night, you were trying  to set your new alarm the birthday gift, the gift from  Ann





181

KROETSCH

what  time is it now? you asked,  gave us a fright
Dennis  raising the spectre  of the stove's  handy clock
over the books of poems, Ritsos, Suknaski, Pound, Webb we were reading aloud  to each other

and  by the time you had let spin by the digital  flash of LOCK, of ALARM
it wasn't  that  time, time passes, wiii, amen what  time is it now? you, wantonly, asked

and, like the guy said, if you really think you can get away with it, thank again















CORDUROY

M. Travis Lane


Porthos, you should  be with me in this hour.
My facing snagged, revealed  my shabby corduroy, guilt-crimpled like a candy's  foil.
What did we read those damn  books for?

For  just your glint of tinsel, yes, your Atlas strength.
Old  fatty, with  your burlap touch
you kept  the tune. Our candied life, weighted with  lies, will smother us.

The dog star  barks,
holding the other  stars at bay. They drop their glittering fakeries, indifferent, reveal
the shoddy  cavern  as it sags.
"Machines," he cried. "Too heavy," and  his heart broke  then.  The  stars lost sight.

He was their  eyes.

VJIRIJITIONS

Patrick Lane


(for  Doug Jones)


1

In your garden, the wild,
the flowers fading, your cabin still not built and  the far smoke of first fires
hangs above your lake.
It is cold here too
my friend. The  leaves fall fast and  the river
from  my window does not move.


2

And in love, your lady moves through her hours. The trees drop last leaves, cry out
we are naked,  naked,
their  voices fading
as sap sinks into earth.
Love is what  the almost dead depend on, what  they tum
to in their last beds.
They cry out, we are naked, we are naked, give us at the last
at least love. The  last
hour  when we desire most, falling  as we do into sleep, into  the blue worlds.


3

A cricket on a grey rock climbs to silence. Last songs

LANE

and  the deer,  remembering winter, are still
for one moment in the garden.


4

The delicate eye extends with grace. The song does not falter, moves upon  stone and  water,
moves as the magpie  moves
when  he is not busy at death, alone
and  bright against  the sky.


5

I sat in The Pagoda Of The Wild Goose in China, in the city of Xian.
The old capital where  the Tang ruled.
The walls were the same walls
Li Po and  Tu Fu knew. I must tell someone. Greater than  The  Wall
and  the tombs  of the Ming
were the words of those men. We are bereft.
And what  is our redress?  Is it
to impress  upon  the word ourselves?
In  the new China they no longer  believe in poems. The old ones, the ones
who know  the songs, are dying.


6

The language defeats
and  the centuries of faith ignore  me. I cannot find
a word  that  will justify the word
will. Still, this poem, this crude curio,  this imitation of destiny will suffice.

185

LANE

7

It is like a woman  on a narrow path with  three dogs and  a child.
In the moment of doubt
she works with the leashed ones and  the child  is left to wander. The flesh has its own song
to sing. I will becomes I know not
what to do. But to allow the line its length,
to let it fly to the far edge knowing  its return will sustain the breath. This  is enough.


8


In less than  four  months the sun will begin
to move north  again. In this country we call
that  image hope and  the fog rests upon  the water.  The  sun cannot burn  it away.


9

It is dawn  and your poems have moved  me to poems. To  improvise as the leaf
in its falling. That music. The return to simple things, to a garden, to a last drink
at night and in the morning the tentative, the body's act in the act of its being
a body. The yellow leaves.








186


MY FINAL HOUR


Margaret  Laurence

IAM  BEING  GIVEN A  UN<QUE OPPORTUNITY.* I will  not  hav<
to  postpone  until  my last  gasp  the  imparting of the  wisdom  of  my  accumulated
years  to a  breathlessly awaiting world.  Just  as well, as I have  never  been  much of a ·believer  in  "famous last  words." I suppose  this  is why  King  Lear's words, "Prithee, undo  this  button" seem  infinitely  more  moving  to  me  than   any  high­ flown  rhetoric  purportedly  uttered  by  some  well-known   person   when  on  the point  of departing this vale of tears. Anyway,  here I am,  faced  with  the prospect  of delivering the message of My  Final  Hour. I do not  promise  that it  will  be My Finest  Hour, but  I will do my best.
First,  I would  like to  pass on one  piece of advice.  If, as you  grow  older,  you feel  you  are  also  growing stupider, do  not  worry.  This   is normal, and   usually occurs  around  the  time   when  your  children, now  grown, are   discovering  the opposite -they  now  see  that   you  aren't nearly  as stupid   as  they  had  believed when  they  were  young  teen-agers. Take  heart  from  that. True, your  new-found sense of stupidity will no  doubt be  partly  due  to the  fact  that  the  technology of the  age  has  far  outstripped any  feeble  knowledge  of it  that  you  may  once  have felt  you  had.  It may,  however, also  be  due  to  the  fact  that   at  last  you  may  be learning  a  little   healthy  humility -humility  in  its  true   and   indeed   religious sense, which  of course  has  nothing at  all  to  do  with  self-effacement but  with  a recognition of  your  human limitations. I would  not  claim  that   I  have  learned that  kind of humility -that struggle  to learn  will never  cease. But  at least  I now can  accept  with some sort  of equanimity that  many  things  are  beyond  my  power. I can try to help friends or family  or strangers, but  I can  never  "save" another in the  profoundest sense.  I can  do  what   is within  my  human  power,  that is  all. Anything else is delusion  or spiritual pride,  or so I believe. My  limitations extend to many  fields.  I know  now  that  I will never  know  an  enormous amount about music  or painting. My  knowledge of science  is likely to remain minuscule. I will never  know  as much as  I would  like  to  about   the  planets  and   their   patterned courses. Even  in my own area  of so-called  expertise,  I will never read  all the novels I would  like to read,  even though I read  great  numbers of them  yearly.  I will also never  write  a novel  with  which  I am  really satisfied.  There is so much  to do, so

*An address  first delivered  to the Trent University  Philosophy  Society,  29 March   1983.

LAURENCE

much  to learn  and  experience, and  one lifetime,  however  long it may  be, is so short. I think of the verse from Psalms 39:  "Hear my prayer,  0 Lord,  and  give ear unto my cry; hold not thy peace at my tears;  for I am a stranger  with  thee, and a sojourner,  as all my fathers  were." Mothers,  too, I feel compelled  to add. Sojourner, yes, but this need not mean "tourist." My lifetime here is a short span, but I am not here as a visitor. Earth is my home. I have tried to read as widely as I can;  I have always believed I had to live as well as write, to be a citizen and  a person and a mother and a friend as well as a writer. But basically, I have spent a great part of my adult life in learning  a profession-or, as I prefer to call it, a trade -that  can  never be mastered  in its complexity  and  richness. I am  fond of the story  about  the brain  surgeon,  who,  meeting  a  novelist at  a  party,  says,
"Oh  ... you're  a  novelist, eh? When  I retire,  I plan  to take  up  novel writing."
"How  interesting," the novelist replies. "When I retire,  I plan  to take  up  brain surgery."
Well, an  acceptance  of limitations  does not  mean  that  one  is  not  constantly trying to extend  the boundaries  of knowledge  and  accomplishment. And  it  cer­ tainly does not mean an acceptance  of defeat, in whatever  fields our  endeavours  take  place.  It  is my feeling that  as we grow  older  we should  become  not  less radical  but  more  so. I do not, of course, mean  this in any  political-party  sense, but in a willingness to struggle for those things in which we  passionately believe. Social activism and  the struggle for social justice are often  thought  of as natural  activities of the young but not of the middle-aged  or elderly. In fact, I don't  think this was ever true, and  certainly in our own era  we are seeing an  enormous  up­ surge  of people  of all ages who  are  deeply  and  committedly   concerned  about the state  of our  hurting  and  endangered   world.  There   is  a  line  from  the  old Anglo-Saxon poem, "The  Battle of Maldon," that I think of frequently.  It is this: "Mind must  be the  firmer,  heart  the  more  fierce, courage  the  greater,  as our strength  diminishes."
So the  basic message of My Final  Hour  would  have  to  be-do not  despair. Act. Speak out. In  the words of one of my heroines, Catharine Parr  Traill,  "In cases of emergency, it is folly to fold one's hands and sit down to bewail in abject terror. It is better to be up and doing."

w.ARE   FACED NOW WITH  AN   EMERGENCY  that  concerns not only our own personal lives, but  the lives of all  people and  all creatures  on
earth.  Ours  is a terrifying world. Injustice,  suffering,  and  fear  are everywhere  to be found.  It is difficult to maintain  hope in such a world, and  yet I believe there must be hope. I want to proclaim my belief in the social gospel, as a Christian, a

188

LAURENCE

woman, a writer, a mother,  and a member of humanity, a sharer  in a life that  I believe in some way to be informed  by the holy spirit. I do not think it is enough to hope and  pray  that  our own lives and souls will know grace, even though  my entire life as a writer has been concerned with my belief that  all individual  human beings matter, that  no one  is ordinary.  The  new commandment of the  man  of Nazareth  speaks very clearly. "Thou shalt love thy neighbour  as thyself."
The social gospel is no easier now than  it ever was. My generation  was the first in human  history to come into  young adulthood   knowing  that  the  human  race now had  the  dreadful  ability  to destroy all life on earth  and  possibly the  earth itself. Only  later  did  we realize the full extent  of the  destruction  of life, a  con­ tinuing  destruction   passed on  to the then-unborn children  of survivors,  but  we did  know that  after  Hiroshima, August 6, I 945,  the  world  would  never  be the same again. The  annihilation caused by the first atomic  bombs was  unthinkable,  but  it  had  happened. Also,  we  had  taken  it  for  granted   that  through   wars, through  disasters, yet would the earth endure forever. It was clear to many of us in
I 945 that  this was no longer  to be taken  for granted. We have  lived with  that thought  ever since,  and  have  yet borne  our  children,  lived our  lives, done  our work. The  will to survive and  to pass on important caring  to future  generations is very strong.  But  today  we have to realize that  the  bombs  used at  Hiroshima and Nagasaki were small bombs, compared  to today's nuclear  weapons.
I ask you to think of the Holocaust in Europe, when the Nazis murdered  a very great  part  of  all  the  Jewish  communities.  That   horror,  surely,  must  never   be forgotten.   No  amount   of  mourning  will ever  be enough  for  those  millions  of children,  women,  and  men  whose lives were  torn  from  them  by  the  group  of de-humanized humans who had taken power in Hitler's Germany. Are we to remember  the  Holocaust  and  the  horrors  of Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki  and  yet remain silent when we hear today about a "winnable" nuclear war or a "limited" nuclear war? I think not.
Our lives and the lives of all generations as yet unborn  are being threatened, as never  before,  by the  increasing  possibility of a  nuclear  war.  I believe that  the question of disarmament is the most pressing practical,  moral, and  spiritual  issue of our  times. I'm  not  talking  about  abstractions.  I'm  talking  about  my life and your life and  my kids' lives and  the lives of people everywhere. If we value  our own lives, and the lives of our children and all children  everywhere, if we honour both the past and  the future,  then  we must do everything  in our  power to  work non-violently for  peace. These  beliefs are not only an  integral  part  of my social and  moral stance  but of my religious faith as well. Human society now possesses the terrible  ability to destroy all life on earth,  and our  planet  itself. Can  anyone who  has  ever  marvelled  at  the  miracle  of  creation -who  has  ever  borne  or fathered  a beloved child,  who  has even looked closely at  a tree or a plant  or a


I89

LAURENCE

river-fail to feel concerned and indeed anguished, every single day, at this thought?
A central  disagreement,  of course, exists between  those  who  think  that  more
and yet more nuclear arms will ensure that  nuclear  arms  will never be used, and those of us who believe that  the proliferation  of nuclear  weapons brings us closer all the time to the actuality  of nuclear  war-a  war  that  no side could  possibly win; a war that  would be so devastating  that  we cannot  begin  to imagine  that horror.  Whatever  we are being told about  a "limited" or a "winnable" nuclear war, the fact remains that  such a war could destroy  all that  we, as humankind, have aspired to, have achieved. It could destroy the future, not only of the world's peoples but of all creatures that share our planet with us.
As America and Russia develop more and  more nuclear  arms, so the other  will
inevitably respond in kind. Nuclear  arms have long since ceased to be a  "deter­ rent,"  if indeed  they were ever so, and  have  become  by  their  very  existence a monstrous  threat.  Daily, the chances are  increasing  for  a  nuclear  war  to  break out by accident,  by a failure  of the intricate  and  not  totally  reliable control  and warning systems on either side, or simply by human  panic and a mutual  mistrust between the superpowers.
Dr.  Helen  Caldicott,  that  courageous  woman  who  has  done so much  in  the struggle against  nuclear  arms,  has said that  both  America  and  Russia have now enough  nuclear  weapons to "overkill every person  on earth  16 times." Think  of that.  Do the world's leaders really suppose that  it  is all  just an  act  on TV  and that  the  dead  would get up again  and  take  on  a  different  role in  another  TV series so they might  be killed again  and  again?  I fear  greatly  that  many  of the world's leaders have so little imagination  and so little real caring  that  they cannot visualize at all what  a nuclear  holocaust would  mean.  Do they really think  that they and their families and executive staffs would survive in deep-buried  bunkers? And if, by any unlikely chance they did, what  kind of a world do they think  they would emerge back into? It would be a dead  and  a putrefying  world. Dr. Helen Caldicott  says, "If we look behind  the  headlines  and  understand the  historical perspective, we realize that  America  is preparing to fight  a  nuclear  war.  Now, that should make us all distinctly uncomfortable. In fact,  we should be screaming in the streets, if we really care about  ourselves, our children,  and  if we really love this planet."  With  well-researched figures, Dr. Caldicott  also says, "In  the event of a  nuclear  war,  we predict  that  within  go  days  after  an  exchange,  go%   of Americans  will be dead.  So will Canadians, probably  Mexicans,  certainly  Rus­ sians, certainly Europeans,  the British, and probably  the Chinese."
Roger  Molander, a former  White  House  nuclear  strategist  for  the  National Security Council, in an article in The  Guardian  in April of 1982, tells of one of the many things that  made him decide to give up  that  job. He is now Executive

rgo

LAURENCE


Director  of Ground  Zero, an  anti-nuclear weapons project.  He  says, "The final chance event that  confirmed my determination to help correct our flaws involved another  military  officer. It happened at a meeting in the Pentagon  when a Navy Captain offered  the  view that  in America  and  Europe  people were getting  too excited over nuclear  war. He  argued  that  people were talking  as if nuclear  war would be the end of the world,  when in fact only sao million people would  be killed. Only  500 million. I remember  repeating  it to myself ... only 500 million.
. . ." Exactly. These  are cold figures, statistics. It  takes no time at  all to say  500
million. But it  all looks different,  as it did  to Roger  Molander, if  we think  of each one of those people as our own children, ourselves, our  parents,  our friends.




IT IS PRECISELY THIS  FAILURE of the imagination  on the part of militarists and  leaders that  is so dangerous  today, the failure  to visualize what a nuclear  holocaust  would mean,  the apparent inability to imagine  the scorched and charred  bodies of children ... our children or children  of Russian  parents  or parents  anywhere,  and  to know, by an extension of imagination  that  all children are our  children.  The  jargon  of the  militarists is a distortion  and  a twisting  of language,  of our  human   ability  to  communicate.   Language   itself  becomes  the vehicle of concealment  and deception. Such words as "overkill" and "megadeath" do not convey in any sense at  all what  would really happen -the  dead,  muti­ lated,  and  dying  people clogging the  ruined  cities and  towns like so  much  un­ valued  discarded   rubbish,   the  suffering  humans  screaming  for   help   with  no medical  help  available,  no  water,  no  relief  at  all for  the  unbearable  pain  of millions of humans except finally the dark relief of death for all. Any shelters that the few might  reach  would  in  time tum  into  tombs.  Civil  defence  plans are  a sham.  In a nuclear  war there  would be nowhere to hide, and  nowhere  except  a dead and contaminated world to emerge back into.
I profoundly  believe that  we must proclaim that this  must  not  happen.
Yes, but  what  about  the  Russians? If we try to persuade  our  government  to refuse Cruise missile testing, aren't  we playing  into the  hands  of the  bad  guys? Won't  the Soviet  Union,  as soon as they have clear superiority  in nuclear  arms, blow us all to hell without  a second's thought?  I do not think so. Isn't  it necessary to have more and  ever more nuclear  weapons in the hands  of the  Americans  so that we can feel safe? I do not think so. Let me make it clear that  I hold no brief for the present  Russian system of government.  I hold no brief for any system of government  that is repressive and  cruel, and  this includes those far-right  regimes in countries such  as El Salvador, to whom the  U.S.A. is determinedly  giving so much military aid. The  U.S.A. and Russia, the two superpowers,  must, I believe,


I91

LAURENCE

co-exist in this  world, even if there are some terrible things  wrong  in both systems, and  there  are. Russia  suffered  horribly  in  World   War  II, whereas  war  has  not been  fought on  American soil since  the  Civil  War. I cannot believe  that   the Russian  leaders  are  all  that  anxious  to  begin  nuclear war  in  which  the  Soviet Union  would  be, if not totally  annihilated, then  certainly decimated beyond  any hope of recovery.  George  Kennan, formerly  U.S.  ambassador to Russia,  who  has been  awarded both  the  Pulitzer  Prize  and  the  Albert  Einstein   Peace  Prize,  and who  is a  distinguished diplomat, academic, and   writer,   says  in  his  book  The Nuclear Delusion:

Aren't  we then ... being unrealistic in the amount  of attention we devote  to  pro­ tecting ourselves from the Russians who, God knows, are not ten feet tall, who have all sorts of troubles of their own, who can't  run  an agricultural system that  really works, who can't  adequately  house their  population, who are  rapidly  losing  their prestige and  leadership  in the world Communist  movement,  and  have  to  reckon with China  on their long frontier  in the East?  Isn't  it grotesque  to spend so  much of our energy on opposing such a Russia in order  to save a West which is  honey­ combed with bewilderment and a profound sense of internal  decay?

Quite frankly, I can't   believe  that   Russia  any  longer   has  hopes  of  a  world revolution. I can  believe, though, that  the  Russian   people,  the  ordinary  people who love their  children just as much  as I love mine,  are  frightened, just as I am frightened, just as a very large  proportion of the American people  are  frightened and  are  expressing  that  fear  and  outrage. The  American people  are  indeed  our cousins, and  a very great  many  of them, young  and  old,  are  saying  virtually the same things as I am saying here.
No  American  president   has  as  yet  declared  himself   willing   to  embrace a
policy of "no  first strike"  in terms  of nuclear weapons. President Reagan recently made  the  statement that  America must  reduce   Marxism-Leninism "to  the  ash heap  of history." If he proposed  to do this by making his country such  a true  and fine example of social  justice, of caring  for the  poor, of equal rights  for women,  of peace-making on the international scene, and  of a refusal  to support corrupt and violent regimes in, say, Central and  South  America, so that  people  the world  over would  look to America, as indeed  once  they  did,  as the  home  of the  free,  then  I would  say-Great. But  I do not  think  that  is what  he had  in  mind. The  presi­ dent  also, not long ago, addressed  a group  of fundamentalist Christians and  told them   that   good  and   evil  exist  in  the  world   and   that   the   good   must   utterly destroy  the evil. By evil, he was not referring to organized crime  in his own  land, or unemployment or poverty  in  the  richest  nation in  the  world.  He  was  talking about  America as wearing  the  white  cowboy  hat   (to  use  a  metaphor from  his Hollywood  days)   and  Russia  wearing  the  black  one.  Good  guys  and  bad  guys. George Kennan says:

LAURENCE


I do  not  have,  and  have  never  had,  any  sympathy  for  the  ideology  of  the  Soviet leadership. I know  that  this is a regime  with  which  it is not  possible for us to  have a  fully  satisfactory relationship. I  know  that   there  are  many  important  matters on  which  no  collaboration between  us is possible,  just  as  there  are  other  matters on  which  we can  collaborate. There are  a number of  Soviet  habits  and  practises that  I deeply  deplore....

He goes on to say:

All this  being  said,  I must  ... say  that  I find  the view  of  the  Soviet  Union   that prevails  today in large  portions of our governmental and  journalistic establishments so extreme, so subjective, so far  removed  from  what  any  sober  scrutiny of external reality  would  reveal,  that   it  is not  only  ineffective  but  dangerous as  a  guide   to political  action.

He  concludes this  portion of an essay written in 1981 by saying:

And  we shall  not  be able  to turn  these  things around as  they  should  be  turned, in the  plane  of military and  nuclear rivalry,  until  we learn   to  correct these  childish distortions ... until  we  correct our  tendency to  see in  the   Soviet   Union   only  a mirror in which  we look for  the  reflection  of our  own  virtue-until we consent  to see there  another great  people,  one of the world's greatest, in all its complexity and variety,  embracing the  good  with  the bad, a people whose  life, whose  views, whose habits,  whose fears  and  aspirations, whose successes and  failures, are  the  products, just  as ours  are  the  products, not  of  any  inherent iniquity but  of  the  relentless discipline of history, tradition and  national experience. Above  all, we must  learn  to see the  behavior of  the  leadership of  that  country as  partly the  reflection  of  our own  treatment of it. If we insist on demonizing these Soviet  leaders  ... on  viewing them  as total  and  incorrigible enemies,  consumed  only with  their  fear  or hatred of us and  dedicated to nothing other than  our  destruction-that, in  the  end,  is the way  we shall  assuredly have  them,  if for  no  other  reason   than that   our  view  of them  allows for nothing else, either  for them or for us.

In a  moving essay  written in  1982,  entitled  "A   Christian's View of  the   Arms Race," Kennan also says,  "utterly unacceptable, from  the  Christian viewpoint as I see it, is the  holding of innocent people hostage to  the  policies of  their  govern­ ment, and the  readiness, or  the  threat to  punish them as  a  means  of  punishing their government."
Our Prime Minister recently asked  the  NDP leader, Ed  Broadbent, who  was seeking to  have the  whole issue  of the  Cruise missile  testing debated in  the Com­ mons, if he, Broadbent, had written to Soviet  leader Andropov to  tell  him to stop  testing, too.  This snide remark was, of course, beside  the  point. Our  federal gov­  ernment, at the  present time talking out  of both sides  of its collective mouth, says
that on the  one  hand the  actual testing of the  Cruise hasn't yet  been  agreed upon and on  the  other hand Canada must  honour its commitment to  NATO.  Accord­ ing  to  Pauline Jewett, NDP defence critic, who  has  done much  research on  this  matter, Canada's commitment to  NATO does  not  include the  necessity  of  our


193

LAURENCE

allowing  America-America, not  NATO -to  test nuclear  weapons  here. My point is that  Canada  could have ... and  must  have, in my view ... considerable impact  as a mediator  in nuclear arms talks, as a non-nuclear  nation,  as a country that  might  conceivably  be  helpful  in  lowering  the  present  climate  of  hysteria between the two superpowers, and in bringing  about  world disarmament.
This is why I think we must keep on trying  to make our government  hear  us. Why would  I write to Andropov  or Reagan? I  don't  have  a vote or a voice in those countries. I have both vote and voice here, though.
I believe that  our land should  be declared  a nuclear-weapons-free zone, with absolutely no testing of nuclear arms or production of parts for those arms allowed in our country. I think that Canada  could do a great deal to bring about a gradual and  verifiable  reduction  of  nuclear  arms  by  both  sides, monitored   by  neutral countries such as the Scandinavian  countries,  and to bring about  a freeze on the production  and testing of nuclear  weapons. Canada could  be a strong  influence for a "no-first-strike" agreement among nations, for multilateral disarmament and for world peace.
Canada is not  powerless nor  are  we insignificant  in  a  world  sense. Yet  our present government  appears  to be quite  willing to allow the  Cruise missile to be tested over our land, in Alberta. The Cruise missile, an American  nuclear weapon, was  not  designed  as a  deterrent   weapon -it   was  designed  as  a  "first-strike weapon." Its presence in the nuclear  arsenal  will not  be verifiable, thus  making any  kind  of  nuclear-weapons  control  virtually  impossible.  The  Litton  plant  in Ontario is producing,  with the aid of millions of our tax dollars, guidance  systems for the Cruise missile. Canada  has sold nuclear  reactors to such repressive regimes as Argentina, and  is delivering fuel for those  reactors,  despite  the  fact  that  our government  is aware that  nuclear weapons could soon be within Argentina's capability. These are only a few of the many  examples of Canada's complicity  in the nuclear arms race.
Do we care so little about our children? Do we honour life so little that  we will not speak  out?  I  believe we do care,  passionately  and  profoundly.  Indeed, one thing  that  gives me hope  is that  so many  of  our  churches  and  synagogues,  so many  people of all faiths, of all professions and  trades,  of all ages, are  speaking out against the arms race and the descent into total madness. Physicians For Social Responsibility, active in this country as well as in America and  elsewhere, are tell ing us what  human  damage  would be done, and  how impossible any  thought of medical  aid  would  be in  a  nuclear  war.  Inter-church groups  such  as  Project Ploughshares are making strong representations to our government, as are labour unions, academics,  and indeed  and  perhaps  most importantly, women  and  men everywhere, in every walk of life. This is true in so very many  places in the world today. When  I speak of lobbying our own government, that  is because  we must


194

LAURENCE


begin  where  we  are.  But  we  join our  voices with  those  everywhere who  believe as we do.
The  money  spent  on  arms,  including nuclear  arms,  continues to  mount. Re­
cently I read  that  $550  billion dollars are being spent, world-wide, yearly, on anns. An even more  recent  estimate puts it at $6oo  billion dollars.  That sum  is so great we cannot  really  comprehend it. But we can comprehend that  for the  cost of one Trident nuclear submarine, malaria could  be wiped  out  from  the  world.  Think of that  for one  minute. I think  of the  people in the world  who are suffering  from thirst,  from starvation, from  preventable diseases, from  ceaseless fighting,  and  the brutality of oppressive regimes. I think, too, of the growing number of unemployed people in our  own  land. I think  of the Reagan program in America-more  and yet more money  spent  on nuclear arms; less and  less spent  on social  programs and help to the poor and  the disabled.


IHAVE TO  SPEAK ABOUT HOW 1 FEEL  as a writer. I don't like calling  myself "an  artist," but  I guess I am,  and  would  join with  my tribal  sisters
and  brothers in many  ways. I believe that  as a writer  ... an  artist,  if you will ... I have  a responsibility, a moral responsibility,  to work  against the  nuclear arms race,  to work  for  a  recognition on  the  part  of governments and  military leaders that  nuclear weapons must  never  be  used  and  must  systematically be  reduced. Throughout human history,  artists  have affirmed  and  celebrated life. Whether we work in words,  in music,  in painting, in film, in  bronze  or stone  or whatever our medium may  be, the  artist  affirms  the  value  of life itself  and  of our  only  home, the  planet  Earth. Art  mirrors and  ponders  the  pain  and  joy of our  experience as human beings. In  many  parts of the world, and  over many  centuries, artists  have risked and  even  given  their  own  lives to portray the society  around them  as they perceived  it,  and  to  speak  out  against  injustices.  Since  the  most  ancient  times, artists  have  passed on  to succeeding generations the tales, the  histories,  the songs, the  sagas,  the  skills of  their  trade. Can  we conceive  of  a  world  in  which  there would  be no succeeding generations? A world  in which  all the  powerful  works of the human imagination would  be destroyed,  would never  again  be seen or listened to or  experienced? We  must  conceive  that  this is now  a  possibility,  and  one  not too far in our  uncertain future, either.  We must  not, as artists,  or so I feel, stand by and  passively  allow  this  to  happen. The  death   of  the  individual is the  end which  we will all one  day  meet,  but in the knowledge  that  our  children and  their children will  live,  that   someone's  children   will  go  on,  that   the  great   works  of humankind will endure in  art,  in  recorded   history,  in  medicine, in  the  sciences and  philosophies and  technologies that  our  species  has  developed with  devotion


195

LAURENCE

and  a sense of vocation  throughout  the  ages. The  individual is the  leaf  on  the tree. The  leaves fall but the tree endures. New leaves are born. This  concept  has been the  mainstay  of our species from  time  immemorial. Now the  tree  itself is threatened. All art  is a product  of the human  imagination. It  is, deeply, an  hon­ ouring  of the  past,  a  perception  of the  present  in  one  way  or  another,  and  a looking towards the future.  Whatever  the medium  of any  particular  artist, art  is reaching  out,  an  attempt  to communicate  those  things  which  most  concern  us seriously in our sojourn  here on earth. Artists, the real ones, the committed  ones, have always sought, sometimes in ways prophetic  and  beyond  their own times, to clarify and proclaim and enhance life, not to obscure and  demean  and  destroy it. Even the so-called literature  of despair  is not  really that  at  all. Despair  is total silence, total withdrawal. Art, by its very nature  of  necessary expression, is an act of faith, an acknowledgement  of the profound  mystery at the core of life.
As a writer,  therefore,  I feel I have a  responsibility.  Not  to write  pamphlets, not to write didactic  fiction. That  would be, in many  ways, a betrayal  of how I feel about my work. But my responsibility seems to me to be to write as truthfully as I can, about  human  individuals and their dilemmas,  to honour  them  as living, suffering, and sometimes joyful people. My responsibility also must extend into my life as a citizen of my own land and  ultimately of the world.
I do not claim to have done this well. There  are no personal victories in those areas. The  individual, here, becomes part  of a community  and  only as a part  of that  community  can one person ever be effective and  true  to herself or  himself. There  has to be the resolve not to give up, and  to join with all others who believe that life itself is more important than our own individual lives, important though these certainly are.
Dr. Helen  Caldicott  speaks of "psychic  numbing," the  temptation  to shut  out from our  minds and  hearts all the terrifying  things  in our  world. To  think  that the problems may  just possibly go away if we ignore  them.  To  feel that  we are totally helpless, and so ... why bother trying to do anything?  What  Dr. Caldicott calls "psychic numbing" I would call "despair," and  although I would take issue with  the  early  Church   Fathers  on  many  things,  I  would  agree  that  despair  is rightly placed as one of the deadly sins. The  problems  of our  world  will not  go away if we ignore them. It  is not all happening on TV.  It  is happening on our earth,  and  we, humankind, are the  custodians  of that  earth.  We cannot  afford passivity. We must take on responsibility for our lives and our world and  we must be prepared  to make our government  listen to and  hear  us. Our  aim must  be no less than  human  and caring  justice, and peace ... for all people that  on earth  do dwell.
So, if this were indeed  my Final  Hour,  these  would  be  my words  to  you.  I
would  not claim  to  pass on any secret of life, for  there  is none,  or any  wisdom

LAURENCE


except the passionate plea of caring. In your dedication to your own life's work, whatever it may be, live as though  you had forever, for no amount  of careful and devoted  doing is too great  in carrying out that  work to which you have set your hands. Cultivate  in your work and your life the art of patience, and come to terms with your  inevitable  human  limitations,  while striving also to extend  the  boun­ daries of your understanding, your knowledge, and your compassion. These words are easily said;  they are not easily lived. Learn from those who are older than  you are; learn from your contemporaries; and never cease to learn from children. Try to feel, in your heart's  core, the reality of others. This is the most painful  thing in the world, probably, and the most necessary. In times of personal adversity, know that  you are  not alone. Know  that  although  in the eternal scheme of things you are small, you are  also unique  and  irreplaceable,  as are  all  your fellow humans everywhere in the world. Know  that  your commitment  is above all to life itself. Your own life and  work and  friendships and  loves will  come to an end,  because one day you will die, and  whatever  happens  after that, or if anything  happens  at all, it will not be on this earth.  But life and  work and friendship  and  love will go on, in others,  your  inheritors.  The  struggle  for  peace  and  for social  justice will go on-provided that our earth survives and that caring humans still live. It is up to you, now, to do all that you can, and that means a commitment, at this perilous moment in our human  history, to ensure that life itself will go on.
In closing, I want to quote one verse from that mighty book ... more like a vast library ... that  Dr.  Northrop Frye calls "The Great  Code,"  and  which  has so shaped, sometimes so ambiguously, the imagination,  the art, and  the many facets of faith in our world. This verse is from Deuteronomy, Chapter 30:
"I have set before you life and  death,  blessing and  cursing;  therefore  choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live."







197

TWO  POEMS
 


Irving Layton


NEW YEJIR'S POEM FOR VENERJINDJI

When  she climbs the steps of her basement apartment she leaves the place in absolute darkness
except for the small mirror in my mind that  holds her surprised  reflection.

I polish it till her confident smile lights up my eyes and  when  I whisper
in the dark: 'I love you with all my heart.'
the comers  of the room begin to shine.

She will bring  wine and  two goblets and  we'll toast my familiar daimons,
my obsession with her mad-making limbs:
cry window-breaking huzzas for her vagrant soul.

I've  flicked off the years, one by one:
'This  one loved me, this one didn't.' Tonight I'll  give her the denuded stalk and it will turn  a sunflower  in her  hand.

December  31, 1982.
Roxboro.



JUDE THE OBSCURE

Yesterday I pulled  my bobsled up the highest  hill
in our slum neighbourhood.

Slow and  thick  the snowflakes fell on my head.
I became  the wonderworld around me.

I do not remember ever turning the bobsled around.
What am I doing in that  woman's bed?

RIFF

Dennis Lee


Darling, when  we are gone there  will be
other lovers,
eternal like us in the flesh and they will turn  and  murmur,
still dazed  in the rush of love, "Darling, darling, when  we
are gone ..."
























199

ALL ABOA-R-RD!


Dorothy Livesay

T.DJFFERENCE   BETWEEN  CHJLDHOOD and  adulthood fu
so simple that  we forget to think about it. It lies in the fact  that  a child does not
have to make decisions. His world is not one of action,  but of sensations. It  is as if he were being hush-a-byed in a cradle "on  the treetop." And if the cradle  were whisked away from  beneath  him he'd still believe he could  be cushioned  on air, for "When the wind blows the cradle will rock!" Or, there is the possibility, if he is less than  three years old, that  he would be put  aboard  a train  with  his parents but  without  any  idea as to whether  this is a stationary   new  home or  an  auto­ mobile on rails. He has no responsibility except  to be there,  rejoicing in  the cries of "All aboa-r-rd !"; in the feeling of being shunted  backward,  then forward; the jolt, the chug  of wheels; and  "Mommy, we're  moving!" Now  his  breath  is re­ leased as the  city's  bones are  cast  behind  and  through   the  racing  window  his eyes devour the grassy plain.
Or  so it was in my day. Is that  why, as adults,  we so love trains?  Suddenly, we are safe. That  sense of security is bliss. As a child  at  home  in  the  west end of Winnipeg,  I remember  my early "train  thoughts": waking  to the  deep sound of an  engine's  moose call;  lying in the  half  light,  the  green  blind  being  drawn. Passers-by on the wooden sidewalk cast strange  shadows on the ceiling above my head and  I imagine fairy princesses, carriages, men on horseback, gnomes. Then outside again there's the clop clop of the milkman's  horse, the clatter  of the huge silvery can of milk from which he will measure  pints and  quarts  and  pour  them into our  jugs on the kitchen table. He may  leave butter  also, in striped  pats, all to go into the ice box beside the  block of ice hewed from  the  river, smelling of sawdust.  In  hot summer we dream  of ice and  snow. The  trains shunt,  the black engine lets forth  its call. Soon it will be autumn, dark  evening, when  the  train's necklace of lights winks its messages across the prairie.
We  took  the  train  every summer  to go  to  a  cottage  in  Keewatin   (northern Ontario). That  was a dull, boring, daytime  journey, no air conditioning, the sun sticky yellow on  the green  plush seats. The  real  excitement  would  be  to  travel overnight  on  the  CPR,  west to  Regina  for  camping   at  Fort  Qu'Appelle. The conductor  would be out on a wooden platform,  the neat  grey-clad  Negro porters grinning  under their red caps, chaffing the children.  How  tense we felt when  the


200

LIVESAY


steam  began  puffing  furiously  under  the  wheels, the  conductor   waved  a  signal to the engineer  leaning  out  of his black window, and  the  magic  words echoed from car to car: "ALL ABOA-R-RD !" You had to kiss your grannie  quickly and  be lifted by the porter in a flying movement up the iron steps past the corridor of "staterooms" into the sleeping car.
Dinner  in the dining  car was a deeply satisfying adventure: just getting  there,
pushing  doors  through   car  after  car.  The  head  steward   kept  you  waiting  a moment  until he led you to a table for four, a snowy tablecloth  with white table napkins folded like wigwams presiding over the population -those knives, forks, three  kinds of spoons, the  jug of ice water,  silver sugar-and-cream bowls, balls of butter  on  ice, and  that  most fascinating  basket  containing   crisp  round  rolls and  soda  biscuits. You did  not  have to feel hungry.  You  knew  there  would  be good  things  coming.  Five  courses! The  waiter  would  shake  out  the  napkin  by your  plate  and  tie it  round  your neck with  a  flourish. There! Tuck.  To  begin with:  celery sticks and  olives. Soup  was served from  a  silver tureen.  Then  the Winnipeg   goldeye,  mashed   potatoes,  carrots,  cabbage,   turnips,   or  beets.  For dessert you might  have  to  choose between  blueberry  pie and  orange  water-ice sherbet   (not   the  strange   starch   pudding   called  sherbet   today)   or,  perhaps, strawberry  ice cream  and  pound  cake. Father  always asked  for seed cake, but rarely  got it-for  which  I  was thankful.  How  could  anyone  like eating  that? Perhaps  the divine  moment  of delight was when the waiter  had  left the  bill for a parent  to sign. For each  person he brought  round  silver bowls of warm  water. "Do  we drink  it?"  "Oh dear  no!  In  these you dip  your  fingers, delicately,  and dry them on your napkin." Delicious ritual,  and  perhaps  the  train  slowed down at that point. The evening sun shone over the golden prairie fields.
There  followed childhood  sleep -"rocked on the cradle" of the wheels! And sometimes  with  all the shunting and  grunting  one  could  be  thrown  out  of the berth.  Then  back into the warm  womb, utter silence as the train  waited  in some country  siding -waited  and  waited  for  the  oncoming  monster  burdened   with freight cars. Finally the shunting began again, until we took flight along the rails. In that  dark  behind  the green  curtain  the child feels completely  protected,  with no will, no needs, ready  to be rocked to sleep by the  thumpety thump over the rails and the ever-so-often tilting from side to side. That foetal feeling! In adults, it becomes sexual arousal.  From my far off ten-year-old childhood  I remember listening  on  the  stairs  when  our  latest  maid  was telling  my  mother  about  her experience in an upper  berth.  "Never  travel that  way!"  It seems as she lay there in the  dark,  a  man's  hand   crept  up  from  below and  began  "feeling"  her  leg. Quick  as a flash she  seized  her  straw  hat  from  the  net  hammock  where  such things  were put  at  night.  From  the hat she pulled out  her  hat  pin and  stabbed the offending  hand.  It  worked!  And  though  at  that  age I  was completely inno-


201

LIVESAY

cent, the incident  must have plunged deeper  into  my unconscious, imprinting a sense of mystery and fear into sleeping on a train.
Years later,  travelling  at  night  with  my  young  family  to  Penticton,   we  en­ countered  the  rockiest roadbed  in  Canada  -the  Kettle  Valley  line   (vanished now) . A married  friend  of mine was aboard  in  the  next  double  berth.  In  the morning,  hanging  on in the swaying washroom,  I asked her if she had  been able to sleep "with  all that shunting?" "Shunting!" she retorted. "He shunted  down from his upper  to my lower. What  a time to make love! But  that's the way men are-unpredictable."
So  nowadays  fun  on  the  train  is no  longer  to  be  looked  forward   to.  The mysteries of train  travel for child or adult  have  vanished.  And  forgotten  also is the  lifestyle of  those  men  who  carried  us  across  the  continent.   What   of  the engineers  faced  with  an  avalanche  of snow?  The   conductors,   trainmen, and porters called in to shovel in emergencies? The  cooks running out of supplies on some ice-bound  siding?  The  passengers playing  cards  endlessly to  while  away the interminable waits, digging for a  bottle  hidden  in  their  carpet  bags  (those one-handled  bulging  cloth or  leather  bags  that  men  carried). Nowadays  there are a lot of retired  conductors and engineers on the CP  and  CN  who travel  free and  for  pleasure,  whose stories are  juicy enough  to  make  a  novel. But  no  one has written  it. The  feuds that  went on between  the  private  CPR  enterprise  rail­ waymen  (and  all their cousins, families, friends)   and  the  public  CN  personnel represented the real Canadian game in those days. Not hockey held your obsessed attention,   but  the  latest  Canadian   National   derailment.  My  mother's   family, ardent  Conservatives and  upholders of the status  quo,  had  a further  stake in the CPR  because my Uncle Phil was a baggage clerk at the Winnipeg  station. What­  ever disaster hit the CN, they cheered. The  CPR  disasters went  unsung.
So today,  if you listen to  those old  railwaymen  in  the  lounge  car  or  at  the table, you'll note how drastically times have changed.  "I think  it's time  now for unification,"  I heard  the other day. "All  the logistics point  to amalgamation of the CN and CP, but the government does nothing." "Oh them  fellows?" exclaims an  eighty-five-year-old  ex-conductor.  "Them  politicians  take  off  in  orbit  and then  they can't  see where they've  gone." So, although   they  were stimulated   by the game,  the  uncertainties,  the  night  shifts,  the  absences  from  home  often  as not, in their middle age they have a sense of having  been cheated  by that  travel­ ling life. They  lost touch  with  their  children.  "You  can  live or  die  alone. The offspring don't  care."  Or: "The wife and  the  kids all ganged  up against  me­ then  they left  me."  "Were  you so poor a  husband?" "I  don't  think  so. I was boss on the  job but she was boss at home ... but  I was away  a  lot. Many's  the time  I had  to work nights. I  didn't  see too  much  of the  kids."  He  was sitting opposite me, a worn-out  deeply lined face, a gesture of defeat. "Who wants me


202

LIVESAY

now?" Railroading had  been his life but it had  also destroyed  him. So he  trav­ elled continuously,  compulsively:  seeking, seeking. For  today  "the  times  is dif­ ferent."
That  old  fellow  reminds  me  of a  children's  story  that  fascinated  me  when young. It was called  "All  Change  Here."  Instead  of obeying the  command   to get off the  train,  the  children  grew  bigger  and  bigger  while  their  mother  and nanny grew smaller and smaller. Changed  indeed! And now the aging conductor and my aging self are shrinking  down. It seems to be the children  who are mak­ ing  decisions, managing our  affairs,  running  the  computers-and those  com­ puterized, sleek, and silent trains.










WOOD EDGE

George MeWhirter


My son remarks, at Evensong, On the swallows culling  moths: Three at a time their  beaks snap, Latch onto each new bug, Slamming all the gates
Out of the wood, on them.
That echoed  rap -
As if a knuckle  tested for security.

Soft moths curfewed under  fir, hemlocked
In an archdiocese of trees.
They  buzz and  dream, tasting pullovers
And gowns in painted closets, Scenting nothing of the camphor.

A last veil of light  their souls
Would  put  on trails in the gutter;

The sky not dry yet,
The street still draining, Starch of starlight not yet set.

On  this respectable night
They  are shut in with skunk cabbage Under the black  jacket and  tall lapels Of conifer,  buttoned down  with  huckle
And rowanberry into a dark  age of obedience.

In  their beds across the road
The sleepers doze in tact.


Their dusty breaths, coated  with  the day's  design
Fall  to the floor. One  word
Of prayer, on wings the colour  of nothing at all
Could  slip through the pores

Of  their pristine  ceilings.
But they sleep so solid in their  body

MCWHmTER


Now. Their lips, like two determined, flightless birds, Snib in their  spirit.  Won't even nibble
At the notion  of fresh clothes, laid out for a feast
On  the other  side, across the cracked  curbs of sleep.
























205

8)1RKER F)IIRLEY  )(NO THE BLIZZ)IRD

Gwendolyn MacEwen


It was freezing  and  wet and  everybody  was being  blown  all over  the street  and  taking  shelter  wherever they could,  when  Barker  emerged from  the swirling cloud  of the  blizzard,  walking  slowly and  thought­ fully, his cap at a superb angle. It was a few years ago, so he couldn't have  been  much   more  than   ninety.  Gwendolyn-he  said,  as  the gale  pushed  me  sideways  and   I crashed into   a  wall-I've  been thinking about suffering. Does the artist have to suffer, do you think? Yes, I said. Definitely. The  older I  get the  more  I suffer  so it must be necessary. And   furthermore  it  is  packed  with  meaning.  Barker looked  at  me quietly  as several  people held  onto  each  other's waists with  the  man  in front  attached  to a  telephone pole,  to  avoid  being blown away. I don't think  so, I really don't  think  so, he said, as two women  and  a man were washed  into  the gutter. We're  here to bring joy; we weren't meant to suffer at all. And  he leaned  into  the exqui­  site storm and was gone.














206

PETITE HISTOIRE D'UNE OBSESSION

Andre Major


LA QUARANTMNE VENuE,  je me  demande ,;  je dols  con­ tinuer  a ecrire. Ce n'est  pas la  premiere fois que  je me  pose cette  question:  au terme  de chaque  livre,  public  ou  non,  acheve  ou mis  de  cote,  elle revient  me hanter,  aussi obsedante  qu'une douleur  physique.  Peut-etre   parce  que  n'etant
pas  un  ecrivain  professionnel,  vivant  done  d'un  autre   metier,   je  n'ai   jamais compte sur l'ecriture pour  assurer mon avenir  et celui de rna famille. Si, malgre les multiples  devoirs  qui  occupent  le  plus clair  de  mon  temps,  je ne  cesse de revenir a la litterature, si je ne cesse au fond d'en  tirer  une raison de vivre, c'est qu'elle  demeure  !'indispensable,  pour  ne  pas  dire  l'unique  et  ultime  recours grace auquel  j'echappe  tant  bien que mal a l'angoissant  sentiment  de l'ephemere dont  parlait Thomas Mann. Comme si seule la creation  pouvait  donner  au vecu toute sa consistance, comme  si la recherche  du sens de !'existence  passait  force­ ment par la -par l'incertain trace d'une  parole en quete  je ne dirai  pas de salut mais de lumiere.
Revenons  en  arriere,   revenons  aux  origines  de  cette  obsession  alors  qu'au beau milieu d'un  cours, incapable de supporter  le vertigineux  ennui  qui me  pre­ nait,  j'ecrivais  de  courts  romans  inspires  par  mes ma1tres successifs,  Chateau­ briand,  Bernanos,  Kafka   et  Malraux. Et  bien  que  leur  influence  vouat  mes essais a  n'etre  que  d'assez  pales  plagiats,  je n'en  avais  pas  mains  le  sentiment reconfortant d'une  delivrance,  d'une  victoire  sur  ce  qui  m'ecrasait.  Man   pere m'avait  achete   une  machine   a  ecrire  bon  marche  sur  laquelle,   les  vacances venues, je tapais  febrilement  ces manuscrits  que  j'adressais, sans vraiment  croire avoir atteint  mon  but,  au  seul editeur  montrealais  dont  le programme  editorial comprenait   des  oeuvres  du  cru.  Mais  mes  manuscrits   me  revenaient   inman­  quablement avec la meme  lettre  de refus au  on me conseillait  tres serieusement
de me consacrer a la poesie, moi qui croyais dur comme fer aux vertus de la prose
pour temoigner de rna revolte contre l'oppressante realite quebecoise d'avant la revolution  tranquille. Je  tenais  bon  malgre  mes echecs, de  plus en  plus mal  a l'aise dans  le milieu ferme  au  j'avais !'impression de croupir,  et  j'en vins a  tout miser sur la litterature, au  point  de  provoquer  les autorites du  college qui  fini­ rent par me mettre a la porte. De retour a la maison, je pretendis etre pret  a taus


207

MAJOR

les sacrifices pour  ecrire, et meme a vivre dans  un  garage  en me nourrissant  de pain sec et de cheddar.
Ma  mere, fille de Ia campagne  qui m'avait vu celebrant  Ia messe, desapprou­
vait tout  a fait !'orientation que  je comptais  prendre.  Mon  pere, lui,  renon  ant sto1quement .a son reve de me voir devenir notaire,  me temoigna  une plus grande sympathie  et  m'assura  du gite et du  couvert  jusqu'a  rna  majorite,  ce qui  reve­
nait  a m'accorder un sursis de trois ans. J'en   profitai  pour  essayer de  tout  lire, meme  ce que  mon  manque  de formation   academique eut  du  m'interdire, en particulier  Ia philosophie de laquelle  je tentais  de  tirer  une  vision du  monde  a rna convenance,  forcement  en  rupture  avec  Ia  morale  qu'on   m'avait  jusque-la imposee et qui, a mon avis, sonnait  plutot creux. Je  partais  du  principe  qu'il  me fallait  faire  table  rase de tout  l'heritage  dont  on  m'avait accable  pour  ensuite
marcher  librement  dans mes propres pas. Je  passai de longues heures a Ia  biblio­
theque,  de  plus longues encore a hanter  les rues et les cafes a Ia mode,  me  re­ signant  a travailler  de temps a autre  pour  m'acheter des livres et apaiser  un  peu Ia rancoeur  maternelle.  Ces incursions de courte  duree  dans le monde  du  travail se justifiaient,  me semblait-il, par leur  utilite  litteraire.  En  fait,  tout  me servait, les heures perdues a ecouter les grandes gueules et a boire, les activites militantes
-car j'etais depuis le college socialiste et independantiste-et meme  un  banal
mal de dents.
Ma  conception   de  Ia litterature etait  assez  lyrique:   les  mots  etaient   doues d'un  pouvoir  magique,  et  un  autre  monde  s'annon ait
j'avais finalement  consenti a etre poete et j'implorais  mes contemporains d'oublier
le vieil homme et de faire !'experience  de la fraternite, comme  me l'enseignaient Aragon,  Neruda  et autres messagers d'un  communisme encore  intact,  du  mains a rna connaissance.  Si Dieu n'existait  pas, comme  j'avais  decide de le croire  en cette  fin  d'automne 1g6o,  l'homme   devenait   totalement   libre  et  responsable devant  ses seuls semblables, son destin se confondant avec  le destin  du  monde. Aucun  refuge  possible, ni esthetique  ni moral.  Et le poete que  j'etais  prenait  Ia parole pour que d'autres  prennent  le pouvoir et qu'advienne le regne de Ia justice. C'etait  un programme  assez simple. Certains  tenterent  de Ia realiser a leur fa on, en prenant  les armes, et je ne peux les condamner sans d'abord faire  mon  mea culpa,  moi qui  ai cru et proclame qu'il  y avait  une  violence  necessaire, comme Sartre-grand maitre de rna generation-nous l'avait  appris.  Je  crois toujours qu'il  existe des situations  ou, en effet, Ia violence s'impose,  mais  ce  n'etait   pas
le cas dans  le Quebec  d'alors,  en  proie  a d'assez  douloureuses  mutations.  11 y
avait-et il y a encore-quelque chose de religieux dans  notre  desir de voir le
peuple  quebecois  se refaire  une  identite  conforme   a  notre  reve.  Tout   peuple minoritaire  a  besoin de temps pour surmonter son sentiment  d'impuissance.  La violence eut pour  efiet d'acculer  le notre  a  un  repli frileux  dans l'attente. 11 lui


208

MAJOR


fallut quelques annees avant d'oser elire un gouvernement dont les positions marquaient une  rupture nette  avec son  passe. Et  meme  au  lendemain   du I 5 novembre  I 976,  nombreux  furent  ceux qui  dissimulerent  mal  Ia crainte  d'une catastrophe.
Moi, depuis des annees,  j'avais liquide le lyrisme de mes vingt ans et  je m'ac­
comodais comme  je le pouvais d'un  realisme fonde sur Ia moderation. J'avais  eu beau  renier  }'heritage  des  miens,  je n'etais  pas  parvenu   a  rompre  }'instinctive connivence que  j'avais  avec eux. C'etait  tout  le contraire  qui  s'etait  passe. Car, apres avoir pris mes distances avec les bien-pensants de gauche,  j'avais fait l'amere experience de Ia dissidence. Les intellectuels quebecois, pas encore marques  par le choc Soljenytsyne, admettaient mal  qu'un  radical  remette  en question  les  certi­ tudes de l'heure. Et il me fallut  payer  pour avoir renie le mythe  marxiste.  Ceci dit,  je ne me sentais pas demuni,  ideologiquement  parlant, puisque  je demeurais loyal  au  mythe  d'un   Quebec  souverain,  ce  qui  ne  m'empechait  pas,  comme ecrivain, d'avoir  une perception  assez pessimiste de  l'avenir,  meme  apres  Ia vic­ toire  du  Parti  quebecois.  Trop  d'incertitudes nous  paralysaient.  Trop   de  peurs aussi. Sans compter  le sentiment  persistant d'etre par nature  condamnes  a l'echec
-sentiment d'ailleurs   confirme  a  plusieurs  reprises  et  encore  recemment   par
}'impasse constitutionnelle ou nous a enfermes Ia classe politique  canadienne, Ia traditionnaliste comme Ia progressiste.
Si  bien que le pouvoir que nous croyions avoir acquis avec Ia victoire pequiste, nous avons  du  admettre qu'il  ne  pesait  pas lourd  face  au  pouvoir  federal.  Et c'est pourquoi  je refuse de cracher  sur le gouvemement  Levesque, comme  on se gene pas de le faire, surtout  chez les intellectuels qui  ont  naivement  cru  que  Ia revolution  allait  se  poursuivre  tranquillement et  qu'ils  n'avaient   plus  rien  a  y voir apres  l'avoir  en quelque  sorte  prepares.  Je  ne crache  pas sur  ce  gouverne­ ment  non seulement  par loyaute mais parce que  je ne peux oublier  que  j'ai  fait miennes ses strategies  et que  ses erreurs  sont egalement  les  miennes.  Moi  aussi, j'ai  cru  qu'il  etait  odieux  de  bousculer  le peuple  et  qu'il  valait  mieux  le faire progresser en douceur.
Le creux de la vague, on y est bel et bien. La crise economique  a engendre  des conflits sociaux que ni l'Etat  ni les syndicats n'ont su resoudre. Tout  le monde voit son credit chuter.  La droite seule profite de Ia deroute des ideologies progressistes, et elle joue a fond sur le vieux reflexe individualiste.  Elle propose qu'on  liquide les visions trop  genereuses, a commencer  par  Ia notion  de  partage  ou de  justice sociale, et elle nous decharge  de tout projet collectif. On  n'a  plus qu'a  rester chez soi, devant le petit ecran,  des administrateurs vont s'occuper  de nos affaires. Tout en respectant  nos droits individuels, bien entendu.  11 n'y a plus que a
les droits individuels.
Quant  a  notre   appartenance  collective,  elle  risque  de  demeurer   ambigue,

MAJOR

irresolue, coincee entre deux mythes antagonistes  mais dont  le magnetisme s'exer­ cera sur des sujets fatigues. La  pax canadiana  qu'etait censee nous  apporter   la nouvelle charte  constitutionnelle  ne change  rien  a la  problematique  quebecoise. Selon l'humeur populaire et l'etat  de l'economie,  le mythe  quebecois se ranimera  ou bien c'est le mythe de nos Rocheuses qui  prendra le dessus.  Perpetuelle  oscil­ lation.  Nos enfants  preferent,  on  peut  les comprendre,  militer  contre  les armes nucleaires. Nous faisions de notre avenir politique  une question de vie ou de mort. Eux croient que la planete risque de sauter  demain  matin.  C'est autrement plus angoissant.



TouT CECI   POUR   CONCLURE  QUE,  contrairement a un slogan vide de son sens, je ne me sens pas particulierement fier d'etre  Quebecois. Pas honteux  non plus, remarquez. Simplement  fatigue.  De-:;u de voir le desenchante­ ment general confirmer mes plus sombres intuitions  de romancier. Me disant  que la voie politique n'a  pas ete la bonne, qu'il  aurait  peut-etre  fallu  agir  a un autre niveau. Mais je n'en suis pas certain, la politique etant  le barometre plus ou mains precis de la  temperature collective. Que  faire?  Si  j'etais  Lenine,  je pourrais  le dire, j'aurais des reponses ames propres questions. Tout  ce que  je sais, c'est que  je me resigne difficilement a la mediocrite  provinciale  a laquelle  nous  risquons de retourner  tres vite si ce n'est deja fait, au  pietinement  aussi et a la recrimination.
Faut-il  tenter  de faire revivre le mythe quebecois,  ce reve en bleu? Operation artificielle sans doute, mais qui aurait  au mains l'avantage de nous empecher  de vegeter dans !'indifference  un  peu  blasee que  nous  affichons depuis  pas mal  de temps. 11 y a quand  meme eu des progres, a bien y penser, au cours des dernieres decennies:  la mentalite  collective est devenue  plus ouverte,  plus tolerante,  mais c'est peut-etre, me souffle un mauvais esprit, parce qu'elle n'a  plus rien a proteger, rien a defendre, rien a proposer. Je n'accuse personne, me sentant  moi-meme dans une sorte de desert que  j'oserais qualifier de spirituel,  faute  d'un  meilleur  terme. Et c'est pourquoi  je me demande si j'ai encore envie de raconter  des histoires alors que l'Histoire se derobe sous nos pas. Je n'ai  jamais voulu ecrire simplement  parce que  je l'avais  deja  fait,  pour  ajouter  des titres  a  ceux  deja  parus.  Ni  pour  la derisoire petite rumeur que cela fait courir dans le public restreint  que je rejoins.
]'attends autre  chose de cette aventure,  ne me demandez pas quai,  je repondrais sans doute:   une  plus grande  lucidite,  une  approche plus  juste de  la  realite  ou autre chose, mais la verite, c'est qu'ecrire  est un oxygene pour moi. Je sais bien que
-;a ne sauve  rien ni personne.  C'est  tout  de meme  un  moyen  efficace de  lutter contre  "l'oubli  de l'etre,"  comme  le rappelle  Kundera citant  Heidegger.  Parce que l'oeuvre  reussie a au mains ce merite de temoigner  de cette part  de l'humain que les autres activites sont incapables de saisir.


210

MAJOR

Mais a trap me demander si l'aventure en vaut Ia peine, j'en viens a preferer au dur exercice litteraire  les simples et reconfortantes  taches domestiques  et, comme Candide en son jardin,  je trouve dans les senteurs de l'humus  plus de joie que dans le terreau  apparemment sterile de nos debats actuels. Prive  de l'elan  que  donne
}'adhesion a un mythe,  je ne me sens sollicite par rien d'autre que  les necessites
les plus elementaires, ce qui  a l'avantage de me ramener  a Ia commune  mesure.
Tout  en demeurant, je dois l'admettre, Ia proie consentante   de  man  obsession litteraire.  Mais  quand   je relis Ia correspondance  de  Tchekhov,   j'y  trouve  une desolation  qui  me console de Ia mienne  et me donne  envie  de me  remettre  au travail.  Lui non plus ne savait  pas si a
meme pour y voir plus clair, j'imagine, et parce que le silence n'eclaire  rien.
J'ai  beau savoir que nul n'est indispensable, il m'arrive  de ressentir comme un manque  intolerable  Ia  perte  de ceux  qui  m'ont  aide  a saisir  un  peu  mieux  Ia
verite de l'existence.  Je  pense surtout  a Gabrielle  Roy qui s'est  tue  a  jamais cet ete et je me rends compte de tout ce que je lui dais, cet univers qu'elle  a cree avec un  minimum   d'artifices,  guidee  par  l'inepuisable  compassion  qu'elle  eprouvait
pour  ses semblables  et  par  l'instinct  qui  Ia poussait a  arracher leur  destin  a ce
qu'il  pouvait  avoir d'ephemere. Sans avoir Ia pretention  de poursuivre  ce qu'elle avait entrepris,  je me dis que  je peux tout de meme, n'ayant rien d'autre a perdre que mon temps, tenter a mon tour de comprendre  ceux qui m'entourent et qui me paraissent aussi demunis que moi. De toute fa on,
l'hiver qui viendra,  je ne pourrai  pas continuer  a jardiner, et il faudra bien que je me remette  a l'ecriture sans trap  savoir, encore une fois, ou a
pis si c'est nulle part, tant mieux si c'est au-dela de mes limites actuelles.

Septembre  1983







2II

THE TECHNOLOGY OF THE PERSISTENCE  OF MEMORY

KimMaltman


When  the first blossoms, which  one never seems
quite  to remember, have announced the unexpected, the sudden flurry of spring, one is reminded of
the old exuberance, but, more  and  more, it is to the disquieted house on the hill
that  one returns, to the grass and  fresh  dug dirt,  the small
fire smells of childhood, the trophies of the memory now gradually mummified, wrapped in the opaque vapours  of wood and old glass. In  the house again one wanders  the rooms, pursued
now by the worn  handhold on the stair  railing, now, for a moment, by some indefinable smell that  tugs an hour at the memory.
Often  the mind  is like a homing pigeon
and  now it is on the old cedar chest that  it dwells, longing for the return of those old ghosts,
ghosts that  could  repossess the huge  bodies
that  return to it now as if by remote control. But it is nowhere  to be found,
though, to the mind,  the smell of cedar
will always be haunted by the continuity of age and  decay. It is as if
it never existed, as if it were from a story, a dream, another life.
And there  was a time when  this brooding was composed  of desires so ordinary one could  hardly name  them.
Desires not unlike love,
which  they sometimes  resemble but are not.












212


AUSCHWITZ

Poetry of Alienation


Ls





ACCOUNT OF  THE  WRITJNG OF A  POEM, "On  the  25th Anniversary of the  Liberation of Auschwitz: Memorial Services,  Toronto, Janu­ ary  25, 1970," is occasioned as randomly and  as obsessively  as  the  poem  itself. This  is January 1984,  almost  14 years after  the event.  There is no obvious  reason to return to it, except  a continuing unease,  a sense of unpaid  debts, unexplained reasons, an uneasy self.
Exorcism and  liberation. To  free oneself of a nightmare. Of  history. There is a literature for  this -alienation, a writing  of what  the  world  rejects,  what  cannot be tolerated, what  is despised,  spit out.  Not very long ago Julia Kristeva wrote  an essay that  touches  on this  writing, on abjection, Powers of Horror. About  "some­ thing  to be scared  of,"  filth, defilement, abomination. An  account of the unclean, a linguistics  of repression. The language (not-language)  of the  unsayable, outer­ utterances, obscene,  unseeable: Dostoevsky, Joyce,  Artaud,  Celine,  Borges. Why would  one want  to write it? This  is an account of such an unsayable poem, a series of inevitable evasions.
August  1946.  I had  returned to Saskatchewan from  Europe, the  war.  Europe lay in ruins. But that  was history.  I had come home to study  and  to write. I would go to university  to sort  out  my sense of things.  The  question of how  and  indeed whether to write  of the  recent  past in any significant  way lay heavily  on me as it had  to lie on anyone who felt that  here was a subject  of dimensions that  troubled the  soul  and  yet  lay  untouchable in  front  of oneself.  On   the  one  hand, it  was finally  remote  from  one's  experience, the  real  root  of it. On  the  other,  worse,  to touch  it was in some  way  defilement, to be involved  in the  ruin  of humanism, in the very barbarism that  George  Steiner  writes of so lucidly.
I had  come  home.  Like  many  young  men  I was deeply  troubled and  almost completely unaware  of  the  source  of the  trouble or  nature of  it.  Something in Europe had  sickened  me.  And  yet it  wasn't  the  war  itself,  of  which  I  had  seen something. That seemed  detached, remote.  Part  of a distant history. Those  awful photographs towards  the  end  of  the  war  as  the  liberation occurred during the spring  of 1945  and  the  evidence of the  camps  began  to manifest itself before  the


213

MANDEL

eyes of the astonished  and  horrified world. Corpses. We  had  supped  on  horrors enough earlier. I had seen bombings in London  and  Antwerp,  had watched  fleets of bombers, flying fortresses, sweeping across the sky to remote targets in the East, had  heard  with  astonishment  the sound  of rockets  arriving  after  they  had  ex­ ploded. Commonplaces.  I  had  read  newspapers  in  the  grand  square  of  Brussels of the world entering a new era, had seen the photographs of the corpses. Remote.
I had  come home. Before me there  were the  usual  tasks of one  who  returns. Among other  things, I was expected  to visit an  uncle  and  aunt  in  Estevan,  the town where I  had  been born and  brought  up,  to tell them  of my last  moments with their son in London, England, three weeks before his death in Europe, in Normandy.  I was the last of the family to see him alive. On  the way to Estevan, I stopped at his sister's home in Weyburn. There,  on an oppressively hot summer day, alone in the house, moody, depressed, I  picked up  a book, idly glancing  at its introduction. It  was Thomas  Mann's "Introduction" to The Short  Novels  of Dostoevsky. The  words leaped  at  me from  the  page.  Mann  is defending  Nietz­ sche's position in The Birth of Tragedy:

The truth is that life has never been able to do without  the morbid, and probably no adage is more inane than the one which says, that 'only disease comes from the diseased.' Life is not prudish and it is probably safe to say that life prefers creative genius-bestowing disease a  thousand  times  over  to  prosaic  health ... certain attainments  of the soul and intellect are impossible without  disease, without  in­ sanity, without spiritual crime....

The   reversal-sanity-health/insanity-poetry,  illness-poetry /health-prose - struck me as stunning.  My own malaise had become a sign. It marked  me as one ruined by the war, no longer seeking prosaic health  but rather  certain  attainments of the soul and intellect. A wildly romantic  position, no doubt.  But in those days I was reading  Kafka,  Dostoevsky, Mann  and,  above  all, Joyce  of Portrait   of the Artist  as a Young Man. I loved Stephen Dedalus  and  could recite whole passages of the book, about  the fabulous  artificer, the  hawk-like  flying man,  the  "soaring impalpable  imperishable  being" forged anew  by the artist  in his workshop. This was the time when  Nietzsche and  new critical  theories  of the  reality  of art,  "its mode of existence as a work," together formed  a basis of what  I thought  made  a poetics, contradicting and  confused though  it was. At any rate, it was a position that enabled my identification with the forces of history themselves. That night, at Weyburn,  I wrote what I knew to be my first poem. It  was ten years later  before I fully understood  the implications of that moment, and almost a further  ten years before I could  possibly begin to undertake  the  task of attempting an  account  of where I believed the real obscenity stood.
Part of the problem to begin with lay in the very poetics that  made  possible the kind of paradoxical inversions with  which  I  first  began.  They   (the  inversions)


214

MANDEL


rested very much in the notion of their reality, their "mode  of existence." And the troubling  unwritten poem  remained  in its character  the  opposite  of "being," a kind of "non-being" or negativity. The  poem I write of, "On  the  25th  Anniver­ sary of the Liberation  of Auschwitz," is itself an example. As its title makes abun­  dantly  clear, it was written sometime after January 25, 1970  (within  two weeks, I would guess),  and  though  it has been widely reprinted  and  anthologized  since, I don't  think  I  have  read it  to audiences  at  public  occasions  more  than  six or seven times. It demands "certain attitudes, a certain ritualistic setting-a certain detachment or ceremonious  remoteness"-to  make its statement. That  notion  is not at all by the way, as I'll try to show later. In addressing the question in art, in poetry, of the Holocaust,  we are not, to begin  with, addressing questions like any others.  It  is set apart  from  any experience  we  can  discuss. It  exists on  its own grounds of being-or rather of non-being. "Since the Holocaust, we're convinced the universe is not the same," says David  Weiss Halivni,  an adjunct  professor of religion at Columbia University. "There is a blemish on creation and that  blemish may lie dormant, but who knows when it will erupt and devour  us."1 There  is an old Jewish  tradition that  to speak of evil  may evoke it, so great  is the  power  of language.  So we approach the question  of  great  evil in fear  and  trembling  and with great awe, that  we may propitiate the spirits and not wake them. Writers  on the Holocaust  use such imagery-of a crack in creation, a flaw, a blemish. It  has been said it happened because God turned  his back on man for one moment.  And always the threat  extends  to language  itself, as if language  is implicated  in some way, as if to speak of  defilement  is to be defiled, while to glamorize  it-as  art always threatens  to do -is to trivialize it and  let its sinister power emerge.  The  event, it seemed  to me,  put  enormous strains  on language  so that  poetry  of the Holocaust  would  have to be in a "special language,"  a new form unheard  of.




l:IS SENSE  THAT  THE   HOLOCAUST touches  on  the  very nature of writing itself, that it raises difficulties and troubles for the writer himself, has metaphysical,  religious, and  political dimensions. So we were told by theoreti­ cians and survivors  alike, George Steiner and  Elie Wiesel, for  example.  By 1967
I had  read Steiner's  eloquent  and  piercing essays, Language  and  Silence, which
provided the first conceptual  account  of the dilemma  the Holocaust  presented  to the  writer:   "We  come  after,"  said  Steiner,  "We  know  that  a  man  can  read Goethe and  Rilke in the evening, that  he can  play Bach or Schubert, and  go to his day's work at Auschwitz in the morning." He drew the extraordinary conclu sions: "The blackness of it did not spring up in the Gobi desert or the rain  forests of the Amazon. It rose from within, and  from the core of European  civilization.


215

MANDEL

The cry of the murdered  sounded in the earshot of the universities...." Ideologi­ cal murders.  A commonplace  now, but to grasp  it then  seemed  beyond  compre­ hension. Under  the stress of implication  (Adorno's  "No  poetry after Auschwitz") language  cracked.  By the  197o's  Susan  Sontag  was  telling  us  of  "fascinating fascism,"  film  and   poetry  toyed  with  an  awful  camp   kitsch.  I  remembered Leonard  Cohen's  equating  of comic  book  mythology  and  Nazism.  Elie  Wiesel scorned the TV series "Holocaust" for trivializing horror.
A further  more intense dilemma  presents itself to the writer: the survivor. Like the camp itself the survivor is set apart  from life as we know it or can write of it. There are two temptations for the survivor himself, silence and speech. Silence, because what must be told is beyond the telling. Any account  of the unrealizable is, in some deep sense, a failure, a trivialization. How is it possible to convey what is impossible to convey? But to witness too is a temptation, full of paradox. Wiesel puts it this way:
I have  written 25 books and  every one has  been  a failure. The feeling  is always  of inadequacy. I feel it at the beginning of a book, and  at  the end  I'm  confirmed. And yet I really  believe  I  have  to write.  There's a certain compulsion. I owe  it  to  the living. I find words by accident. Therefore, this accident must  have  meaning.
For a long while after  I first encountered  Wiesel's work I disliked it intensely. He made a subject impossible, but necessary, morally urgent  for me. "A survivor's testimony" he said in one of those utterly, infuriatingly moral  remarks  that  had the force of inescapable  logic, "is  more important than  anything  that  could  be written about survivors." I felt a furious bafflement, the need to write, the impos­ sibility of writing. If writing about the Holocaust  was virtually impossible for him, what  could it be for me, for whom the  experience  existed  not  literally  but  his­ torically? For me, the camps were part  of history. Pictures.  Those  awful  photo­ graphs. The obscene evidence emerging from mass graves as World War II ended. "To suffer and then to suffer for not having suffered." Wiesel is talking of sur­ vivors. But something  stirred.  Not  reality  but  derealization  might  now  be  the necessary subject  or mode itself of poetry. By 1970  I had  begun  to think  of the technical problems involved in working out the poetics. Once someone had spoken to me of Europe  as the  place of the dead,  what  I  later  would  speak of in  Life Sentence  as "The Plague Cemetery."  How to touch  death  a<>   death  and  to know it for what it was so that it would identify me, this became  the problem.  It was, I realized,  a  technical   problem  in  poetry  because  it  meant-in  contemporary
terms-the  unwriting  of what  I  had  been  writing  for  twenty  years. It  meant
then, a process of personal and formal dissolution. the breaking  apart  of personal, psychological structures, and  moral  categories, the imperatives  of tradition. The place of death, Europe and the Jews, I had identified as tradition, fathers, all that named me, connected  me with the past, the  prophetic,  Hebraic, Judaic sense--


216

MANDEL


in its alien and  tragic  sense not in its ethical and legalistic aspects. If the  camps recorded death, it was that death  I had to record, an attempt too horrible to contemplate. But the possibility of re-enacting  that death  began  at the same time to occupy  me. Its substitutions,  the graves of the war  dead,  in  Europe,  for  ex­ ample, the place of the Jewish dead on the prairies, a father's  grave.
I  won't  talk about  the silence or the nerve needed to wait,  not suffering. On
January 25, 1970, there  came  a  phone  call from an  Auschwitz survivor  asking me to take part in the Auschwitz memorial service by reading  the  poem on Babi Yar  by  the  Russian  poet  Yevtushenko.  I  went  to  the  YMHA   on  Bloor  and Spadina. A winter day, snow melting. As I entered the hall, past a mock entrance to  the  gates  of  Auschwitz  with  its  infamous  sign  "Arbeit   Macht   Frei,"  sur­ vivors in camp  uniforms,  a wax mannikin  prisoner, directing  us to our  places, I had the uncanny sense that it was my own past I was entering. The disorientation,  through  the ceremony of pictures/slides,  speeches (Sigmund Sobolewski, mayors, survivors)   was  virtually  unbearable. Through  the  long  afternoon   the  poems, reminiscences, remarks  continued,  the eerie electronic music of Pendericki's  Dies
!rae  providing  a sinister  counter  point.  I  had  become fragmented, broken  into many  pieces-now and  then,  here  and  there.  Toronto,   1970;  Europe,   I944; Estevan,  I 930. And the photographs. Family albums.
I cannot  recall to the day when it occurred  to me I had  been given a solution
to a technical  problem.  There  was a way to write the  poem to be thought  of as "Auschwitz." It would be a series of displacements:  structurally,  grammatically, imagistically,  psychologically. It  would  be a camp  poem  by  not  being  a  camp poem. Stuttering. All theatricality. All frantic  posturing. All pointed  to a resolu­ tion  that  would  not  be  a  resolution,  a  total  ambiguity  in  which  two  different moments  (Toronto, I 970 and  Estevan,  1930)  dissolved into  one another  seam­ lessly, becoming at that instant  another  time, the unimaginable  place of  the killing ground itself.
This wasn't  planned  out. It exists only in its process. One Sunday  afternoon  at our apartment on Eglinton  Avenue west I sat down at my desk and  rapidly  with few pauses began to type. When  I finished, though there were revisions necessary, I knew (I  heard in the poem)  a new possibility in poetry lay before me. It would be a year or two before a new book with all these possibilities in it would appear. The  poem itself appeared before that in Canadian  Forum. The  book I completed on the Costa del Sol in Spain  in winter,  1972. In  I983,  in winter,  with  my wife and daughter I walked from a train at the station to a memorial of the concentra­ tion camps at Dachau, Bavaria, West German  Republic,  past the entrance  gates. An infamous sign there says in Gothic lettering,  Arbeit Macht  Frei. In the frozen fields of snow, a few dark  figures moved.  An icy cold wind  blew over  desolate ground.  One  day, I thought,  I will be writing about  this moment.

2I7

MANDEL


NOTES

1 The quotation and  those of Elie Wiesel  are  from  "Bearing Witness: The Life  and
Work  of Elie Wiesel," The  New York  Times  Magazine, October  23, 1983. "On the
25th  Anniversary of  the  Liberation  of  Auschwitz:  Memorial  Services,   Toronto,
January 25, 1970, YMHA Bloor and  Spadina" first appeared in  Canadian  Forum, in  revised  form  in  Stony  Plain  (Erin: Press  Porcepic, 1972),  in  Dreaming  Back­ wards: Selected Poems, 1953-81 (Toronto: General, 1981),  as well in J. L. Granat­ stein  and  Peter  Stevens,  eds.,  Forum:  Canadian   Life  and  Letters   from  1920-70: selections  from 'The Canadian  Forum'  (Toronto:  Univ. of Toronto  Press,  1972); Robert Weaver and   William   Toye   (eds.), The   Oxford   Anthology  of Canadian  Literature  (Toronto: Oxford, 1981); Gary  Geddes  and  Phyllis  Bruce, eds., Fifteen Canadian  Poets Plus 5 (Toronto: Oxford, 1978),  a revised  edition  of  15 Canadian Poets (1970); and  Gerri Sinclair and  Morris Wolfe,  eds., The  Spice Box (Toronto: Lester  & Orpen Dennys,  1981 ) .
























218


ENTERING IN

The Immigrant Imagination


Daphne Marlatt

TETWO  WORDS ''rMMlGRANT"   and  "emig.-ant" have al­
ways fascinated  me  because  of the gestures implicit  in  their  prefixes, a leaving
something behind  (with its backward look) and an entering into something new.* The  old-world  nostalgia  of the  emigre  must  colour  my  notion  of  an  emigrant imagination  because  i  think  of  that  imagination  as  rooted,  bound  up  in,  the place left, the "old country," "home," and preoccupied with recreating  that  place, whether  out of nostalgia  (a longing to return)   or fury  (that  avenging spirit  that cannot  let go of old wounds). I think of Joyce and  Marquez as two poles of the emigrant  imagination.
The  immigrant  imagination seems to me, on the contrary, to embrace  the new
place it enters. It seeks to enter into its mystery, its this-ness, to penetrate  it imagi­ natively even as it enters  from  outside. I think of Malcolm  Lowry and  Mexico, Audrey  Thomas  and  Mrica-does this mean all travel  writing  is  writing  from the immigrant  imagination? Only  i think  when  it genuinely  struggles to  pierce the difference, the foreignness, the mystery of the new place with its other culture, as it does in these two writers.
Looking back, i think that  most of my writing has been a vehicle for entry into what was for me the new place, the new world. I immigrated  to Vancouver  from Malaysia as a child aged nine and spent many years trying so hard to assimilate, to speak and  dress and  behave  as a West Coast Canadian, that  when  people asked where i came  from  i would  say "Oh, North  Van."  Though   my  parents'  house was filled with furniture and curios and articles of clothing from Malaysia, though they both spoke with  British accents and  shared  a common  wealth  of memories from  Penang  days  with  us-"remember  Eng  Kim?  remember  Camrille?"­ though  we all wore Chinese slippers around  the house (and  i still do), out in the street i tried to look as much  like a normal  North Van.  teen-ager  as i could. For the sake of entry  and  acceptance i denied for years my history  and  that  of my parents.

*From a  talk  given  as part  of a panel,  "The Immigrant Imagination," at  a Canadian  Associa­ tion for Commonwealth Literature and  Language Studies  session, May  30,  1983,  at  the Learned  Societies Conference, U.B.C.


219

MARLATT

My mother  came from a colonial medical family that  had been in India  for two generations:  she was born there, as was her  mother.  She met my father  in  Ma­ laysia where she had  joined her parents after  graduating from an English  private school. My father  came from a military family, had  lived as a child in  India  and Malta,  had gone out to Malaysia as a young C.A. and,  except for the war years when Malaysia  was occupied by the Japanese  and  he was serving with  the Aus­ tralian  navy,  he  spent  almost  twenty  years  in  Penang   before  immigrating  to Canada. They both referred to England  as home when i was a child, and yet they chose not to go home when they left Penang. I grew up with two nostalgias in our house:  the nostalgia for England,  which, having  spent only some months  there, i didn't  really understand; the nostalgia for Penang,  which i could share  though  it was effaced  by my enthusiasm  for this place  here.  I  loved  this  place, loved the woods out our back door, the Grouse Mountain streets, the inlet and the sparkling lights  of  "overtown" at  night.  I  dreamed   harbour  dreams  and  Stanley  Park dreams  and  Lonsdale  Avenue  dreams  and  nightmares. I  wanted   to  "belong" here, be "from" here, but i found there were differences not easy to bridge.
We  came  from  a  colonial  multicultural situation   in  Penang  where  five  lan­ guages were spoken in our house (English, Malay,  Cantonese,  Tamil,  Thai)  to a city which was then  ( 195 r)  much more monocultural than  it is today, decidedly WASP, conservative, and suspicious of newcomers. We spoke the same language but not the same dialect and were consequently  made  fun  of at school. We wore different  clothes, ate slightly different foods. I learned  to say tomayto instead  of tomahto, sweater  instead of woolly, i learned  to speak of catchers  and  basemen, i learned  to square  dance, learned  to wear  nylon slips instead  of  woollen "vests," learned not to bring curry tarts to school in my lunchbox. Thirty years ago, Ameri­ can culture  hadn't infiltrated  the rest of the world as it has now. When i arrived,  i'd  never seen baseball  (i'd  never even seen snow), i  didn't  know what  a parka was, or jeans, or a hamburger.  I knew what orange squash was but not Mountain Dew or Dr. Pepper  or Coca Cola. I'd  never heard  of bubble gum or  jawbreakers or chickenbones.  Here i heard  country  and  western  music for the first time  and loved the stories in it. I discovered Mark  Trail  in cereal  boxes and  a completely new range of fauna  and flora outdoors, from skunk cabbage  to cougars  (my little sister had  nightmares about  cougars for years) . Where  we lived in the last block of a street that stopped at a ridge too steep to pave, bears periodically  raided  our garbage  cans. I was used to wild  monkeys terrorizing  our  chickens in the garden in Penang and bears seemed much more exotic. Yet if i talked about  the monkeys or the cobras and scorpions at school, the other  kids thought that  was so exotic i must be making it up. In this i experienced  a turning  upside down  of the world, an  inversion  of values. It  permeated  everything.  I  had  been  taught   politeness, "excuse me," and  "thank  you," as an essential oil to smooth  the  rough  edges of


220

MARLATT


racial and class differences. Here it was taken as a prissy assertion of  difference­ "why  do you keep saying 'sorry' all the time?"  I learned  that  reading  historical romances like The  Scarlet Pimpernel, or reading Keats and Tennyson  (my moth­ er's view of a basic education) taught me nothing of any social use if i hadn't read Nancy Drew or heard of Bill Haley and the Comets.
So i bought  rock 'n  roll records, put  away  my mother's copies of Keats  and Tennyson, wore white bucks and  jeans and pencil-line skirts. I loved the principles of democracy  as we argued  them  out in school, loved Canadian history with  its romance of the coureurs  de bois, the Metis uprising, Simon  Fraser tracing  rivers, Pauline  Johnson  and  Emily  Carr  recording  a  culture  as  exotic  as  any  Malay kampong's-yet  here  it had  something  to say about  the  plants  and  rocks and animals we lived and  would go on living among.  (I  didn't stop, then, to question the  application  of "democracy" to reservations.)  Wanting to sing "0 Canada" along  with  everyone  else at  school  (we  did  in  those  days) ,  i  enthusiastically became a Canadian citizen.
Only later, years later, did i begin to feel that, like a phantom  limb, part of me, that  Penang  past, not quite  cut off, still twitched  alive and  wanted  acknowledg­ ing. Twenty-five  years after  we had left Penang, i went back for a  visit with  my father  and sister, living in the first house we had lived in as a family, sleeping in the same bedroom,  finding  in the amah  of the house the same  woman  who  had been our  children's amah  back then.  Out  of that  grew, for the  first time, some Penang  writing,  as similarly  going back  to England  five  years later  sparked  in How  Hug  a Stone  some English writing  (an  attempt  to capture  that  voice, that  ethos, i recognized from my childhood). Yet both  returns  were incomplete,  inter­ cut always with my present Canadian consciousness, so that neither writing is truly emigrant.
When  i collected  an  oral  history of Strathcona   with  Carole  Itter   (Opening Doors), i discovered  how  isolated  my  experience  as  an  immigrant   had   been. Strathcona is the  immigrant  neighbourhood   of  Vancouver, has  functioned   as such for decades.  It  lies adjacent  to commercial  Chinatown and  is now largely Chinese though  it was known as Little Italy, once was the first Jewish settlement, once  (before the war)   had  a school population  that  was sixty percent  Japanese. I lived in it for six years and  felt completely at  home, felt as if  part  of me had been returned  to the whole i'm still discovering. But what  astonished me was how collective  the  immigrant  experience  was  amongst  the  people  we  interviewed, whether  they were Japanese, Chinese, Italian, Yugoslavian, or Jewish. Most immigrant children  seemed to have grown up in extended  families formed  by the phenomenon  of "calling  over," where one member immigrates and then gradually calls over other members of his family to the new country. In addition,  there were numerous  regional  associations,  from  the  Chinese  tong  or  clan  houses, to  the


221

MARLATT

Italian  district groups. All of this helped keep the  original  culture  alive by  cele­ brating festivals in traditional  ways and gathering people together with traditional rituals at weddings, christenings, funerals, etc.
I can only remember  one family we knew  who  had  a  similar  background   to
ours and they ended up moving to Toronto. We children  made  friends at school, my father made friends at the office, my mother,  being at home all the time, was more isolated. There  were no relatives living a few blocks away.  There  were no neighbours to chat  with who might  have come from  the same district in the old country, even the same town. In fact, my mother  had  no district in England  her family could be said to come from.
So the nostalgia for England  (where  her parents  had  retired)   and  for Penang
increased at home as our assimilation, as children,  increased  outside in the neigh­ bourhood and  at school. My mother  wanted  to keep up "English" in  our  values as we struggled very hard  to become Canadian. This led to a deepening  neurosis i could neither  understand nor address, as it increased  my  determination to leave all that behind and completely enter into this place here.
It seems to  me  that  the  situation  of being  such  an  immigrant   is a  perfect seedbed  for  the  writing  sensibility. If you  don't   belong,  you  can  imagine  you belong and  you can construct in writing a world where you do belong. You can write  your  way  into  the  world  you want  to  be a  part  of  (Vancouver  Poems, Steveston), even as, from outside it, you witness its specific characteristics.   (The first piece of writing  i had  published  was a sketch  i wrote  in school in  which  i was Gassy Jack  reminiscing at the end of my life on the growth  of Gastown.  It was published in a local PTA magazine, probably  as an example of regional sensibility, but  what  i was doing was trying  to write myself into the  history of a city i wanted to belong in and felt i didn't, quite.)
The  sensation  of having  your  world  turned   upside  down  or  inverted  also, i think, leads to a sense of the relativity of both  language  and  reality, as much  as it leads  to a  curiosity about  other  people's  realities  (the  kind  of  curiosity  that makes you wander  by lit rooms at night and  invent  characters who live in them
-a basic fictional urge) . It leads to an interest in and  curiosity about  language,
a sense of how language  shapes the reality you live in, an  understanding of how language  is both  idiosyncratic  (private) and  shared   (public), and  the  essential duplicity  of language,  its capacity  to mean  several  things  at  once, its figurative or transformational powers. When you are told, for instance,  that  what  you call earth  is really dirt,  or  what  you  have  always  called  the  woods  (with  English streams)  is in fact  the bush  (with  its creeks),  you experience  the  first split  be­ tween name and  thing, signifier and signified, and  you take  that  first step into a linguistic world that  lies adjacent  to but  is not the same  as the  world  of  things, and indeed operates on its own linguistic laws.


222

MARLATT


The  sensation of living  in  this place  with  its real  people  and  things,  of  being contained in it, but  knowing that  somewhere else there  exists that  place,  with  its real people  and  things  which  you can  no longer  go back to, the sense that  the  you you were in that  place is not the same  you as the you you are in this place,  though the  two  overlap, produces a  desire  to  knit  the  two  places,  two  (at  least)   selves, somehow. I think  that  writers  who feel this way are often  interested in myth  and symbol  which  are  common to  disparate phenomena and  form  a  universal  lan­ guage  underlying the  specifics  of  the  local-which  is why,  perhaps,  so  much  early  Canadian literature is full of myth  and  symbol.  Now  we make  our  exegesis of the  difference using  montage, using  juxtaposition, knitting disparate  and  spe­ cific images  from  both  places.  Seeing  the  world  as multidimensional  as  possible and  ourselves  present  within  it.




from TOUCH TO MY TONGUE

this  place  full of contradiction

a confusion of times if not of place, though  you understood  when i said no not the Danish  Tearoom,  the Indonesian  or Indian, was in fact  that  place  of warm  walls, a  comfortable  tarot  deck  even  the lamps  pick up your glow, a cabin  of going, fjords  in  there,  a clear and  pristine  look the winds weave through  your eyes i'm  watching you talk of a different  birth, blonde hair on my tongue, of numbers, nine  aflush  with  cappucino  and  brandy  and  rain  outside  on  that street  we flash down down,  laughing  with  no umbrella,  i see your face because i don't  see mine equally flush with  being, co-incidence being together  we meet in these far places we find in each other,  it's Sappho  i said, on the radio, always we meet original,  blind of direc­ tion,  astonished  your hand  covers mine walking  lowtide  strands  of Colaba,  the lighthouse, Mumbai  meaning great mother,  you wearing your irish drover's  cap  and  waiting  alive in the  glow while i come up  worrying  danish  and  curry,  this  place  full  of  contradiction - you know, you knew, it was the one place i meant.


houseless

i'm  afraid,  you say, are you? out  in the  wintry  air,  the  watery  sun welling  close  behind  your  shoulders  i  am  following,  the  already known symmetry of your body, its radiant,  bow-woman  arched  over


223

MARLATT

me, integrity straight as an arrow. blind  with  joy i say oh no, think­
ing, how could  i fear  with  you?

and  now it's  dark  in here,  deep,  my cave  a house,  you on  the  other side of the country, our  country of sea  with  the  wind  blowing,  our country of reeds  and  grasses under unfathomed sky. i huddle small, i call you up, a tiny  point  of light,  memory  small  like a far-off  hole
-are  you there? in  all  this smoke,  fear,  images  torn  from  the  wall requiring life for a life / that  she take  it all, mother of giving  turned terrible  mother, blood-sipper, sorrow  Durga. turning her  back,  she takes  back  what  she  gives, as  you  might, or  i  might. giving  myself up  to fear. turning away  (for "safety's" sake) .

there  are  no walls. fear /love,  this light  that  flashes over  the sea sur­ rounding us. signals  danger, yes, my house  no  house.  i can  only  be, no  vessel but  a  movement running, out  in  the  open,  out  in  a  dark  and  rising  tide, in risk, knowing who iam with  you-

creatures of  ecstasy,  we  have   risen  drenched  from   our   own   wet grasses, reeds, sea. turned out,  turned inside  out,  beside ourselves,  we are  the  tide  swelling,  we are  the  continent draining, deep  and  for­ ever into each  other.


where we went

we went to what  houses stars  at the sea's edge,  brilliant day, where  a metal  crab   jets  water  catching light,  heaven   and  earth in  a  tropic embrace joined  upright, outside  glass doors  people  and  cars  and waterglaze. city  that  houses  stares,  city  that   houses  eyes, electricity writing the dark  of so many  heads  figuring where  we were.  we knew so well i didn't even catch  your  eye as we stepped through and  she brought out  the  rings for  us to look at,  silver,  moon  metal  engraved in  the  shape  of wild  eyes by kwakiutl and  haida hands, raven  and wolf and  whale  and  unknown birds  not  seen  in  the  light  city. crea­ tures of unorganized territory we become,  a  physical impulse moving  from  me  to  you  (the  poem  is),  us  dancing in  animal  skins  in  the unmapped part  of our world.  now you wear  whale  on the finger  that  enters  and  traces  in whale  walrus   the  horse  you  thought i was, shy of fences,  running the  edge  of the  woods  where brought up  short  i feel the warmth of you, double you, wolf. i wear  wolf and  dream of your  lean  breast   descending, warm   and   slow  the  fur   that   grows between  your eyes fifteen  hundred miles away in  another city  under
the same moon.


224

from THE DJINISH SKETCHES

Anne Marriott
(for Heather Spears) On Bornholm  Island

They pull down  the roofs
over the eyes of the ochre cottages to shut  out  dark  beasts
Grendel, dragons.

On  my distant island
what lurked under thimbleberries shook dripping cedar?
I rushed  to turn on lamps
was Grendel in that  ornamental shrubbery?
Bear or raven? Is the true dark
only the darkness inside us?

On  Bornholm Island we pull down roofs over our own eyes
indoors  behind  blue curtains pile on logs.
The stove is glowing.
The sound  at the door is friends.

We are travellers bivouacked around a campfire
on a journey  over
a long plain.
We speak  softly­
travellers' tales.

Hammershus

The castle  grins
showing its broken  teeth above  the fierce
hammer of water a fierce grin
at the ancient enemy


225

MARRIOTT

crouched on the horizon : Sweden,  see?

That old enemy now is friend
yet there's  nothing of peace about  this red castle
though between stumps  of ramparts tiny daisies ring
on the worn grass
making  wreaths  for the dead  of all old wars.

English  daisies
my mother called  them in Victoria
but  they run
right  around the globe trampled
persistent
pink-tipped in memory of everybody's blood.

Actually  it was neighbours pulled  this castle down stacking  the stones
into  their family houses
but  hatred's still here flushing the angry  walls a deeper  colour
fury
of the single enemy, the man who lay in the rock chamber (we peer
down  through the iron grating finally our eyes pick out
the hacked walls)
the man who lay and  raged cursing  praying death
while the thick maggots
ate up his living flesh.

Sketches

My father  sat by my sickbed when I was seven

MARRIOTT

read  from  the prophet
Write  the vision.
But  I was born  myopic my vision broken.
I make  only sketches, guessed-at
uncertain.

Reality is not here always elsewhere the friend far away
(dear friend, sharer)
clearer than  this friend near.
These parks and  houses island, even the dark  sea
are  only shadows  that  loom tum brilliant
pass like a sunset.
Is there  no solid land we can grasp
so firmly our fingers cannot be unloosed?

Through a glass darkly
read  my father read
Love never  faileth.

Until the light
bursts  through the broken glass
I will write love
to this friend  whose hand  puts down the same words of joy and  pain
as my hand.
I will write love to any friend
whose mind  locks even a corner
into  mine.
I will write love-
and  praise, for every word we write
word of ours
that  goes down true.


227

from DREJIMFIELDS

Tom Marshall


xxu

"Oh, through a powder  of ghosts  I walk; through dust
Seraphical upon  the dark winds  borne  ..."

Klein  writes of god
dispersed.  Gassed:	"martyr-motes,"

"Flotsam of flame!"   His kin are  not consoled or consolable.

His kin are clouds
lingering.   Ashes.    His kin

fear  not, having  gone ahead of us:

A horde.     Their cries unheard ... God's  hosts.


XXV

atomic disintegration, or blindness, or

burns, or
destruction of the ozone layer, all organisms  blinded
by the hostile sun, or

cancer, or
rotting corpses, plagues amid

broken  buildings, flayed, all skin become fluid peeling

MARSHALL


xxvz

We have bitten  into the fire-apple

Atom's  intoxicating fruit/ fall




























229

TWO POEMS



JIT THE MONJISTERY OF THE CROSS

No one may annihilate the motherless  angel, Rasputin of the Valley,
who inhabits this yellow fortress
and  offers a severe face, little softening  pity.
He lifts the portal for entrants
and  strides away in monkish  purple.

Winter or spring, invincible against  bullet or axe, unseen
he often sits above  the stone gate, counts  the olive trees
grasping the rock-rooted soil as if forever.

Valley  of the Cross, Jerusalem



SJICRIFICE

My neighbours talk cautiously­
worrying  about
who will overhear them? Their children  they keep
to themselves, edgier  smiles turn  on their  lips and  cheeks Fright  they camouflage

The managers bemoan
the imminent avalanche of profits
Someone  must lead  the nation and  give direction to the young, they complain

The big men have begun to speak of sacrifice
 


Seymour Mayne

TWO POEMS

Ron Miles


CL]ISS OF '62: RE-UNION

We were never one.    Twenty years later we have doubled ages, halved  hopes
reddened our faces

with sunshine and  liquor. Tonight we glow,,
re-naming past
glories and  our  children

reducing lives to sentences. Most  kids, first grandmother, longest distance travelled.
Old  businesses, new marriages.

But what  of wives and  husbands gone, long nights after
and  before, children split?
What of goals  missed, or reached

but  not extended?	Black and  white yearbook  entries  show us
what  we were, and  would  be.
Who among us will admit

losses irrecoverable, cumulative, humiliating.	Our amputations make  a whole  of us.    All the colour photographs are a lie.

MILES
 


LIVING TOGETHER

We make the little man
come out, his blue slicker wet as the day, chase him away

only to greet his yellow­ dressed woman  from another door.    Gaily she looks

for  him, sadly he hides
in their house.    Whether they live alone, or have

children does not matter yet.    There has been no separation of their separate

ways.    His blue habit  takes its turn then  gives her

hers.    And what  is hers has its sway.
Living as equals

they individually pursue a place in the sun
or ram.    Indoors

and  outdoors,  in doors and  out, passing
in the balmy weather and  the chill.

THREE POEMS

Erin Moure


SIKSIK:JI

Like women  of the rugged  plain, Siksika women,
their  moccasins  black from  the ashes of their  fires,
the wide circles of medicine  stones they carried from  the earth
to hold  the circumference of teepees, eighteen feet at the centre

Like the Siksika women
who made & owned  the teepee of the family, thirteen buffalo  skins
The man  who could bring her this her  husband

Like Siksika women, called  Blackfeet,
sorrow  of the prairie, viewers of small animals grazing,
of buffalo, wonder  of the crazed  spirit,  the advent of laws to guard  the railway,
its division  of land

Even  when  hunters are dying,
drunk in streets of Cluny or Toronto, the buffalo  pound empty, the siding closed
Like Blackfeet women
it is us who own  the circle of our bodies,
one skin unmarked by stitches,  undecorated, celebrated between  us, unhunted by men










233

MOURE

























































234
 

BE SOCIJIBLE

Wanting to be sociable, wanting to be mind,
wanting to mete out  presence & the thinking word
The  white settees, teak table & glass plates of the meal
Amnesty brought by objects  is not only beautiful
but senseless
The  killings go on & on in the glass factories of the skull
the head  beaten  against  glass the mouth  blown
full of glass

If we are sociable beings why are so many dead,
fingering  the mouths  of others, clamped shut,  not speaking  of joy As we raise our glasses
in greeting, safe from  their agony
A voice outside  our body
A dry tongue
A drink  of wine






SHOCKS

Like the Indian boy who climbed  up into  the transformer
& touched the power with his head  & shoes, perfect
except  on the inside,
except  the scalp burn,  the twin  burns  on his feet

He lay in the hospital  for weeks, a vegetable A place where  time stopped  & never started, a shell, a body to trip into
& never grow to adulthood

MOURE

As my husband did,
poised over  the dinner after  he tipped  it on the floor, straddling the soft heap
of vegetables
He wavers  drunken
Don't  touch anything, don't  touch  me
& I can't answer, just stare  at his sad impulse, shock & hunger

The girl who stuck a spoon into  the socket to find where  the TV  picture hid
& jolted her arm & neck
A neat  bolt of lightning etched  in the metal  handle
I still have  that  spoon

How  the body's  built
to take it, to preserve  its likeness,
how it won't  remember shock or marriage, & ignores good proof,  sits up at night  in its coil of bedding
its hair  on end, irresistible

a vegetable with  three bums, smaller  than  quarters











235

JIDRIFT

Susan Musgrave


I was everything at once, fish, line and lure
and  small boat  with person adrift in it.
I'd  even go so far
as to say I was the sea.

I should describe  how it felt to be a fish pulling  itself in hooked  through its own heart
by something inseparable from  its flesh.

I felt confused.  I felt uncertain. When  the boat  rocked, I rocked  too,
and  when the sea turned greasy and  dark
I had to roll, I felt one with it.

At times I had  human thoughts,
I wanted  to reel in the fish and  eat it.
At other  times I sympathized with  the sea; I wanted  to beach  the boat and  scuttle it.

Talk  about  being in two places at once­ I was in six at least. I was cold, too, irritable in my skin and  unnatural
at the end of the line. Yet, understand me,
I knew how it felt to be that  line,
taut  and purposeful, baited  in fate's  hand.

It must have been you in your little aluminum boat who came zigzagging through a squall  to bring me to my senses. Six of them
adrift in a body with  teeth chattering and
mind  teetering on the brink  of a horizon  which,  you pointed  out,
wasn't  really there.  You said the world
was round, not square. Good  news, I thought, and  started  rowing.

TRIPTYCH

Suniti Namjoshi




A  PLACID cow was grazing  in  the meadows. She  wasn't really  think­ ing about  anything, except  perhaps about  the texture of the grass, its springy  resilience,  about  a patch  of clover,  about the  taste of  butter­ cups,  about flies, and  the  warmth of  the  sun  beating  on  her  back. In   other  words   she  was  simply  grazing.   When   suddenly  a  half­  grown  lion  cub  bounded from  the woods.  It was  a  ball  of sunshine,  a  bundle of  joy. It danced up  to  the  cow  and  licked  her  all  over with  its  rough   tongue.  It  was  importunate. It  was  friendly. It  in­ sisted  that   the  cow  play  with  it.  And  the  cow, poor  beast,  was  so exceedingly flattered, she soon complied, to  the end  that  you see:  a penitent cow,  and  an  astounded  lion  cub  begging   piteously  for  a piece  of beef.
The point  of  the  tale?  It depends  rather on  which  of  the  two you identify with.




AND YET the cow we are speaking  of  was a Brahmini cow, had the  long  slender   legs of  Indian cattle,   the  quiet   eyes,  wistful  and expressive,  the curving horns,  the elegant  dewlap, and  that  masterly sweep  from  shoulder to  rump   which  seems  to  say  this  is  the  way cattle should  be made,  this and  only this.  And  she  was skinny-all the  better  to admire her  bones, their  indisputable integrity. What is more,  though not  tended  and  praised  as a goddess  ought  to be, she was used  to some  lip-service.  This  she accepted gently  and  calmly, never  once  altering her  docile  expression; and  when  chased  out  of gardens with  sticks  and  stones,  it  is true  that  she  ran,  but  she  ran with  a slow and  clumsy  dignity.  So much  for  this  beast.  And  what of  the  cub?   The golden  lion  cub  whose  genes  proclaimed  a  royal heredity? They played   together   these  incongruous  two,  the  burn­ ished  cub  against her  white  flanks  making them  look  like  a  scene from  heraldry. Oh  they  were  beautiful. They  were  gleaming. They  recalled   the  world  before  the  fall.  They  were  like  milk  and  honey.







237

NAMJOSHI




cONVERSELY   Moon-Calf in  love  with   the  Lady   Lioness:  "0
Queen of  the  Jungle, Princess  of  Night, allow  me,  if  you  will,  to entertain you  with  my  grief." Lioness   a  little  anxious,  has  other things  to do, but  Moon-Calf distracting and  rather dazzling in  the light  of moonbeams. Speaks  to  the  Moon-Calf: "Go  away,  Moon­ Calf.  Come  back  again   in  another five  years.  Then  we  will  see." Five  years elapse.  Moon-Cow returns. Lioness  and  Moon-Cow be­ come  excellent  friends,  lovers  as  well,  pick  pretty  patterns in  the smooth  moonbeams.














DR)IFT OF )IN EPILOGUE TO "INCHO)ITE WORLD"

(from The  Martyrology Book VI Books)


bpNichol


35,ooo feet  above Saskatchewan less than  a foot  between  me &
all that  air,  these airs err insubstantial as comparison
spots to which  we come, position ourselves heirs to the veaucabulairies
terrer that fires us all gollems finally
someone  marks  our fourheads
four elements there

enact tradition familiair
 we lurch  forward

monstrously


tri bull
 familheir

labyrinthinemine

a tour  of gnossos logos osos
( 0 that  S.O.S. of consciousgnoss)
or that  old question
"who's the  boss?"  (b.s. os)

minos  most of our memory we function out  of loss amigos

unless i've got a pun i can't write  it down

ink think


239

NICHOL

"is that  what  you mean  by procoss ?" [harbor lights
th'arbor of masts &
sails off the edge of your world 	a view venue 	STREEts
lower&upper
middle  voicejtonguejworld]
i mean  the earthyear the puns get the more  the pen can pin it down to

Pan  plays the world 'pon  his flute


old bullfoot  amazes us pipes bright  as language

who will wake you mourn  your death & dance  your resurrection
 


sleepy giants




[the rivers branch like trees
 dreaming world

someone's  always leaving

[catch  in the voice the ship

water water  water  you doing?


[meme eau: i'm  just looking at the sea 'n world something fishy when the tongue  slips
[glimmering surface invisible depths
across which  the boats skip]

"I'll write you a letter
[A to A]]

giant  talk

the long waged war
the fight or struggle  for
 
[eauver & eauver]]]

NICHOL


the mind
 
boarders in these rooms words open



i said  that  be


you said  that  be

we said  that  be
 
FORE


they said that  be

warned

letting the future know we're  playing  thru
gulf the gulls & mist rise out of
stretches between  "me" & "you"

August  23 to October 25, 1983










CONFESSIONS OF A COMMERCIAL WRITER
 




Eric Nicol




I.M HERE  TO  TURN   MYSELF  IN,   The  guilt has become too much  to bear.  For more than  35 years I have lived with  it, the crushing shame, and  now, before it is too late,  I  must get this  Kong-sized  monkey  off my back. I come to this respected periodical to ask the editor to take my statement:
I have made money as a writer in Canada.
No,  I  don't  mean  counterfeiting,  though  that  sounds  more  feasible.  I  mean that  I have supported  myself and  my family with my typewriter,  with enough  to spare to sustain a meaningful relationship with my broker.
I sense that  the  reader  is already  shrinking  away  from  me. Anyone  familiar
with  publication  in this country  knows that  a  Canadian writer's  literary  worth varies  inversely with  his financial  liquidity.  If the  author has  anything  in  his pocket besides a hole, he has obviously been engaging  in -and  I  apologize for using the word in a respectable journal -commercial work.
I remember the pain and mortification I felt the first time I read a newspaper's
theatre  review in which my comedy of manners  was described  as a "commercial play." I was too young to understand what the term meant,  or I might have tried to get out of the dirty business before the stigma  had  hardened. Hopelessly naive, I thought  that  having my play classed with  the style of Neil Simon was a  com­ pliment.  Little  did  I  comprehend  that,  whereas  being  popular  is  tolerated  and even admired  in most parts  of the world, in  Canada it  is merely  vulgar,  in  the worst Latin sense of the word.
The critics (reviewers, actually, as Canada has no professional critics in any performing  art not directed by a referee)  are seldom tolerant  towards the author of a popular  hit. If he attempts  to repeat  it, the watchdogs  of Canadian culture will quickly have him by the seat of his designer jeans.
Instead  of recognizing this early on in my mercenary  career,  I saw  no  harm in letting  artistic  directors  produce  a second  play of mine  despite  the  fact  that the  first play was a financial  success. Fool  that  I  was, I  openly  admired   their moxie. Only latterly  have I learned  to plead with producers  to conceal box-office figures unless they are really low.
I also write under several names.
Too late. In a pre-opening interview with one of Vancouver's drama  reviewers, he asked me, almost sympathetically,  "Why  do you keep trying?"  I didn't  have a


242

NICOL


reasonable  reply ready. To say that  I still hoped to write something  both  artisti­ cally meritorious and  good for big bucks-well, it would have sounded absurdly pretentious, not to say hallucinative.
How  then  does  a  Canadian  writer  cope  with  success? One  way  is to  live
abroad.  Mavis Gallant  is suspected of earning  substantial  sums, as a contributor to The  New Yorker, and  in U.S. dollars at that.  But she very sensibly holes up in Paris. This  makes her  an  expatriate, her  royalty cheques  excusable  because she is too  far  from  Canada to  be on  welfare. Similarly,  Canadian  writers  Arthur Hailey  and  Bernard  Slade,  though  seen to be highly commercial,  pay for  their millions by  having  to  work  in  the  United  States. They  are  more  likely to  be mugged,  and  they  are  entirely  cut  off from  the  Canadian Council  grant-the modem  equivalent  of excommunication. They may have expensive homes in California, but  they have  little  chance  of being invited  to  read  their  work at  a meeting  of the Moose Jaw  branch  of the Canadian Authors  Association.
For the commercial  author  seeking respectability the only other option is to live on  the Gulf  Islands  of British  Columbia,  preferably  an  obscure  and  bleak atoll with  no ferry service and  brackish  well water.  So long as he keeps his ill-gotten gains in an old bait  bucket  and  dresses like something  discharged  from  the  bilge of a Russian trawler,  the bush man or woman of letters may conceivably  prosper without inciting contempt.
But I, alas, am betrayed  by my address (Vancouver's Kerrisdale), even though I avoid using the  postal code. As a commercial  writer  I suffer an  anxiety attack every time I send an unsolicited manuscript  to a publisher or dramaturge, because under  Canadian criminal  law prostitution  is not a crime but soliciting is. I must be careful not to appear  pressing and persistent. I never try a publisher more than once, or on the street.
Yet, people know. Somehow  the basically decent reading  public of Canada can detect those of us commercial  writers who cannot  simply summon  the  Muse, but have  to deal  through  her  pimp.  When  my Muse does show  up, she is wearing pink hot pants and fishnet stockings. Oh, God, how I envy the author  who receives his divine afflatus in a tiny garret, as he nibbles his mousetrap cheese!
"No  man  but  a  blockhead," said  Samuel  Johnson,  "ever  wrote  except  for money."  The  doctor's  prescription  is not  accepted  in  Canada. Here  the  block­ head is valued as totemic. He writes not for money but for the manifest destiny of being  appointed  as writer-in-residence at  a  recognized  Canadian  university.  (I was offered a  writer-in-residency  once, but  had  to tum  it  down  because  I  had encumbered  myself with material  objects, such as a wife and three children.)
Let my fate serve as a warning  to the Canadian writer  tempted  to give up the succes d'estime  for the greener  fields of the commercial.  Those  fields are actually foul, soul-sucking bogs, my friend. Do us both a favour:  keep out.


243

PIGS

Michael Brian Oliver


Pigs
Are like gods.

Their dirty faces, Their itchy arses, A welcome sight After Edmonton's Tall blank  towers, Cold golden  faces.

Out past sloughs, Bickering blackbirds, Leduc  Number One,
THE  FOUNTAINHEAD, We found  the farm - My wife, my son, myself.

Fellow Easterners, The swine grunted, Raced between  stumps, Rooted the sunset
Up out of the dust, That damned horizon.

Every Saturday night
We came to watch,
To  praise their  excellence. Homeless, like us, Belonging nowhere, Everywhere -pigs.

Back in Edmonton
Splendid magpies
Were  being slaughtered.
I longed  to liberate them, Replace them  with  pigs - Let the racists try them on!

OLIVER

I dreamed of leading Fat  rampant pigs Across suburban lawns. Think about it-
Pigs and  dandelions
Against  the Gestapo.

8-year-old Susie, Born on May Day, Shouting Fuck you! At every passer-by,
She would hail  the pigs:
Welcome, barbarians!

Pigs and  Susies are Necessary,  inevitable, Whenever laws Precede salvation.
I do not know
What they are, but

Pigs
Are like gods.











245

TWO POEMS
 


Michael Ondaatje


PROUST IN THE W]ITERS
for Scott  and Krystyne

Swimming along  the bar of moon the yellow scattered sleeping
arm of the moon
on Balsam  Lake


releasing the air
 
out of your mouth

the moon under  your arm tick of the brain submerged. Tick
of the loon's heart
in the wet night  thunder
below us knowing its shore is the air

We love things which  disappear and  are found
creatures who plummet and  become
an arrow.
To  know the syllables in a loon sentence
intricate shift of preposition
that  signals meridian


The mother tongue
 west 	south  west.

a bubble caught in my beak releasing the air
of a language

Seeing no human in this moon  storm being naked  in black water
you approach the corridor
such  jewelry! Queen Anne's  Lace!
and slide to fathoms, androgenous.

ONDAATJE

The mouth swallows river morse throws  a sound
through the loom of liquid
against sky.
Where are you? On  the edge
of the  moon bar


BIRCH  B]IRK
for George  Whalley

An hour  after the storm  on Birch Lake
the island  bristles. Rock. Leaves still falling. At this time, in the hour  after lightning
we release  the canoes. The silence of water
purer  than  the silence of rock.
The paddle touches  itself. We move over blind  mercury, feel the muscle within the river, the blade
weave in dark  water.

Now each  casual  word  is precisely chosen passed from  bow to stern, as if
leaning back  to pass a canteen.
There are echoes, repercussions of water. We are  in absolute landscape,
among names  that  fold in onto themselves.

To  circle  the island  means witnessing the blue grey dust  of a heron
released  out  of the trees. So the dialogue slides nothing more  than  current, this fly line of friendship
an old song we break into not needing all the words.

We are  past  naming the country. The reflections are never  there without us, without the exhaustion of water and  trees after  storm.

247

DR. DOLITTLE

Richard Outram


Almost unable in the text
To  bear with what  was coming next,

How could  I ever hope to know, Once  having  been abandoned so,

The elegant, insistent  why
And wherefore whereby  I was I,

The creature of my tender years, And not the other  of my fears?

As yet, I only knew, I knew,
Although I knew it through and  through,

That one must somehow, in the end, Become and  thereby  comprehend,

Embody and elaborate
The tale that  no one would  relate

To  me:  whereof the central part
I had complete, I thought, by heart;

But guessed with surety  I had
The best of reasons to be glad,

As long as I was child, not Man, That one was not allowed  to scan

The scientific occult  note;
The answer  the good Doctor wrote

With  feverish delighted haste, That not an inkling  go to waste,

Upon  the silken lining  torn
Out of his hat, while he was borne,

OUTRAM

As all of us, perhaps, may be, Across the bottom of the sea

Within  the great snail's chambered  shell: And understood  therein full well

The  question he had died to ask
The  mollusc, being brought  to task

Before the pushmi-pullyu's  rare, Binary relentless stare.


























249

BESTI;21RY
 


Al Purdy


ABCofP

Whoever wrote Tom  O'Bedlam, the anonymous, the all-of-us, enduring the pain  of everyman, perched on a throne in the gutter.

Auden  for "Lay  Your Sleeping-" etcetera, who was nevertheless  anti-romantic;
a nay-saying man, a quiet  torturer,
no spontaneity, decidedly  magnificent.

Blake-who knew life's central things: God, money  (glory-power) and  love. Nobody  can have all three of them: Blake made  two more than  enough.

Byron for "So We'll Go No More-" the glory of loss, the triumph of sorrow, at Marathon, at Missolonghi:
no excuse given, none needed.

You, Gaius Valerius Catullus
" -here face down  beneath the sun":
an absent friend,  lost in the centuries' dust next door,  just stepped  out for a minute -

Donne, of course, Dean  of St. Paul's. Just the early stuff. That death portrait, sitting  in his shroud, repels me:
the godless lover is alive and  warm.

Homer and  his characters struggle  for control in the ancient world of Achilles and  Hector, while Cassandra prophesies  bloody  hell­ You have to remind  yourself now and  then
this is literature.

Housman: aware  of a moment coming when  human face and  death's skull face

PURDY

stare  directly at each other,
and  listened  to what  they said beforehand.

Jeffers,  who was America's Cassandra. I don't think  he ever wrote  of flowers,
but glimpsed  another reality: dams broken high  in the mountains; after  the bombers, animals returned; earth grown  bright-

Keats, the rejected  -but rejection wasn't so bad when  you can soar like he did :
with a sadness so unbelievably poignant, it escapes  books and  becomes gladness.

Kipling-still somewhat unfashionable: for certain poems that  awake  the feeling of woodsmoke in a simpler  world,
and  whatever poems do that  prose can't.

Lawrence! -not for his blustering Jesus-propheteering: just some delicacy that stands  on one foot and  blushes
like a girl, then  sticks out its tongue.

A yea-nay-sayer, the political  Neruda, who loved a mythic  America
that  never was -: in the blue distance
of Machu Picchu, and  condors  hovering.

Dylan  and  his Childhood Forest of Arden, whose life paraphrased his death:
as if there  were artificial boundaries between  them,  with  booze in both  places.

Yeats for Maud Gonne,
and  those little glittering gay eyes
of the Chinese man: and  because of him, a feeling  that  greatness is still alive.

Star painters, lapidaries, and often poseurs; craftsmen more  than  artists; but sometimes, when  we had forgotten, they  remembered where  the heart  is.

ONTARIO  CULTURE AND
-WHAT?


James Reaney




SOME YEARS  AGO,   I started teaching   a  gmduate courne called Ontario Literature  and Culture. The usual response to this at the time was,
''Ontario Literature and  what?"  "For  we have very little of that  around  here," seemed to be the attitude  expressed by this remark,  "thank you." But, of course, we are knee deep in our culture even if it prides itself on not being one ! If brought back to visit his old hunting  grounds,  an Attiwandaron tribesman  would  imme­ diately notice the new gods we worship -among them, the flush toilet/ the ritual spraying  of expensive poisons every spring,  the  human  sacrifice  to the  car,  the cenotaphic  expression in every town,  city and  village of even  more  spectacular  sacrifices off in Europe somewhere, and  the carefully  tuned  banality  of coliseum movies and  brutally  loud music. A few months  ago, a television  news  broadcast at my mother-in-law's brought  many elements of our culture  into focus, elements listed above. Someone in the suburbs of London,  Ontario had tried to burn  down their new house. In full colour with music the camera  lingered over the bathroom  where gasoline, the new sacrament, had started it all. The French  Empire  colour scheme  of lavender  trimmed  with  gold  now  had  disturbing and  desacralizing stripes of dreck piled randomly  over it. From  thousands  of invisible viewers you could hear a chorus of shocked "tsktsk's."  So  perhaps  my adding  "and  Culture" was my admission that what literature  we had wasn't taking effect, did not express what  it  should  powerfully  enough,  had  failed  to see much  of  our  real  life in Ontario. So I had  evidently  wanted  to  hurry  up  things  a  bit  by raiding  other disciplines-sociology, geography,  local  history, fine art,  McLuhan and  Innis, folklore, and  even just hunting  local graffiti or snowmen  made  by the local chil­ dren. Because, potentially, all of Ontario life is subject  matter  for artists, only they must hurry  up or the banality may freeze?
Things  are  changing  though.  For  example,  it  used to  be that  that  sphinx  of cities, Toronto, had  almost no literary  reflector.  With  Paris  or  London,  you can point to Balzac and Dickens. All I could find for Toronto  was a sociological study called Crestwood Heights, still an excellent novel only lacking some foreground figures and a hero. But novelists have now sprung  up:  with its subways like pastel

REANEY

chutes, Edible Woman  was the breakthrough. There's  even an historical study by a cousin of Ernest Thompson  Seton which explains Spadina  Avenue  in terms of its original  inheritance and  real  estate  history. Above  Bloor Street,  the  "i"  in "Spadina" is soft;  below it is hard.  I stress the fact that  this historian  is related to the man  who wrote Two  Little Savages because that  novel starts  off with  its sensitive hero going crazy in a place called Bonnerton, and  what  I did not realize at the age of eight when I read this very essential Ontario book was that Bonner­ ton is a pseudonym  for the mean little Toronto  of the nineties. Somewhere  in it, further  blinding flashes!, the hero explains to his mother that the reason he threw a stone at the  bird  at  Niagara Falls was that-he loved it. Now  we're getting somewhere.  Alice Boissonneau, the author  of Eileen  McCullough,  a  penetrating  study  of Toronto's West  End  in the  thirties-forties,  once reminded  me that  not very long ago when you came in from a walk parental figures would ask: "What'd you see?" And  you would  reply-oh-a  killdeer, a  weasel, a  butterfly.  "Did you kill it?" Many in the know would agree that  that is the essential voice of our Ontario,2   that  and  the  boy's reply to  his mother's  question.  I'm  sure  that  even our  Attiwandaron tribesman   would  agree  that  technology  aside,  nothing  much has changed  from  his supposedly  violent and  primitively inarticulate time.
I  have  just mentioned  a local bird-no, a national  bird-the  killdeer, and this brings me immediately  to a basic problem with not only Ontarians, but also Canadians. No one knows our  birds, despite the vogue of birdwatching and  the prevalence of nature  study  in schools. When, in 1959, I wrote a play called The Killdeer, audience  members  representing  most of the  provinces  kept asking me, "What's a killdeer?" Now the killdeer is not just a pasture or wilderness bird.  It nests on  beaches and  in fields, but  it also nests on the  gravelled  roofs of  down­ town buildings, and  I  have  heard  its distinctive and  haunting "killdeer" cry on campus grounds in Halifax,  Kingston, Winnipeg, and Vancouver. At the time, my feeling was that  if  I had  polled these audience  members  with  an  abstract  word such as "predestination" they  would  have done  quite  a good  job  of identifying that vulture. But a wonderful  plover bird 3 all over the place with its thrilling cry? No. No one has bothered  teaching  them  about  anything  so concrete and  useful to poetry and drama  as the name of wild birds. Los Angeles with its condors has lifted us too far above the tree line for such earthly knowledge. In  a way killdeer, tree, and  weed identification  is what  my course is all about.  I  happen  to believe that  if you don't  know the  weed that  grows at  your doorstep -knotweed -or the grass that  grows in cemeteries -orchard  or  poverty grass -or  the name  of the tree outside your window,  then you're not rooted in your environment. Books such as Two  Little Savages or Surfacing are about the way such knowledge heals a nervous breakdown, something  I think our society is quite  unconsciously experi-


253

REANEY

encing. And, of course, at colleges you get quite  a lot of useful knowledge  about laurels, myrtles, and  nightingales,  but  no  takers  for  the  local  ugly  ducklings­ knotweed,  poverty grass, and  killdeers. In  the  early days of the  course,  when  a published  one was still available, a partial  solution  was to ask  students  to make a leaf  album,  often  with  accompanying   quotations from  our  writers.  Perhaps  afraid of climbing trees, some delegated  this project  to their spouses. Well, some­ one in the  family  knew their  leaf-shapes. You  may  ask,  "What difference  does this really make?"
My answer would be to take a look at a story in Alice Munro's Who  Do You Think  You  Are? called "Wild  Swans."  In  this story,  a  young  girl  travels  from Wingham  near Lake Huron  to Toronto  on Lake Ontario for the first time in her life. She goes by a train  in a  journey  that  involves sweeping  across  the  South­ western  Ontario peninsula,  up  over  the  Niagara   Escarpment, and  so,  hugging Lake  Ontario, to  Union  Station  where  her  stepmother  has  warned  her  about white slavers. The  white slaver strikes earlier than she expected though, for beside Rose there  sits down  a man  claiming  to  be  a  minister -"Lake  Erie  . . . wild swans." About this time, the girl also notices that  just at the escarpment  the trees subtly change to a richer leaf texture and a different  kind of  bark surface. As she notices this, her life changes since now for the first time she is intimately  touched by a man-"Lake Erie ... minister ... wild swans." Physiography,  psychology, physiology all meet. Rose has reached several kinds of  escarpments  at once. And she makes the appearance of things in the Ontario landscape  help  her as they, it used to be thought,  were intended  to by being useful symbols, soothing  referents. Our  consumer  culture  couldn't  care less about  the  delicate  nuances  I have  been describing, and  its money-making "rites of  passage" stories avoid  leaf textures  if they can.  At the other  end of the  Escarpment from  Rose, aggregate  companies threaten  to turn  Grey County  into one big gravel  pit. We live in a  world where Kentuckians  wake up to find that their birthplace is now a strip  mine, a monster which,  I once read  in a  book on  Ohio,  has completely  done  away  with several of that state's counties. Technology with its ignorance  of what topsoil and Quaker  farmhouses could mean is the enemy of the course I am talking about.  Your inti­ mate surroundings do matter  very much be they pastel chutes or silvery bark, and I am happy  to find Atwood and Munro  apparently on my side.
Alice  Munro's husband  is a  professional  geographer, and  one  of  her  early stories -"Walker  Brothers Cowboy" -makes  deft  use of a  father  who  knows his physiography.  He explains to his daughter how glaciers formed  Lake Huron; we sense later on that  these glaciers haven't  stopped  forming  people's  lives. One of the essential handbooks for my course happens  to be Chapman and  Putnam's Physiography  of Southern  Ontario,  and this is so because when  I first taught  at

254

REANEY


the University of Manitoba I met two geographers who really changed  my  ima­ ginative  life-John Warkentin and  the  late  Fred  Watts.  They  could  explain something  I  was having  a great  deal  of trouble  with  in  I979-the  Manitoba landscape.  The  authors of the  above-named  book had  been their  teachers,  and they were expanding their  teachers' insights into Ontario landforms and  cultural  effects on same in the  direction  of the quite  different  Red  River  Valley world. Field patterns,  farm  yards,  houses, fences, the  presence  of an  imported  Ontario landscape  in  Manitoba/  Mennonite house-barns,  the  presence  of  an  imported  mediaeval Russian landscape  in Manitoba-all these matters  make you happier  for thinking  about  them.  I had already started  bicycling around  my own county at  home  with a government  map  in my  carrier -one  inch  to three  miles, and now, in Manitoba, I started  bicycling up and down the  banks of the Red  River. Naturally  this results in students  trying  the same sort  of thing  just to see what impressions are to be had. Beyond this, however, I encourage  my students  to pay attention   to  the  way  geographers,  particularly   physiographers,  write. When  it came  out,  Chapman and  Putnam's  Physiography  of Southern   Ontario  was  a better  written  book than  most  Ontario novels. This  comes, I  like to think,  not from their trying to write well, but from trying to organize their subject as clearly and  knowledgeably  as  possible.  They  spent  all  their  summers  driving  all  over Ontario, down  every  road  evidently. Then   they simply  ran  their  observations through  the  rather  attractive jargon  of physiography;  this  jargon  was invented by an  Ulsterman  who  used Gaelic  words-kames, eskers- for landshapes.  As well, these  gentlemen  were not  afraid  to voice their  own  personal feelings from time to time at a particular lonely set of farmhouses, or a particularly  fine set of well kept schoolyards. Similarly, Chaucer  ran his human  landscape  forms through the hopper  of planetary  influences, and  Atwood and  Munro-perhaps you can guess some of the speculations  that  arise in my seminars  about   possible  relation­ ships between our writers and our geographers.




SINCE I AM Now IN DANGER of teaching you the whole course, I will now only sketch in the remaining extradisciplinary  layers which  eventually have poems and  novels written  in Ontario placed on top of them. Grace  Camp­  bell's Thorn   Apple  Tree, or  Atwood's  Surfacing,  or  John  Richardson's West­  brook, the  Outlaw  look somehow  different  if you have  read  Selwyn Dewdney's Indian  Rock  Paintings, delivered a paper on the Culture of Glengarry  County, or re-established  the satirical  Reform  attitude  to that  so-called father  of his settle­ ment,  Colonel  Talbot. Also, if  you  have  a  forties  map   of  Toronto, so  does


255

REANEY

Avison's "The Local and  the Lakefront"; so do the early  poems of Christopher
Dewdney if you have listened to an account  of London,  Ontario's Coves district.
Indian  studies:   how can  Wallace  Stevens  say, completely  overlooking  those who gave his state  its name,  that  "we  never had  a mythology  in  Connecticut"? Since it seems unfair  to exterminate  them  while stealing  their  myths,  perhaps  he is wise. Still,  Jehova  came  to  Ontario like  a  rapacious  Elizabethan  settler  to Ireland. Surely you have to know who were the gods of your country  before your arrival.
History:  since an Ontario  resident invented  the word "pre-history" you would think that  we might have solved the problem of telling our mere story;  however, there is as yet to my knowledge not a book for grown-ups  that  professes to give a clear account of our province's life from beginning  till now.5 And this, despite the fact that a poet, Margaret  Avison, has beautifully  shown the way with her school text, The History  of Ontario. As the years go by, my students  seem to think  that the problems are not insufficiently funded research, but literary and psychic blocks. Is it that  we don't  think  we're  worth  a story?6   Perhaps  it was this shyness that caused one of our premiers, Mitchell Hepburn, to close down  the archives  of the province. The  closure caused no great popular  outcry.
Thinkers: in  particular, Richard   Maurice   Bucke,  Harold   Innis,  and  David Willson, the  heretic  Quaker.  Philosophy  journals  in  Ontario ignore  these  men and murmur instead about  the Scottish Kantians at Queen's.
Painters: David  Milne writes as well as he paints,  and  Bucke's theosophy  has a great deal to do with the look of Lawren  Harris' abstracts  as well as his earlier landscapes.
People:  most graduate students  know only their  peers and  the  famous  dead. Asked to interview a professional trapper, a botanist  who collects stories about  his township's seven idiots, or an old woman who once ran a ferry on the Sydenham River, they have been known to tremble in fear-at first.
Now we are ready-for what?
As  I have  implied,  if the  course were  just  Ontario literature, you  would  be missing a big echo chamber  which we have now given you blueprints  for.  What are  the  resonances?  Certainly  not  those  of  a  Quebecois-Iike  Renaissance.  The Bible still remains the best guide to our minds, and  such  poets as Rilke, Spenser, or Olson are apt to mean more to our poets than  Crawford or Willson, or  Lamp­ man,  and  rightly so. Nevertheless, the student  may  have  seen one  of  the  most unpopular and  misunderstood  Canadian provinces as a big poem  rather than  an elusive mystery or an exercise in materialism. If the reader can see this as desirable, it would certainly  to my mind  justify this rather  curious  course I  have in the last fifteen years so enjoyed teaching, and in the last few weeks, up in  the  Middlesex Memorial  Tower,  also, however briefly, enjoyed  describing.

REANEY


NOTES

1 "The bathroom is the  most  important room  in  the house"  is an  Ontario saying.
2  Another Ontario folk  saying  is  that   particularly in  photographs, Ontario  people never  touch  each  other.
3  What does Archibald Lampman mean  by "shore-larks"?
' As in Robert C. Stead's Grain.
5 It may  be that  the  province is physically  too big. Students discovered that  John A. Macdonald wanted the prairies to have  the Lakehead harbours. But,  no, our  greedy premier, Oliver Mowat, too foxy for  the  Manitoba lawyers,  pushed   us west  as far as Kenora.
6  Royce  McGillivray has  written a  fantasy   history  of  Ontario, parodying the  local histories. Perhaps after  this uninhibited account, he could  attempt the untried.










257

THE CANADIAN CLIMATE

Jane Rule




BECAUSE I WAS BORN AND  RAISED  m the United  State< and came  to Canada for the  first time when  I  was twenty-five  and  have  now lived over half my life here, I should feel more self-consciously Canadian than  a native of the country, more defensively Canadian, if you like. I have written  a defensive essay for The Globe and Mail called "Canadian Enough," having to do with what I see as my right to be known as a Canadian writer.  What  really distinguishes me from native writers is my lack of defensiveness about Canada.
I was not  raised to think  that  anything  Canadian is second  rate.  I  was, like most Americans, entirely ignorant  of Canada. My geographic  insight was limited to the certain  knowledge that  I lived in the greatest  country  on earth.  Living in England  and travelling in Europe shortly after  World  War  II, I discovered large numbers  of people who did not feel simple gratitude for America's  having  won the war and  having provided the Marshall  Plan for Europe's recovery. Nor were people  generally  convinced  that  the  threat  of  world  communism   justified  the purges McCarthy was initiating  in the United  States.  I  was asked a number  of embarrassing   cultural  as well as  political  questions  about   the  rights  of  native Indians  and  blacks, about  the  incarceration of Japanese Americans  during  the war.
When  I returned  to my own country,  I didn't any longer  feel at  home  there. The  patriotism  which  required  citizens to  be  proudly,  blindly  loyal  seemed  a peculiar American  vice which I no longer shared.  In  England, though  I had  not been particularly welcomed as an American,  I had  been encouraged  as a  young writer,  met  with  others  like me  to discuss work,  talked  with  published  writers who  offered  introductions  to  their  publishers.  In  the  States  I  was,  because  I hadn't  published,  dealt  with  as  someone  deluded,   shut   out  of  the   jealously guarded, narrow  professionalism of publishing. At  the Stanford Writing  School, where I expected to meet others like me, I found  instead  a focus on commercial­ ism and  negative competition.  We were not being groomed  for the long appren­ ticeship required  of a writer but for another  American  dream:  American  writers spring onto the scene full grown, out of the head of Zeus, with best sellers as noisy as the atom bomb.
After teaching on the east coast for two years and saving enough  money to take a year off for my own writing,  I  returned  to California   to visit my family  and

RULE

incidentally  took a trip  north  with  a cousin who had  never seen  the  redwoods. We drove as far as Vancouver only because an English friend  of mine had  been hired by U.B.C. and I thought  I might scout out an apartment for him.
We arrived  on a clear August day in 1956, and  there  before  us was a city of human  scale (the only two highrises were B.C. Hydro and  the Vancouver  Hotel) defined  by thirty  miles  of  accessible beaches  and  the  mountains of  the  north shore  rising  abruptly   into  forest  wilderness. As we drove  along  the  tree-lined streets, seeing gardens  as loved as English gardens,  then  out  through  the  grant lands to a university on cliffs overlooking the sea, I kept wondering  why nobody had  ever told me of this place, so rarely beautiful, on a coast  I'd  known  all my life. Until that day, that coast had ended for me at Seattle.
It  was a good time in the city's history for its aspiring  young.  The  university was expanding  by thousands each year. The CBC was in a period of regional assertiveness. The  first really  professional selling gallery, The   New  Design,  had just been established. From the beginning of my life in Vancouver  there was work to do, marking papers and tutoring students for the U.B.C. English department, reading TV scripts for CBC, free-lance broadcasting.  When  I again  needed a full­ time  job,  I was  Assistant  Director  of  International  House  the  year  the  new building  was opened.  Then  I taught  in  the  English department, for,  though  I had only an honours  B.A. in English and  a casual year's graduate  work  in Eng­ land,  the  university  needed  more  teachers  than  they  could  find  for  the  hugely expanding  enrollment.  The  four-month-long summer holidays gave me free time to get on with writing.
In  those early years the McConnells  hosted a writers' group  where  I met  Bob
Harlow,  Phyllis Webb,  Anne  Marriott, and  Marya  Fiamengo.  Bob  Patchell,  a producer  for CBC, was also a member of that group and  bought  a story of mine he'd  heard  there for  Anthology. The  McConnells founded  their  own  publishing house, Klanak  Press, and  brought  out  an anthology of our short  stories, Klanak Islands.
A group  of artists  of all sorts gathered  to form The  Arts  Club.  I  was on  its first board  of directors  with  Geof Massey, architect;  Tak  Tanabe, painter; and Alvin Balkind, director of New Design Gallery. When we rented a building in downtown  Vancouver, even Lawren  Harris, one of the Group  of Seven painters, came down to help clean it up and  redecorate  it with us. Nearly  all the painters belonged,  John  Korner,  Jack  Shadbolt, Gordon  Smith.  Arthur   Erickson  was a member  and  gave a wonderful  lecture  on the  process of designing  his legendary Comox  house. The  writers gave readings. I first heard  Dorothy  Livesay's poetry there.  In  the early days we didn't  have the money which  was later  available  to turn  the Arts Club into a theatre  club as well, but it gave us all a meeting  place, provided us with a community  of friends as well as an audience.


259

RULE

Though I  published  very little in  my first  half-dozen  years in  Vancouver,  I felt supported  by that  community  of artists. The  university  provided  me with  a living, but no university is a very good climate for a young writer since academics need to distinguish  between "literature," so worthy of their  devotion,  and  "crea­ tive writing,"  practiced  by dabblers  without  Ph.D.'s or  by themselves  in  semi­ secret. Among other artists, my calling was considered neither silly nor pretentious but the hard,  long, lonely work it was. We celebrated  when any one of us had  a show, a performance,  a building, something  published. And  a  remarkable  num­ ber of us survived to take our places not only on the local and  national  scenes but to international accomplishments  and  recognition,  far  more  than  any  people  I had known in the States or England.
So for me Vancouver was a remarkably  rich and nourishing  place, and increas­ ingly I felt I belonged there.  More gradually  I began  to have  a sense  of British Columbia. As a  university chaperone,  I  toured  the  province  with  the  Players' Club,  presenting  Tennessee Williams'  Glass Menagerie  to  places  as  isolated  as Bralorne, the gold mining town, as far  north  as Smithers  and  Prince  George, all through  the  Okanagan. We were billeted  and  entertained by  local  people. Still populated  by immigrants,  it was a west much  younger  than  the  western  United  States.  In  British  Columbia  a  dozen  cultures  mingled  uncertainly   in  towns,  in small towns isolated by great reaches of wilderness, mountains, deserts, lakes, and rivers, and  I felt the more a part of it because I  was an immigrant, too.




IT TOOK   LONGER  FOR   ME   to  have  a  sense of  Canada as  a country.  When  I travelled,  I went either  south  to see my family  and  friends  or to Europe which went on offering me insights into art, history, my own experience. My first published  novel, Desert of the  Heart,  was first accepted  by Macmillan of Canada. In  the early 196o's it was still nearly  unheard  of for  a  novel  to  be published  in  Canada alone.  Mine  was accepted  on  the  condition   that   I  find either  an American  or English  publisher  to share  the  costs. Since  the  book was set in Nevada,  it seemed sensible to look for an American  publisher.  Nearly  two years later,  when  it  had  been  rejected  by  twenty  American   firms,  I took  the manuscript to England  where it was accepted  by Seeker and  Warburg, the  first publisher  to see it. When the book came out and  was reviewed across Canada as well as in England, I felt welcomed by the country  as I had  not been by my own, which took yet another  year to publish  the  book to a silence so familiar  to first novels there.
If I hadn't been living in Canada, my long  apprenticeship might  never  have come to an end. Yet the native Canadian writers all around  me were more often

RULE


bitter at the lack of opportunity in Canada,  the necessity of commanding a market either in England  or the States before they could be heard  here. They felt cut off from the rich markets to the south, claiming that American publishers weren't interested in Canadian material. My own experience made me think  that Ameri­ can publishers  weren't  interested  in American material either  but only in success; for, once I'd  been published in England  and Canada,  American magazine editors began to accept  my work. They  didn't  seem to me prejudiced  against  Canadian settings, only against unknown  writers.
Redbook  once asked me to name the city a thousand  miles from  Seattle  from which  one of  my  characters was driving  and  suggested  Winnipeg.  Winnipeg? The  city a  thousand   miles away  from  Seattle  is San  Francisco,  but  Redbook thought   of  me  as  Canadian  and  therefore  chose  Winnipeg.   After  my  initial surprise, I happily concurred.
When I exchanged  my envied and disliked American citizenship for Canadian, I did  not  take on  the defensive  bitterness that  seemed  to be a  Canadian  birth­ right. At first I felt modestly guilty when I travelled in Europe,  enjoying a friendly welcome I hadn't received as an  ugly American.  Though living in  Canada had changed  me, had  given me a sense of citizenship  I'd  never felt in  the  States,  I knew that  I had  not really become someone else. It helped  me to remember  that one set of my great-grandparents had  gone from  Nova Scotia  to  northern  Cali­ fornia  to settle.  I  was named  for that  great-grandmother. I  had  personal  roots to claim in Canada.
I  had  never  applied  for  an  American  grant.  Educated  in  the  west, I  had  a notion  that  without  any  connection  with  the  eastern  establishment,   I  had  no chance  of success. I had  to apply four times for a Canada Council  grant  before I was given one, but  it was extended  for another  remarkable year during  which I  could  continue  to confirm  myself as a  professional writer  and  serve my craft with the intensity of attention  that is essential for its maturing.
I have since served on juries for Canada  Council. Though women and western­ ers are  not fairly  represented  either on  juries or as successful  candidates,  it  is a quite  remarkably  good system for supporting  artists in  Canada. Canada Council is not a patriarchal charity  as some of the big American foundations seem to me. It is an organization susceptible to change and improvement.
The  Writers'  Union  of  Canada is another  institution  envied  by  Americans
who are just now trying to organize their own. It's very unlikely that  any agent of their  government  will be  willing, as the  Canada Council  is, to  pay  the  travel expenses of every member  of the Writers' Union  to attend  annual general  meet­ ings in or near Toronto or Ottawa. As a result of being able to meet once a year, members from the most remote  regions of the country  have an opportunity to be active  members  and  don't  feel that  the  organization  is really  for  the  benefit of

RULE

the eastern establishment only. Also it gives them  a yearly opportunity to call on their own publishers, on book stores. Though  most of us care about  our  increas­ ing lobbying force on issues like copyright  laws, pay for  public  use of  books in libraries, and rely on the Union to help us with  contract  disputes with  publishers, to organize reading  tours, it is our sense of professional community which is most important to us.
Publishing,  like  all other  business, is suffering  hard   times.  For  perhaps  ten years, aided  by substantial  grants from the government, publishers  were able  to accept Canadian books for the Canadian market  without  having to seek  publish­ ers in either  England  or the States. Now again  Canadian writers  are  having  to find other  markets for their books to be published  in Canada at all. My last two books have not had Canadian publishers because the only one interested  wanted international rights without  having the staff to handle  the  distribution  problems of that larger market. I have also had to go to the States to find publishers willing to reprint  my books and keep them in print for the growing academic  market  for them, both in Canada and the United States.
Canadian  publishers  haven't   yet  taken   full  advantage  of  the   remarkable changes  taking  place both  in Canadian schools and  universities  which  now  for the first time are offering a variety of courses in Canadian literature. Imitating the establishment  publishers in the States,  they  are  trying  to sell books like cottage cheese, the  hardbacks  stamped  "Best read  within  six months,"  the  paperbacks, "Good  for six weeks," thereby losing the entire  academic  market,  for  the  books are out  of print  before there is time  to  put  them  on  reading  lists, and  it often takes years before they are reprinted.  We have too few small  presses staffed well enough  to serve their own backlists as well as they should.  In  the States,  where small  presses have to depend on sales rather  than  grants  to survive, both  writers and readers are at present better served.
Nevertheless,  my  American   reprints   are   noticed   in   the   Canadian  media. Though  too few books written by Canadians are reviewed in newspapers and magazines,  we have better  radio  coverage  than  any  American  writer  can  hope for. Though  we don't  have much TV coverage for selling books, CBC is commis­ sioning scripts for both radio and TV  adaptation of stories and  novels. The  extra income as well as the increased audience has helped a number  of us to stay at our desks.
Very few artists in any country ever make a handsome  living, and  even fewer of those who do make a lasting contribution  to their  cultures.  Canada, with  all its real limitations,  most severe of which is its inferiority  complex, is a remarkably good place to begin a writing career. It also has a greater  opportunity than  many other  countries  to  distinguish  between  those  books  which  are  something  like cottage cheese and  those which are important as part  of our  heritage.  Canada is

RULE


still able to design institutions  on a human  scale. We are increasingly supportive of our gifted young. We are growing in our awareness of the strength  of our own literature. Courses in Canadian literature  are now being offered in universities all over the world.
Most  writers  are  defensive  about  any label  that  has  a  potential  for  limiting
their audience,  whether  it is "woman," "black," "academic," "regional," "popu­ lar,"  or "lesbian." Unlike  some writers, I like the label "Canadian." I  chose it, feel at home with it, and know it travels very well in the world.


















AMELIA

or: Who Do rou Think rou Are? Documentary and Identity in Canadian Literature

Stephen Scobie

AucE MUNRo's TITLE Who  Do You  Think  You  Are!
one of those finely balanced  phrases which subtly shift their  meanings  depending
on which of the six words receives the major stress:

Who  do you think you are? Who do you think you are? Who do you think you are? Who do you think you are? Who do you think you are? Who do you think you are?

These various emphases transform  the phrase from its pejorative  use, to crush presumptuousness,  into  a serious question  on  the  puzzle  of identity.  Is  identity created  by external,  objective forces-what other  people think  you are -or by internal,  subjective  forces-what you yourself think  you are?  If you decide  to alter  your identity  by thinking  yourself into  a  new  role,  how  do  you go about making this new you manifest to the world?
Such questions are pervasive in Munro's  book, and  they surface  even at  points where the attention  might seem to be focused elsewhere. For  instance,  the story "Wild  Swans"  is principally  about  the  bizarre  and  disturbing circumstances  of Rose's sexual abuse by a strange man on a train; yet the last page of the story is almost totally concerned with the puzzle of identity. The  man  has claimed to be a minister, but is not dressed as one:  that is, his assertion of identity  is not backed up by any external  evidence. "Was  he a minister, really,"  Rose wonders, "or  was that only what he said? Flo had mentioned people who were not ministers, dressed up as if they were. Not real ministers dressed as if they were not. Or, stranger  still, men who were not real ministers pretending  to be real but dressed as if they were not.m  It  appears  that  Rose is troubled  more  by the indeterminacy of the  man's identity than  by what he has done to her. Nor is Munro content  to leave the story there:  she  adds  a  half-page  coda  which  pushes  the  puzzle  of identity  to  even more dizzying levels of doubletalk.

SCOBIE


She remembered, because she was in Union  Station,  that  there  was a girl  named Mavis working  here, in the Gift Shop, when Flo was working in the  coffee shop. Mavis had  warts on her eyelids that  looked like they were going  to turn  into sties but  didn't, they  went  away.  Maybe  she had  them  removed,  Flo  didn't   ask. She was very good-looking,  without  them. There  was a  movie star  in  those days she looked a lot like. The  movie star's  name was Frances Farmer.
Frances Farmer.  Rose had never heard of her.
That was the name. And  Mavis went and  bought herself a big hat  that  dipped
over one eye and  a dress entirely  made of lace. She went  off for  the  weekend  to Georgian  Bay,  to a  resort  up  there.  She  booked herself  in  under   the  name  of Florence  Farmer.   To  give  everybody  the  idea  she  was  really  the  other   one, Frances  Farmer, but  calling  herself Florence  because she  was  on  holidays  and didn't  want  to be recognized. She had a little cigarette  holder  that  was black and mother-of-pearl. She could  have been arrested,  Flo said. For  the nerve.
Rose almost  went over to  the Gift  Shop, to see if Mavis  was still there  and  if she  could  recognize  her.  She  thought  it  would  be  an  especially  fine  thing,  to manage a transformation like that. To dare it; to get away with it, to enter on preposterous adventures in your own, but newly named, skin.2

One  could  well argue that  this  brief  passage,  apparently tacked  on  to the  end of a story  about something else, is in fact  the  thematic centre of the  whole  book. Frances Farmer  ( 1914-1970)  was,  as  Munro says, a  movie  star; she  was  very popular for a  brief  period  in  theI 94o's,  but  her  character was  too  independent to fit in well with the star-making machinery of the Hollywood studio system, then at  its  most  brutal and  impersonal. Farmer later  wrote  an  autobiography,  Will There  Really Be A Morning?, and  two  recent  films, starring Susan  Blakely  and Jessica  Lange  respectively, have  recreated the  tragic  and  melodramatic story  of her  life. She was dominated by her fiercely ambitious mother, who,  after  Frances had  collapsed  under the  stress of her  personal  and  professional  conflicts,  had  her committed to a mental hospital. There she  was subjected to  a  partial lobotomy, which  "cured" her  to  the  extent   of  removing her  will  and   her  ability  to  assert herself.  Later she  made one  more  film, and  appeared briefly  as  the  hostess of a television talk show.
The relevance of  this  tragic career   to  Rose  is evident at  several   points,  not least  in the  detail  that  Rose  also appears on  a television  talk  show.  Rose  consis­ tently sees herself as an actress,  playing  a series of increasingly unsatisfactory roles: as child,  as wife, as lover,  as mother-and as actress.  In  the final,  title  story  of the  book,  she  confronts herself  in  the  person  of  Ralph  Gillespie,   who  "does" Milton Homer, and   who  evokes  all  her  doubts  and  ambivalence about acting, about telling stories,  and  about "performing" her various  identities and  roles. The name "Frances" echoes   back   to  Rose's  first  major   example  of  sexual   abuse,  Franny McGill, whose  adolescent incest  with  her  brother is described by  Flo  as "Relations performing."3  The name  that Mavis chooses to both  disguise and  pro-

SCOBIE

claim  herself as Frances  Fanner is Florence:  Flo. Although   Rose's  relation  to Flo does not  reach  the macabre  extremes  of  Frances  Fanner's relation  to  her mother,  it is clear  that  Flo, as the original  audience  for  Rose's stories,  remains to  the  end  the  dominating  influence  on  her  character. These  two  aspects  of Frances  Fanner-her  troubled  career  as an  actress,  and  her  fraught  relation­ ship with her mother-are both thus points of reference for Rose's definition  of her own identity. The tragic outcome of Fanner's personal  conflicts remains as a possibility, or even a threat, to Rose: if she cannot  answer for herself  the question "Who  do you think  you are?" there  are  always other  people ready  to answer  it for her, in potentially disastrous ways.
The  preceding  paragraph indicates some of the directions  which could  be fol­ lowed in developing a full reading of Who Do You  Think You  Are? based on the implications  of the  Frances Fanner reference. That reference  acts in  the  text  as a kind of allusion -albeit a somewhat  esoteric one, since Frances  Farmer's life story would not be as familiar to a contemporary reader as, say, Marilyn  Monroe's
-and its richness depends upon the informed  reader's  awareness of such details
as Farmer's relation  to her mother, her lobotomy, and  the collapse of her career. Amidst  the  welter  of fictitious, false, or  assumed  identities-the molester  who says he is what  he does not appear  to be, Mavis who lays claim  to a false name by disguising it -the historical facts of the "real" Frances  Fanner stand  out as a touchstone, a point of reference to what  we may call the realm of documentable reality.
Munro  uses this "documentary" image of Frances  Fanner as one way to define Rose's  predicament, and  even Rose's identity.  That definition  takes  place  in  a dialectic process: a dialectic between objective  fact and  various forms of  subjec­ tive fiction or interpretation. For this dialectic to work, it is essential that Frances Fanner be an actual,  documented  character, and  that  the  allusion  be  historical rather  than  literary  or mythological. The  appeal  is  to  the  authoritativeness  of fact, to a category of reality which exists outside  and  independent of the  text - admitting, of course, that  as soon as it enters  the text  it becomes mediated, and "part of" the fiction. It is precisely this "dialectic between the objective facts and the subjective  feelings of the  poet"  which  Dorothy  Livesay defined,  in  1g6g, as the key characteristic of what she called "The Documentary Poem : A Canadian Genre."4



LIVESAY  SET OUT   HER  DEFINITION in  a  paper  presented  at the Learned  Societies meeting in June  I g6g; it was published in I 97 I  in Contexts of Canadian  Criticism, edited  by Eli Mandel. Livesay adapted  the  term  "docu­ mentary" from film, specifically from the work of the National  Film Board under

266

SCOBIE


the direction of John  Grierson. The prevalence of the long poem in Canadian lit­ erature has frequently  been noted;  it may in some ways be seen as a psychological response to the sense of scale imposed by the country  itself. Livesay  argued  that the Canadian long narrative poem did not follow either the "epic" pattern,  "con­ cerned with an idealized 'hero,'" or the Chaucerian  pattern, concerned  with "the  development  of individualized characters," or the American  pattern  "where  the emphasis  is on  historical   perspective  and  the  creation   of  a  national   myth."  Rather, she argued,  Canadian poems are  documentary, "based  on  topical  data but held together  by descriptive, lyrical, and didactic  elements."  Theme  becomes more important than  plot; and "our narratives are told not from the point of view of one protagonist,  but rather  to illustrate a precept." Above all, the documentary  poem is characterized by that "dialectic  between the objective  facts and  the sub­ jective feelings of the  poet":  it can never be purely one  or the  other,  but  must always involve an active interplay  between both.5
It  is clear  that  to some extent  what  Livesay was doing  was propagating as a general theory a definition  based on her own practice:  the finest examples of the "documentary poem"  as  Livesay outlined  it are  her  own  works, such  as "Day and  Night"  and  "Call  My People Home"-poems which  she had  collected the previous year in a book entitled  The  Documentaries. Other  convincing examples cited in her essay are Anne  Marriott's "The  Wind  Our  Enemy"  and,  of course,
the  major  narratives of E.  J. Pratt.  A much  less convincing  example,  to which
the essay unfortunately devotes six out of its fifteen pages, is Isabella Valancy Crawford's "Malcolm's Katie":  as fine and  important a  poem  as  "Malcolm's Katie" is, it is not documentary, by any stretch of the definition, and one suspects that  Livesay was using any  excuse to give it some prominence  at  a time  when Crawford  was unjustly  neglected. A positively disastrous example,  however, was provided by the citing of Earle Birney's "David." Livesay's erroneous and incred­ ibly badly worded  assertion  that  "this was no imaginary  story"6   resulted  in legal action  by Birney.  (Indeed, it  is remarkable  that  there  have  been  so  few  legal actions as a result of the "documentary" claims made  by writers.)  Birney's suit, like that  launched by Premier  Lougheed  of Alberta  against  the  CBC over their "docudrama" on the Tar Sands, was settled out of court.
There  are  problems,  then,  with  Livesay's  examples;   her  definition,  though, and  her intuition  in  the  naming  of the form, were brilliant, and  in many  ways prophetic.  In the fifteen years since her talk, there has been a plethora of examples of the "documentary poem."  Not all of them  have followed  every aspect of her definition -most of them,  for instance,  have concentrated on  a  single  protag­ onist-but  all  of  them  have  maintained   the  dialectic  of  objective  fact  and subjective  feeling, and  the  importance of grounding  it in  documentable reality, in the authoritativeness of fact.

SCOBIE

What  follows is a selected list (not a comprehensive  one)  of titles which could now be used as examples for Livesay's theory-all of them published since I969. While Livesay's essay set the theoretical framework, the two books whose success and  prestige established the form in the  practice of recent  Canadian poetry  both appeared  in I 970  (the year between the delivery and  the publication  of Livesay's talk):  Margaret Atwood's  The   journals of Susanna  Moodie  and  Michael  On­ daatje's  The  Collected Works  of Billy the Kid. These  two definitive works depart  from Livesay's definition insofar as they do focus on a single character   (it  might also be argued  that  Atwood's volume was, precisely, an attempt  at  "the creation of a national  myth"), and  they set a  particularly important  precedent  in  using that  character  as the persona, or speaking voice of the poem. "The  effect  is often ironic,"7  Livesay had written;  the irony of the documentary poem was to become the classic dramatic irony of all persona poems, the division between  the  voice of the poem and the implied stance of the author.8  This dramatic irony is the major form taken by the documentary dialectic. At the same time, the technique of the persona  enables  the  author,  and,  vicariously,  the  reader,  "To  dare  it;  to  get away with it, to enter on preposterous adventures in your own, but newly named,  skin."
Nineteen seventy also saw the publication  of George  Bowering's  George, Van­ couver, the first writing, in poetic form, of what  was to become, ten  years later, the novel Burning  Water.  The  relationship  between  the documentary  poem and the  historical  novel  (or  the dramatized   biography)  is a  subtle  one.  The  major advantage of the  poetic form  is that  it is more  amenable  to the  subjective  side of the dialectic;  it allows more scope (in  tone,  rhythm, imagery)  for  the  ironic interpretation to be made manifest. Some "novels"  are more "poetic" than  others, however;  so, though  I  would  hesitate to  include  in  this  discussion the  massive and inspiring novels of Rudy Wiebe, such as The Temptations of Big Bear ( I973)  and The  Scorched Wood  People (I 977), I do include Bowering's Burning Water  ( I98o),  Ondaatje's Coming   Through   Slaughter    (I 976), Timothy   Findley's Famous Last Words  ( I98I ), and, indeed, before any of them,  Leonard  Cohen's great and  prophetic  Beautiful Losers ( I g66) , in this respect as in so many  others years ahead of its time.
By  I973,  the  form  was in  full  swing.  In  that  year  Frank  Davey  published The  Clallam,  a  poem  which  simultaneously  stands  in  the  tradition   of  Pratt's shipwreck  poems  and  carries out  a  caustic  deconstruction of  Pratt's poetic.  In I974, David Helwig explored historic roots of the  New World  in Atlantic  Cross­ ings, while a deep sense of the history of place pervades both AI Purdy's  In Search of Owen  Roblin  and  Daphne  Marlatt's Steveston. The  biographical   approach was resumed  in  1975  with  Florence  McNeil's   Emily, again   using  the  central character  (Emily Carr)  as persona. Nineteen seventy-six, as previously noted, saw

SCOBIE

Ondaatje's Coming Through  Slaughter, as well as Gary  Geddes' invented  life of Paul Joseph  Chartier, the man  who tried to blow up  the  Houses of Parliament, in War & Other Measures. Don  Gutteridge's  Tecumseh  concluded  his tetralogy of poems on Canadian history. Also in 1976, one of the  purest  examples of the documentary form is to be found in Sid Stephen's  Beothuck Poems, dealing  with the genocide of the Beothuck  Indians  in Newfoundland  and  focusing on the girl Shawnadithit, the  last surviving  member  of the  tribe.  In  1977,  E. D.  Blodgett presented  the  life of  Vincent  van  Gogh  in  Sounding,  while  Douglas  Barbour explored the life of a Canadian painter  in Visions of My  Grandfather. In  1979, Monty  Reid used his immigrant  grandfather's memoir  as the base document  for Karst Means Stone. My own McAlmon's  Chinese Opera, although  not published until   rg8o,  had   been  written   three  years  earlier;   198o's  Governor   General's Awards,  going  to  McAlmon's Chinese Opera and  Burning Water,  were  domi­ nated  by the documentary impulse. In  rg8r, Jon Whyte's  Homage, Henry Kelsey paid tribute  to the first English poet west of Ontario.  In 1982, Gwendolyn  Mac­  Ewen assumed the persona of Lawrence of Arabia in The  T. E. Lawrence Poems, while  Doug  Beardsley  also crossed genders  to  write  Kissing the  Body  of  My Lord: The Marie Poems, the life and  times of Marie  de !'Incarnation.  Nineteen eighty-three  saw  Ted  Plantas' Passchendaele, a  detailed  account  of  the  World War  I battle,  assuming  a fictitious and  anonymous  protagonist.  Hovering  some­ where  in  the  background  of all these is the great  unwritten, or  "failed" docu­ mentary of the period, Phyllis Webb's The Kropotkin Poems.
From all these examples, it may now be possible to assemble a new definition, or at least a description,  of the documentary  poem as it has evolved in  Canada in the fifteen years since Livesay's essay. It is a long poem, or sequence of poems, usually of book length, and narrative  in structure.  The  events which make up this narrative   are  documented, historical  happenings,   although   the  poet  will  fre­ quently  modify or shuffie these events, or add  to them  purely  fictional  incidents. The  poem often focuses on a single character  who took part  in these events, and this character's biography   (up  to and sometimes beyond  his or her  death)   pro­ vides the structure of the book. Many of the poems adopt  the persona or speaking voice of this central  character. The  idea of the  "document"  remains  within  the poems, as a source  of historical  fact,  and  as an  element  of  intertextuality: the central characters are frequently  artists (writers or painters), or else keep journals, draw maps, or in some other way produce "collected works" which the poem may either quote  directly  or else refer to. The  relationship  of  poet  to persona  is one of dramatic irony,  and  this irony is the  major  form  assumed  by the  "dialectic between the objective  facts and  the subjective feelings of the  poet,"  which  con­ tinues  to be, as  Livesay  perceived,  the  central  characteristic of  the  genre.  The  documentary poem  has  close affinities  with  both  the  historical  novel  and   the

SCOBIE

"docudrama," but the poetic form remains, in most cases, the most effective way of registering the subjective force of the dialectic.
The  obvious question  to ask is why? What  are  the  attractions of  this form, that it should  dominate  recent Canadian writing  to the  extent  that  it does?
Some  of the  answers  are  rather  pragmatic   and  superficial,  but  they  cannot entirely be ignored.  Success breeds success, and  the  prestige of The  Journals of Susanna Moodie and The Collected Works of Billy the Kid was bound  to attract imitators. Publishers tend to prefer a volume with a clearly defined  (and exploit­ able)  subject  and  form. Once  the  poet has  made  the  initial  choice of  topic,  a large  store  of  material-incident,  character, imagery-may  be  obtained   by research rather  than  by inspiration.  A good research  project  is always nice for a Canada Council grant.
Imitation  may  be restated,  on a somewhat  more  exalted  level, as the  aware­ ness of tradition. Once a form is named, its possibilities are opened  up, liberated,  made widely available. The  poet may assume the reader's familiarity with certain conventions. The  works within  a tradition  build  upon  and  refer  to  each  other. Speaking personally, I can say that  in writing McAlmon's Chinese Opera I was very  conscious  of  my  predecessors, and   the  book  contains  several  deliberate  (though  I hope unobtrusive) echoes and  allusions to  Ondaatje. How  accidental  is  it  that   so  many  of  these  books-Atwood,  Ondaatje   (Coming   Through Slaughter),   Blodgett,  Reid,  Scobie,  Bowering    (Burning   Water),  MacEwen, Beardsley, Plantas-are divided into three sections?
Apart  from  these  pragmatic   considerations,  however,  the  major  reasons  for the  attraction and  the  usefulness of  the  form  may  be  summarized   under  two headings: a fascination with the interplay between fact and fiction, history and imagination; and  the  attempt   to  define  the  identity  of  the  self by  a  dialectic process of contrast to the other.



l:E DOCUMENTARY POEM begins with  an appeal  to the  au­ thoritativeness  of fact.  Many  writers in  recent  years  have  felt  that,  as  Michael Ondaatje said in a recent interview, "Fiction  can't  compete  with  real  people or events; that's  why I'm  drawn  to historical subjects."9 "I tell only what  I know," Frank  Davey  wrote  in  rg6.h  "and  speculate,  never.  Only  with  the  validity  of fact, and the form of the natural  object, can a poem  hope  to survive in a world that  admits only the real.mo This is an extreme  view, and  few writers  (including  the later Davey)  would accept it in quite so unqualified  a form.  Its ancestry is in Pound  ("The natural  object is always the adequate symbol")  and  in  Williams ("No  ideas but in things")  ; looking much further  back, we might speculate  that the documentary poem is a last-ditch  defence against  Plato's  accusation  that  all

SCOBIE


poets  are  liars.  Several  authors of documentary poems  have  taken  refuge  in  the line that  "Truth is stranger than fiction," and  have been  at some  pains  to explain to audiences that  the  more  implausible stories in their  poems  actually happened, they wouldn't have dared to invent  them.
Ten  years later, in  1974,  Davey  returned to the  idea  of  the  "validity of fact" in his poem The  Clallam :

This is not a documentary of the Clallam's
sinking. There  are documents
but no objective witnesses
of the Clallam's sinking. The survivors
were not objective. I am not objective. Only the objects we survive in.
All the stinking white corpses.11

Davey  is here  using  "documentary" to  mean  a  purely  objective form,  which  is not  of  course  the  sense  I am  proposing for  it.  He  rightly   insists  on  the  non­ objectivity of the author -and indeed,  The  Clallam goes on to become a forceful  and  unambiguous expression  of  Davey's  personal  anger  at  the  events  he  is de­ scribing. His technique, however, remains  "objective" to the extent  that he rigidly avoids  the  transformations of metaphor. In  The  Clallam,  as  in  his  other   work, Davey's poetic  imprint is to  be  found   in  tone,  rhythm, selection  of  incident - but  not in image  or metaphor. He remains true,  always, to the Poundian precept.
In  this  respect, The  Clallam  is part  of Davey's  critical assault  on  E.  J. Pratt.
In  his article  "E. J. Pratt:  Rationalist Technician," published in  the  same  year
as The  Clallam, Davey  goes over  the  familiar ground of Pratt's love  for detailed research, or  technical vocabulary of  all  sorts,  and  for  historical accuracy;  but Davey sees all this as part  of Pratt's attempt to give a false impression  of confident omniscience. "Pratt's rule  seeins  to  be,"  Davey  writes,  "that if  an  event  is not totally  knowable (and no event  is),  one must  fake total  knowledge."12 The major technique for this fakery  is metaphor:

Metaphor in Pratt's work tends to be a restricting device. The  subject of the meta­ phor  is compared  to a  term  or set of terms either  less complex  than  the  subject itself, or possessing a complexity irrelevant  to the subject. The  effect is to simplify or rationalize  the subject,  to make it  appear  definable and  comprehensible when it has been neither defined nor comprehended. The subject is presented  as if "dealt  with"  when  in  fact  its  own  particularity  and  individuality  have   been  totally avoided.18

Davey  is essentially  correct  in his analysis  of the evasiveness  of Pratt's metaphors, and  he makes  a strong case for  the  need  to  preserve  the  integrity of the  factual subject; but  the  parenthetical concession  that  no event  is totally  knowable  does

SCOBIE

indicate, again, the need for a dialectical definition of the documentary-such  as that exemplified, in fact, by The  Clallam.
Indeed, it  must  be admitted   that   all  this  talk  about   "objective   fact"   and
"historical  reality"  rests on  very queasy  philosophical  foundations.   The  appeal to "the  validity of fact" is a response to a world which simultaneously  accords its highest  prestige to "scientific objectivity"  and  acknowledges  the  relativity  of all perceptions.  The  whole notion of "fact" may itself be no more than  a fiction, a linguistic construct -and thus subject, like all linguistic constructs,  to the decon­ structive  play of Derridean  "differance." The  poetic reconstruction  of  fact  which goes on in the documentary  poem may then  be taken  as a model for  our  prag­ matic  daily  use of all language-continuing, as it must,  despite  all  theoretical inadequacies.
The  relativity of perception, and  the indeterminacy of fact,  are admitted most
openly  in  the  writing  of history.  It  is a  commonplace   that,  since  the  winners write  the  history  books, they  periodically  have  to  be  rewritten, in  belated  ac­ knowledgement  of the losers. Leonard  Cohen  casts his savage eye on this  process in Beautiful  Losers, which is already  a kind  of meta-documentary,  commenting  on  the  form  in  its  distinctions  between  l's  constipated  ineffectuality   and   F's contemptuously easy mastery  of  historiography, as  well  as  in  F's  and  Edith's  outrageous  use of Pratt's  "Brebeuf  and  His Brethren" as sado-masochistic   por­ nography.  Cohen's warning that  historiography  is simply another  arena  for power was especially timely inI g66, as Canada prepared  to launch  its Centennial project of self-validation. That  period's interest in history  per se (we've  been around  for a hundred years; we must amount  to something)  made  a major  contribution to the emergence of the documentary  poem.
So, while the attraction  of the documentary may begin with  an  appeal  to the authoritativeness of fact, consideration of the difficulties involved in ever satisfac­ torily writing fact leads quickly to that  borderblur area between fact and fiction, in which the categories collapse into each other  (all statements  of fact are necessarily fictive;  a well-told  lie takes on  the  authority of  history), and  the  line between them  exists only to be transgressed. Thus  Gary  Geddes,  in  his  note  to War  & Other  Measures, writes of his book that  "what truth  it may  have lies [the pun is, presumably,  intended)  not in the  'facts,'  all of which  are  fabricated, but  rather in the psychology, which has been revealed over and  over again  in Canada since
1966 and  which could not have been invented."14  Similarly,  in the Afterword  to Kissing the Body of My Lord, Doug Beardsley writes:  "I wish to stress that  while many  of the  events, and much  of the language,  come from  Marie's  letters, and I  consider  her  to  be  co-author  of  the  book,  a  very  different,  fictional  Marie emerges  from  these  pages,  a  Marie  of  my  own  making.1015   And  in  my  own McAlmon's Chinese Opera, after quoting Livesay's definition of the documentary,

SCOBIE


I conclude that  "it  will be best if the reader  accepts  the  McAlmon of these poems as a character in a historical fiction." 6
The most  extreme (and joyous)   transgressions  into  the  realm  of fiction  occur in the works of Michael Ondaatje and  George  Bowering  (and so perhaps it is no accident that these  are  the  authors who  carry  the  stance   and   concerns   of  the documentary poem  over into  the form  of the poetic novel) . Whereas the authors' notes which  I quoted above  may  be taken  at  face  value,  one can  only  regard   as the   most   outrageous  understatement  Ondaatje's  straight-faced  claim,   in   the "Credits" to The  Collected  Works  of Billy the  Kid,  that he  merely  "edited,  re­ phrased, and  slightly  reworked" his source  materiaP 7  Coming  Through Slaughter blithely  predates by some  twenty  years  the  death of  Isadora Duncan, and  con­ trives to import a disguised  Billy the Kid,  some twenty  years  after his  death, into  Buddy  Bolden's asylum.  Most  playful of all is George  Bowering's glorious  travesty  of facts  throughout Burning  Water, imputing a homosexual  relationship to Van­ couver   and   Quadra  ("Give us  a  little  hug,  now") 18     and  quite   unashamedly killing off his hero  before  he returns, as he historically did,  to England.
Burning  Water  is full  of  deliberate anachronisms, bad   jokes,  and   concealed
quotations from  other  writers ("'The sea,' said  Menzies ... in mid  ocean,  'is also a garden'") .19 These  elements operate in the novel as one form  of intertextuality, the general  condition of all texts as existing in relation  to other  texts, and  also as a travesty20   of  the  whole  idea   of  the  document. The   document  is  the  point   of intersection, for  the  documentary poem,  between  its equivocal realms  of history and  imagination. The document "proves" the  historicity  of the  subject: but  the document is itself  no  more  than  another instance  of  writing,  and  is not  exempt from its own context of equivocation. Bowering  acknowledges this through the technique of travesty; Timothy Findley  "forges"  documents (the  supposed "transcripts" of taped recollections of Lady  Juliet d'Orsey in  The  Wars)   or  else presents  them  in  images  of  extreme contrivance  (the  "writing on  the  wall"  in Famous Last Words).
In  the  poems,  the  documents occur  in  many  forms  and  are  treated in  many ways. They  may  include actual historical  accounts (as,  quite  extensively,  in  Don Gutteridge's Tecumseh), or  transcriptions of  interviews  and  oral  history   (as  in Daphne Marlatt's Steveston). Works  created   by  the  historical character about whom  the  poem  is written may  function as "documents," whether they  are  di­ rectly  quoted or  only  referred  to.  These  may  include novels,  letters,  journals, autobiographies, or other poems. Visual  material may also be used as documents: the  paintings, for  instance, of  Gauguin or  Emily  Carr. Doug  Beardsley's   book contains reproductions of seventeenth-century lithographs; Daphne Marlatt's text is counterpointed by  Robert  Minden's photographs;  perhaps most  dramatically


273

SCOBIE

of  all,  Sid  Stephen's Beothuck  Poems  incorporates  the  surviving  drawings  of
Shawnadithit herself.
This  documentary material may  be quoted directly, as prose, or else presented as found  poetry  (McAlmon's Chinese Opera  arranges as found  poems  the  text of a  rejection  letter  from  an  English  publisher, and   a  list  of  Montparnasse street names). Monty Reid  begins each  poem  in  Karst  Means  Stone  with  a quotation from  his  grandfather's  memoir. Jon   Whyte   arranges his  whole  sequence  as  a setting  for the  "jewel" of Henry  Kelsey's original poem,  which  he quotes  in full. Every  poem  in Gwendolyn MacEwen's book  is an  intricate weave  of echoes  and quotations from  Seven Pillars of Wisdom and  other  writings  ofT. E.  Lawrence. Susanna Moodie hovers  in the  background of  Margaret Atwood's work,  a  con­ tinuous  presence,  though there  is very little  in  the  way  of  direct  quotation.
One  of the  loveliest  instances  of  reworking of  a  document occurs   in  E.  D. Blodgett's Sounding. Blodgett  takes  a famous passage  from  one  of  Van   Gogh's letters and  uses it as the source for a graceful  and  moving lyric:
to look at  the stars always makes me dream,  as simply  as I dream  over the  black dots of a map representing  towns and villages. Why, I ask myself, should  the shin­ ing dots of the sky not be as accessible as the  black  dots on  the  map  of  France?  If we take the  train  to get to Tarascon  or  Rauen, we take death  to  reach  a star. One  thing  undoubtedly  true  in this reasoning  is this,  that  while  we  are  alive  we cannot get to a star, any more than  when we are dead  we can  take the train.
So  it  seems  to  me  possible that  cholera,  gravel,  phthisis  and  cancer  are  the celestial means of locomotion,  just as steamboats,  omnibuses  and  railways are  the terrestrial  means. To die quietly of old age would be to go there on foot.21

I stretched my hand across the map
of france

to touch
the black o's of towns peppered  there

it was a map vincent as you had scanned

the day you saw
the dark towns of france seattered back

against the sky reduced again to dots

when you're dead there is no train
to tarascon

SCOBIE


you said
and when you live
the other train

is stopped

with what eye now do you stare
upon the stars
walking forever
through our returning nights
within the white

and fired towns gazing upon trains moving minutely

across the map of france approaching
stops forever out

of tarascons so
unknown within the clouds.22

In all these cases, the reader's appreciation  will be greatly enhanced  by a knowl­ edge  of the  original  source  and  context.  The  document   is the  necessary  link, provided   by  the  author,  between  the  reader   and   the  "real"  material.    The document  guarantees the  accessibility of the facts on  which  the  poem  is based:  the  reader  is always free  to check out for  herself the  newspaper  reports  of  the sinking of The Clallam, or the letters of Marie de l'Incarnation. (Whether or not the  reader  actually  does this  is in  a sense  irrelevant;   what  is important is the reader's  awareness  of the  theoretical  possibility of doing  so.)  The  documentary poem is never  an  enclosed, self-sufficient creation;  the  reader  is actively invited to  repeat  the  poet's  research  and  engagement  with  the  facts. The  poem  works both ways:  it directs both  poet and  reader  towards  a fuller understanding of an historical  character, event, or epoch, but  it also directs them  back  to their  own subjectivity, to their definitions of themselves.



ALTHOUGH MANY  OF   THESE  POEMS do  treat  subjects  di­ rectly related to Canada and  Canadian history, a surprising  number  do not. Billy the Kid,  Buddy  Bolden, Vincent  Van  Gogh, Paul  Gauguin,  Robert  McAlmon,  T. E. Lawrence-the choice of these figures seems at times almost  wilfully cos­ mopolitan. What  is a Canadian poet doing writing  about  an  American  outlaw,  Paris in the twenties, the war in Arabia?  But in another  sense, this separation  in


275

SCOBIE

space  is no greater than  the separations in time  (between the  twentieth and  the nineteenth centuries, say,  between  the  modernist sensibility  of Margaret Atwood and  the Victorian sensibility of Susanna Moodie) or in gender   (Sid Stephen  writ­ ing about  Shawnadithit, Doug  Beardsley  adopting the  persona of Marie). What they all have  in common  is a sense of alterity:  the  documentary  poem  opens  the way to the other,  the opposite.
Canada as  a  culture  has  been  accustomed  to  a  dialectical  process  of   self­ definition, to  identifying its own  characteristics in  terms  of  what  it  is  not:   not British,  not  French, not  American. Livesay's   essay  defines  the  Canadian  long poem  in precisely this way, in terms  of other  national traditions to  which  it  does not  conform. To  take on a persona  may  indeed  be, as Munro says, "To dare  it; to get away  with  it, to enter  on  preposterous adventures in your  own,  but  newly named, skin"; but  the  persona  is also  a  mirror, whose  very  alterity   reflects  the image of the other  who is/is  not yourself.
In  the brief poem  which  prefaces  The  journals of Susanna  Moodie, and  which
thus  stands,  ambiguously, outside  or inside  the  speaking voice of  the  sequence/ 3
AtwoodjMoodie writes:

I take this picture of myself and with my sewing scissors cut out the face.

Now it is more accurate:

where my eyes were, every-
thing appears.24

The   "picture of  myself"  may  refer  either   to  the  photograph of  Moodie which appears in the cover collage, or to the whole  book;  the  "myself" is most obviously Moodie, but  may  also  apply   to  Atwood, substituting  her   persona   for  herself. Cutting out  her  own  face,  Atwood   allows  Moodie's to  show  through-or  vice versa. The "every-   / thing" which  appears in  the  poems  is a  view  of  the  nine­ teenth-century pioneer  experience seen in the  more  contemporary terms  of  "para­ noid  schizophrenia." While  the  biography  may  be  Moodie's, the  voice  is  At­ wood's: when  the  protagonist says, "I refuse  to  look  in  a  mirror,1125  the  reader  may well wonder  which face she would in fact see there. Moodie provided Atwood  with  a  means  of  defining   her  history,  her  cultural  tradition  and   thus   herself;  indirectly, this book is fully as personal  a volume  of  poetry  as Power Politics.
One  fairly  minor  detail  which  attests  to  the  self-defining aspect  of  the  docu­
mentary poem  is the  tendency of the  writers  to make  "personal appearances" in their  works. Sid Stephen closes his sequence  with  a brief section  describing his own dsit to  Newfoundland, where  he  buys  a  keychain   featuring a  plastic  Beothuck,

SCOBIE


made in Taiwan, and speculates which party Shawnadithit would vote for in the upcoming  provincial  election.  In  McAlmon's Chinese  Opera,  the  list of  Mont­ parnasse street  names includes  not only the addresses of famous  bars and  writers of the twenties, but  also the street on which  I  myself lived in  Paris  in  1975-76. The  more  spectacular "personal   appearances" of Bowering  and  Ondaatje will be discussed shortly.  All such  details  are  important,   as assertions  of  the  poet's presence in the work, the personal applicability  of even the most remote historical material.
As Atwood seeks to define her cultural  inheritance, so poets who use their own family history seek to define personal roots. "What I  know,    so little  really,    of
you  I & your  life,"  writes  Douglas  Barbour,  addressing  his grandfather,  whom
he knows only from  a handful  of landscape  paintings. The  whole  book, Visions of My  Grandfather, moves between the poles of what  is known  and  what  is not known,  what  can  be shared,  inherited,  or  passed on  through   art  and  what  is ineluctably  distant,  closed off by time. The  prairie landscape  is shared -

irecognize you grandfather    your great love for the land shines thru you knew it iknow    & ido it ilook at it too with new eyes because of you26

-and the knowledge is passed on through  the documents, in this case the grand­ father's  paintings, which "i share with you    long dead I grandfather,    whenever i lift up mine  eyes unto  the  hills I above my desk." Yet the  final  image  of the
sequence is of a great secret, a withholding: the Sun Dance  which his grandfather witnessed but never described, never painted.
In  Karst  Means  Stone,  Monty  Reid  also lives through  a family  history, and
speaks in his grandfather's persona:  but  in a late  poem,  "Molly's  Translation," he enters as himself-"my point  of view, the youngest   I son"-and  when  he makes the  transition  back  into  the  persona -"and  I  (Samuel  Karst  now)" - the effect is less of clarifying distinct voices than  of identifying  them.27
The  writers of documentary poems speak frequently  of a sense of "possession" by the voices they assume.  I  can testify to this myself in the  case of McAlmon, and  I have heard  Gwendolyn  MacEwen  speak in similar terms about  Lawrence. In  his Preface  to Passchendaele, Ted  Plantas  writes:  "The character that  acts as narrator in this work introduced  himself to me through  a poem.... We were beginning  to find sustenance  in each other  and share a common  energy of mind and emotion that  translated  into language."28  This is reminiscent of Doug Beards­ ley's description  of Marie  as the "co-author" of his poems. Paradoxically, such a "possession" can  lead  to a freedom,  a liberation  of the  writer  to imagine,  or to be, aspects of his or her own personality which could not be expressed in the first­ person lyric. This freedom extends as far as death itself: the documentary persona speaks from beyond the grave. George Bowering's subtitle for George, Vancouver

SCOBIE

-"a  discovery  poem" -describes  not  only  the  immediate  subject  of  George Vancouver  exploring the West Coast but  also the whole experience  of the docu­ mentary  poet  discovering  (as opposed  to  the  fiction  writer  inventing)   what  is already there, in the factual material and also in his or her self.
Bowering's  presence is only implicit  in  the  poem,  which  ends  "Let  us say  I
this is as far as I, George, I have travelled."29  But in the  novel, Burning  Water,
he is a full protagonist:
When I came to live in Vancouver, I  thought  of Vancouver, and  so geography involved my name too, George Vancouver. ... What could I do but write a book filled with history and myself, about these people and this place ?30
It's a good definition of the documentary-"a book filled with  history and  my­ self" -and it stresses the key role of the author  as the creator of a historical past. "Without a storyteller, George Vancouver  is just another  dead  sailor."31  So the storyteller is constantly present in his story, walking through  the rain of Trieste, or "sitting  down in that  chair in that  tax  write-off study,  producing."32   Even  when there is no direct reference to Bowering as a character, he reminds  us of his pres­ ence in the jokes, the literary allusions, the anachronisms, the caustic commentary  of the observing Indians,  and the increasingly drastic distortions of  historical fact. One  can sense, also, an increasing indulgence  for the character of  Captain Van­ couver:  Bowering moves closer to his namesake  as the novel  progresses, and  the ending is genuinely tragic.
Another  variation  on  the  possible relationships  between  author   and  persona is to be found in Gwendolyn MacEwen's The  T. E. Lawrence  Poems. MacEwen has always displayed a strong attraction for the exotic, highly coloured  and emo­ tional life of Greece, Egypt, and  Arabia; and  in the short stories of N oman,  she attempts  to infuse that sense into Canada itself, mythologizing  Mackenzie  King, and  metamorphosing the country's  very name  into  the  alterity  of Kanada. The Lawrence  poems, then, are clearly personal  as well as  historical;  Lawrence  en­ ables MacEwen  to explore the psychological attractions of violence in very much the same  way  as Billy the  Kid  did  for  Ondaatje. The  Lawrence   poems  are  a brilliant  impersonation,  and  often draw very closely on Lawrence's  own  writing, and  yet, possibly because of that  very  sense of strangeness,  they  are  completely identifiable  as  Gwendolyn  MacEwen  poems.  Lawrence,   for  all  the  wealth  of documented   detail  that  surrounds  him,  remains  a  mysterious  and  inaccessible personality;  the  poems, for all  their  lucidity  and  vividness, never  dissipate  that mystery.
In  the same way as one can  understand the  qualities,  both  of attraction and of  alterity,  which  drew  MacEwen   to  Lawrence,  one  can  understand   Phyllis Webb's  attraction to the "saintly ... Prince  in his dungeon,"33  Peter  Kropotkin (I 842- I 92 I ) , Russian anarchist,  writer,  and  geographer. Kropotkin's long years

SCOBIE


in  prison  provided Webb with  a documentary image  for  her  own  concerns  with confinement, restriction, silence,   and   failure.   Her   long-projected  and    (as  she herself says)  legendary volume, The  Kropotkin  Poems, is itself a "failure," in that it  was  never  completed, though  the  fragments published in  Wilson's  Bowl  are among Webb's finest works, that  is to say, among the finest  poems ever  published
in Canada. "Consider the dead  I for whom we make elegies,"  Webb writes in her
portrait "Kropotkin," "how they  differently   I instruct us."34   The   lines  might serve  as a  motto for  the  whole  documentary impulse. Section   II of  "Poems of
Failure" provides  the  incisive  moments of historical  detail  (significantly, mostly moments of disguised identity) :
Kropotkin, old Prince Peter
with your forty barges on the Amur with your hammer  in Finland
dressed up in your merchant's  costume dressed up as a page de chambre dressed up as an eight-year old Persian Prince with real jewels in your belt for
Madame Nazimova 'who was a very beautiful
woman.'35

Part  III makes  the  transition to the  poet  herself,  through an  image  of reversal: "As  above,  so below."38   Ultimately, Webb's own  sense  of failure  denies  her  the possibility of accepting Kropotkin as a full persona:

The  simple profundity of a deadman  works at my style. I am impoverished.  He the White Christ.  Not a case of identification. Easier to see myself in the white cat asleep on the bed. Exile.37

One  is left, then,  with a series of documentary images  of "Solitary Confinement"
-Socrates drinking hemlock, Dostoevsky in the  House  of the  Dead, Ezra  Pound "under the  Pisan  sunfire," the  children   of  Treblinka -and  the  poet's  appeal, "give  me I a face."38  In  contrast to the  confidence  with  which  Atwood  cuts  out
Moodie's face  to substitute one of her own making,  Webb's poems  (which, despite their ostensible  "failure," cut  to far deeper  levels of doubt and  affirmation) admit the crisis of self-definition from  which the documentary poem springs.
Perhaps the  most  dramatic example of that  crisis, apart from  Webb,  is to  be
found in Michael Ondaatje's Coming  Through Slaughter.  After  Buddy  Bolden's collapse at  the  height  of his parade, Ondaatje introduces a passage  describing his own  visit to  New  Orleans, "tak[ing] fast  bad  photographs into  the  sun.'' 39   The stress here is on the similarity between  persona  and author, perceived or intuitively grasped across the broken  glass divisions of alterity.

When he went mad  he was the same age I am now.... When  I read  he stood in front of mirrors  and  attacked  himself, there was the shock of memory.  For  I had


279

SCOBIE

done that. Stood, and with a razor-blade cut into cheeks and forehead, shaved hair. Defiling people we did not wish to be.40

In  the final pages of Coming  Through Slaughter, Ondaatje tries desperately  to return  Bolden to the safe distance of pure objectivity,  the "thin  sheaf of  informa­ tion"41 from  which  he had  forced his way into  his author's  imagination. Tables of chronology,  transcripts  of interviews,  extracts  from  A  Brief History  of East Louisiana State Hospital, tape recordings of old jazz musicians who scarcely men­ tion Bolden at all:  all show the depths of Bolden's fall, and  all hold him at arm's length  from  the  author's  awareness  of  that  moment   when  "[I]   push  my  arm forward and spill it through the front of your mirror and clutch mysel£."42
"Drawn to opposites, even in music we play. In  terror  we lean in the direction that is most unlike us."43 These lines sum up the ambivalence, in all of Ondaatje's
writings,  towards  "my  heroes,"  his "white   dwarfs":  Billy, Buddy,  his  father. Running  in the Family is the most extended exercise in self-definition  by dialectic with the other.  What  Ondaatje does openly, all the  documentarists do  more  or less implicitly.  The  authors  are  drawn   towards   their  opposites,  the  images  of alterity, setting between them the distances of era, country, gender, yet always recognizing  in  the  image  something  of themselves,  a  territory  that   awaits  dis­ covery. And in the intensity of the documentary's dialectic,  the exchange becomes complete;   possession occurs;  the  mirrors  shatter; the  barriers  break  down.  As Robert McAlmon  (or his author) says at the end of his life:

I am watching my face in the mirror collapsing: not even my eyes
can keep their distance.••

IHAVE  DEFINED THE  DOCUMENTARY mainly  in  terms  of the long poem, or the  poetic novel; but obviously the  documentary impulse  may  be present in many forms:  in fiction, in drama,  in the whole interesting  genre of the
"work  poem."45 As I began this essay by taking  an  example  from  a short  story, I  would  like  to  end  it,  by  way of symmetry,  with  another   illustration  of  the workings of the documentary impulse outside the field of the long poem, this time
in song.
Hejira  (1976) 46   is perhaps the most successfully integrated of all Joni  Mitch­ ell's albums.  Its  central  theme  is flight,  and  the  ambivalence of  the  notion  is summed  up in the title itself:  Mohammed's journey from  Mecca  to  Medina  was both  an  escape, a running  away, and  the  precondition of spiritual  fulfilment,  a running  to. Every song on the album speaks of travel,  and  of  Mitchell's  compul­ sion towards it: she is "A prisoner of the white lines on the freeway," seeking the


280

SCOBIE

"refuge  of the  roads."  Proposing  a truce  with  her errant  lover, she says, "You lay down  your sneaking  around  the  town, honey  I And  I'll  lay down  the  high­ way." On  the  jacket illustration,  her own  black cloak becomes  transparent  to a
picture of a limitless desert highway;  in another  photographic  image she extends her arms like the wings of "a black crow flying I In a blue sky." The ambivalence of flight as escape as against flight as fulfilment is further  explored in songs which
balance  Mitchell  against other characters: her friend Sharon,  who has opted  for home  and  security;  the  old  jazz man  Furry,  who  rejects  Mitchell's  interest  as that of a rich dilettante whose "limo is shining on his shanty street"; or the arche­ typal wanderer, trickster, Coyote. The  richest song on the album,  which contains  all these ambivalences  within  one perfect documentary  image,  is  "Amelia."
Amelia  Earhart ( 1898-1937)   was the first woman  to fly across the  Atlantic, in  1928.  She  was a  pioneer  in several areas  of aviation,  making  solo crossings of the Atlantic  ( 1932)  and of the Pacific ( 1935). In 1937, she and co-pilot Fred Noonan  were attempting a round-the-world trip when their plane vanished  with­ out trace in the South  Pacific. There  have been persistent rumours  that  the  flight involved  espionage  activities,  and  that  the  disappearance  may  not  have  been accidental; and  also that  Earhart is still alive, living  under  an  assumed  name somewhere  in  the  United  States.  In  Joni  Mitchell's  concert  film,  Shadows  and Light, the  performance of "Amelia" is accompanied  by a  montage  of historical photographs of Amelia Earhart.
The song opens with a picture of the singer-protagonist  at her most characteris­
tic, travelling:

I was driving across the burning desert
When I spotted six jet planes
Leaving six white vapor trails across the bleak terrain
It was the hexagram of the heavens
It was the strings of my guitar
Amelia, it was just a false alarm

The  "six  jet planes"  are presumably  (because of their close formation)  military, and  so provide  a vague  echo of the  putatively  military  nature  of Earhart's  last flight. They present an image of flight higher and more distant, unattainable, than anything  yet achieved by the singer (or by Amelia) , yet she links herself to them by the repetition  of their  pattern  in the six strings of her guitar: music is for her the medium  of flight.  In  the  I Ching, the  hexagram  of six unbroken  lines is a sign of creative  power, usually male-both  the singer and  Amelia intrude  upon the stereotypically  male preserves of flight, travel, exploration.  The  song's concise and brilliant  conjunction of the planes, the guitar, and the hexagram  suggests the aspirations  of its characters  (flight, music, creativity,  discovery)  along with their dangers. The  recurring  chorus-line -"Amelia, it was  just a false alarm" -re-

SCOBIE

tains an open-ended  indeterminacy  of meaning,  due  to the  lack of specific  ref­ erence for "it," but is also a repeated  reassurance of mutual support.  The possible dangers  of flight  (Amelia's  death)   may  be  no  more  than   "false"  alarms   (the  rumours of Amelia's continued  existence).  Or  the falseness of the alarm  may  be because the flight itself is worth it, whatever the fall.
The  following stanzas continue  to outline  the singer's  restlessness and  dissatis­ faction. Travel  provides "A song so wild and  blue I It scrambles time and seasons if it gets thru  to you." The  singer reveals that  she is travelling  to  escape a lover
who has  (in  a line that stumbles  expressively over  its reluctant rhythm)  made "His  sad request of me to kindly stay away": for  her, the  road  is both  "cursed and charmed," as it leads her to a freedom she isn't at all sure she wants. Through­ out  these stanzas,  Amelia  remains  as a  constant   reference  in  the  chorus  line, whose undefined  sense of reassurance  is clearly  directed  by the  singer  as much towards  herself as towards  Amelia.  (Earhart's fate  in  the  South  Pacific is also
perhaps  hinted  at in the lines "Where  some have found  their  paradise  I Others
just come to harm.")
The  historical  Amelia  does not occupy  the  foreground   of  the  text  until  the fifth stanza :

A ghost of aviation
She was swallowed by the sky
Or by the sea, like me she had a dream to fly
Like Icarus ascending
On beautiful foolish arms
Amelia, it was just a false alarm.

The  oxymoron  of "beautiful foolish" echoes the  "cursed  and  charmed" of  the previous stanza; the mythological reference to Icarus  universalises both the beauty and  the foolishness. This full emergence of the  "documentary" Amelia  into  the text  enables  the  singer  to  arrive  at  her  own  most  searching   and   honest  self­ definition:

Maybe I've never really loved
I guess that is the truth
I've spent my whole life in clouds at icy altitudes
And looking down on everything
I crashed into his arms
Amelia, it was just a false alarm.

("Clouds," like  "Blue"  earlier,  is a  reference  to  one  of  Mitchell's   best-known songs.) The  ambiguities of these last lines are very rich:  the singer sees her flight, like Earhart's, ending in a crash-but it is a crash back into the arms of the lover from  whom she has taken  flight. The  lover is, then,  in  a sense, death: his arms welcome her as the ocean welcomed Amelia. Yet even this alarm is "false."

SCOBIE


The final stanza of the song returns to the road:

I pulled into the Cactus Tree Motel
To shower off the dust
And I slept on the strange pillows of my wanderlust
I dreamed of 747's
Over geometric farms
Dreams, Amelia, dreams and false alanns.

The  geometric patterns  of the opening stanza  (six parallel lines)  have now been brought  down from the air to the earth  ("geometric  fanns"), though  earth  only as seen from above. Amelia's  primitive biplanes have become the impersonal  bulk of the  7 47s. Yet for all the  inconclusive sadness of the singer's  lonely dilemma, Amelia remains to her as a source of dreams, of comfort, of affection: one cannot judge the song properly without  hearing the aching tenderness  with which Mitch­ ell's voice, on every recurrence  of the chorus line, caresses the name "Amelia" (or without  hearing,  in the concert  version, the high, soaring,  ethereal  flight of Pat Metheny's  guitar solo) .47
"Amelia" is obviously not  a "documentary poem" in  the central  sense which I  have  attempted to define.  It  is not  a long  narrative,  and  the  song  itself has comparatively little to say about  Earhart's career. In  its fullest version, however, that in the concert film, the photographs of Earhart  testify to much of that  history, and  act,  in  the  classic sense, as the  poem's "documents." "Amelia" is rather  a mini-documentary, a small scale model of the form. The  references  to  Earhart are what  prevent  the song from falling into the flaws (all too prevalent  in much of Mitchell's  work)  of maudlin  self-indulgence:  Amelia provides a solid reference point for the song, both factually  (in the insistence on her historical  reality)  and emotionally  (in  the mysterious assurance  and  love of the  repeated  chorus  line) . And  the figure of Amelia  provides the singer with the  necessary pole of alterity by which  to complete  her  own  dialectic  process of self-definition.  If what  she arrives at  is indeed  "the  truth" about  herself, it is the  truth  of Amelia  Earhart that  has enabled  her to reach it-just as "the truth" of Frances  Farmer  enabled Rose also to arrive at an answer to the central  documentary question  of identity, Who Do You Think  You Are?

NOTES

1 Alice Munro, Who Do You  Think  You  Are? (Toronto:  Macmillan, 1978), p. 64. Munro, p. 64.
8  Munro, p. 25.
4  Dorothy Livesay, "The  Documentary  Poem: A Canadian  Genre," in Contexts  of Canadian  Criticism,  ed. Eli  Mandel  (Toronto:  Univ. of Toronto  Press, 1971), pp. 267-81.
5  Livesay, pp. 269, 267.

SCOBIE

6 Livesay, p. 279.
7  Livesay, p. 267.
8  Note,  however,  that  there  is still a difference between  this  use of the  persona and that  in, say, Browning's "My  Last  Duchess" or Eliot's  "The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock"namely, the  essential  difference  that   the  documentary  persona is  an historical character, not  an  invented one,  created and  manipulated by the  author solely  for  the  purpose  of  the  poem.  Eliot  could   invent   anything he  liked  about Prufrock; Atwood  had  to accommodate the  immutable facts  about Moodie. More subtle   precedents for  the  documentary  persona might  be  cited   in  Ezra   Pound: "Homage to  Sextus  Propertius," for  instance, although  few  documentary  poems rely so completely on translation. Pound's Hugh Selwyn  Mauberley is of course  a fictional character, but he takes on a strange quasi-historicity, and  can  thus  be used in a documentary manner, in Timothy Findley's Famous  Last Words.
9  Urjo Kareda, "An   Immigrant's Song," Saturday  Night, 92,  no.   12  (December
1983),48.
10 Letter to Peter  Miller,  quoted   by bp  Nichol  in  his  Introduction to  Frank Davey,
The Arches: Selected  Poems  (Vancouver: Talonbooks, 198o), p. 8.
11 Frank Davey,  "The Clallam," The Arches, p. 77·
12  Frank Davey,   "E. J.  Pratt:   Rationalist Technician,"  Canadian Literature, 61 (Summer 1974), p. 71.
13 Davey,  "Rationalist Technician," p. 73·
14 Gary  Geddes,  War  & Other Measures  (Toronto: Anansi,  1976), p. 78.
15 Doug  Beardsley,   Kissing  the  Body  of My   Lord   (Edmonton:  Longspoon, 1982), p. 63.
16  Stephen Scobie,  McAlmon's Chinese  Opera (Montreal:  Quadrant, 198o), p.  93·
17  Michael Ondaatje, The  Collected   Works  of  Billy   the   Kid    (Toronto:   Anansi,
1970), p.  110.  For  some  detailed examples of  Ondaatje's  manipulation of  docu­
ments,  see my  previous  article  "Two Authors In  Search of a  Character:  Michael
Ondaatje, bp Nichol,  and Billy the Kid," Canadian Literature, 54  (Autumn 1972),
pp. 37-55, especially  p. 49·
18 George  Bowering,  Burning  Water (Toronto: General, 1980), p. 29.
19  Burning Water, p. 126.
20  There is an  interesting exploration to  be  made  of  the  whole  notion  of  the  docu­ mentary as  a  form  of  travesty,  not  excluding the  association  of  the  transvestite. Tom Stoppard's  play  Travesties, which  plays  quasi-fictional  games  with   the  his­ torical  conjunction of Joyce,  Lenin, and  Tzara in  Zurich in  1916,  is, arguably, a kind of documentary.
21  The Letters of Vincent Van Gogh, sel., ed., and  introd. by Mark Roskill  (London: Fontana, 1963), pp. 272-73.
22   E. D. Blodgett, Sounding (Edmonton: Tree Frog,  1977), p. 24.
23 A similarly ambiguous position  is occupied by the  very last  page  of The  Collected Works of Billy  the  Kid,  which  may  be interpreted as  being  spoken  either by Billy or by Michael Ondaatje.
24   Margaret Atwood, The   Journals  of Susanna Moodie  (Toronto:  Oxford, 1970), p. 7·
25   Atwood, p.  13. See also Sid  Stephen, "The  Journals of Susanna Moodie:  a  self­
portrait of Margaret Atwood," White Pelican,  2, no.  2 (Spring 1972), 32-36.

SCOBIE


26   Douglas  Barbour, Visions  of My  Grandfather   (Ottawa:  Golden Dog,  1977), un- paginated, section  g.
27   Monty Reid, Karst Means Stone  (Edmonton: NeWest,  1979), p. 68.
28 Ted  Plantas, Passchendaele  (Windsor: Black Moss, 1983), p. 7·
29   George  Bowering, George, Vancouver (Toronto:  Weed/Flower, 1970), p.  39·
30 Burning Water, p. 7·
31 Burning  Water, p. 7· "Dead Sailors"  was in  fact  Bowering's working  title  for  the novel,  and  some early  extracts appeared under  that  name.
82 Burning Water, p. 18.
33   Phyllis Webb, Wilson's  Bowl (Toronto: Coach  House,  1g8o), p. 15.
34   Webb,  p. 28.
35 Webb,  p. 15.
36   Webb,  p. 17.
37 Webb, p. 21.
38 Webb,  pp. 25, 29, 31, 43, 41.
89  Michael Ondaatje, Coming  Through Slaughter  (Toronto: Anansi,  1976), p. 133.
4 ° Coming Through Slaughter, p. 133.
41 Coming Through Slaughter, p. 134.
42  Coming Through Slaughter, p. 134.
43  Coming Through Slaughter, p. g6.
44   McAlmon's Chinese Opera,  p. 84.
45   The comparison has  been  suggested  by John   Lent,  writing about   Tom   Wayman in CVII (Autumn 1982).
46 Joni  Mitchell, Hejira,  Asylum  7ES-1087   ( 1976). All  quotations in  the  final  sec­
tion of this essay are  taken  from songs on this record.
47   The soundtrack is available on  Shadows  and  Light,  Asylum  2XBB-704   ( 1g8o).







NOTE ON THE ECONOMY

Robin Skelton


The crows are killing the songbirds here this Spring.

Hoarse from  their broken islands, they descend

on eggs and  young and  weaker  birds, their  long

beaks gaping wide, their  talons hooked, their wings

black, beautiful, bright  glossed;
they perch and  call

from  branch and  roof and  post,
avid for life

and  strength through joy; there's  talk
of snares and guns

but  we can't kill and  they
won't scare away.











286

ARE CANADIANS  POLITICALLY NAIVE?

Some Observations by a New Canadian from the Old World


Josef Skvorecky


Yu woN'T  UKE THIS ESSAY, but  let h be a comfort to you
that  the  question  in  my title  is stupid.  If you do not  subscribe  to  collectivistic
hypotheses-as I most vehemently don't-you  will know why. What,  after  all,
is the only thing  that  Canadians have in common?  Not even the language;  just their citizenship. Apparently there are some naive Canadians; some are downright silly. Others are sophisticated, knowledgeable, talented. A truistic observation  that can be made about any nation.
The  question should  read:  Are Many  Canadians  Politically  Naive? As much
as I hate to hurt  people's feelings, I am afraid  I must answer Yes. Unfortunately, many are.
As long as such  men and  women are  not  members  of the  academic  or  mass media communities, their naivete is pardonable.  In this country, we don't  have mandatory indoctrination sessions for everybody, and the majority  of our citizens are preoccupied with the good old Yankee business of pursuing happiness. The cab driver  who  has  never  had  a  totalitarian experience  cannot  be  blamed  for  not reading  scholarly  treatises  on  history  and   politics.  Inexcusability   begins  with people in the  mass media  and  in university lecture  rooms. In  this day  and  age, it is not  just naive to express publicly uninformed  opinions  and  judgments,  it is criminally naive.
To be accurate: Canadian political naivete, as I see it, has nothing  to do with the  way Canadians view our  domestic  political  issues; in  that  respect  they  are admittedly  and  understandably much  shrewder  than  citizens who  came  to  this country late in life. Neither  has it anything  to do with the way they view nazism (though  they rarely distinguish it from fascism).  Nazism was blatantly  evil, anti­ humanistic,  racist, supremacist. It  would  have  been dangerous  to  the  world­ and  therefore  to Canada-had  it won the war.  Fortunately,  the  nazis lost and, in my opinion, they present no danger  at all to the world at large; they can only

SKVORECKY

endanger  individuals.  The  nazi ideology never could  have  any  appeal  except  to Germans,  the nation  of supermen   (and  certainly  not  to  all Germans), to some individuals in nations that deemed themselves racially first-class, and  to cranks in other  nations:  to the Sir Oswald  Mosleys, or  to the  Emanuel Moravecs  of  Bo­ hemia.  Today,  the  influence of the nazi  ideology is limited  only  to  cranks.  But what about  the estimated  2,ooo ex-nazis living in our midst? Do they not  present a danger?-How can they? For the past 38 years they have kept not  just  a low profile, but utter silence. None of them has ever tried to stand  up and defend their past and their ideology publicly. They  know better  than  we do about the crimes they had committed  before this country gave them-unwittingly-shelter. Now, after Roiko, they must be shaking with fear.
Unlike  the nazi ideology which  had  charm  only for  members  of the  Herren­ volker  and  for  deviants,  the  communist  ideology sounds  sweet.  It  is  antiracist,  uses humanistic  cliches, talks a lot about  peace  (while  conducting  little surrep­ titious military  interventions,  wars, and  proxy-wars  in Hungary,  Czechoslovakia, Poland, Afghanistan, Angola, Abyssinia, etc.), about international solidarity, even brotherhood, even love. Vis-a-vis things Soviet, the political naivete of quite a few Canadians is brought  to oppressingly fragrant  bloom.  Let  me discuss a concrete and recent example of this blooming at its Stachanovite best.
In  the spring of 1983 a World   Assembly  for Peace  and  Life  Against  Nuclear War was  held  in  Prague,  Czechoslovakia.  The  Brobdingnagian  length  of  the name semantically betrays the inspiration  behind the gathering: where else but in Soviet Russia does one find dailies with titles like For The Lasting  Peace,  For  A People's  Democracy!  But  one  cannot  ask  Canadian  delegates  to  do  extensive homework in semantics first, and only then head for Prague. So they went without having  done  their  homework.  Once  there,  they  were  wined  and  dined,  guided through  the  countryside  on  Potiemkinian  excursions,  and  allowed  to  witness  a peace  rally  of-according  to  their  estimate-a quarter-million  people.  They also met some Soviet V.I.P.'s. Back home, some wrote about  the events in  Cana­ dian papers. One such writer was Ms. Lesley Hughes from Winnipeg.
I have read three reports from her pen. One, headlined  "A Prague spring with­ out  tanks,"  appeared  in The Winnipeg Sun  on  June  22,  1983,  and  tells  about how, on  arriving  in  Prague,  she  suffered  "a  shock  when  [she]  discovered  the sophistication  of  life in  Communist   Czechoslovakia."   Her  second  shock  came when she realized the "similarities to Westem  life. First there were teen-agers. All in denim ... a few given over to punk-rocking ... defying  the system just like the ones at  home.''  In  another  article  (July  6), "Why  we  don't   have  peace,"  Ms. Hughes  recounts  some  personal  chats  with  Valentina  Tereshkova,   the  world's first woman cosmonaut, and with "a  high-placed Russian.'' This  gentleman  even entrusted  her with a few state secrets, namely that  the American  delegates to the

SKVORECKY


Geneva Peace Talks had "been told [by their government] to offer only impossible suggestions for  disarmament." Ms. Hughes  opines that  "we  have  been seduced out of our ability to see beyond appearances  to reality" and  expresses a wish "to see  for ourselves"  [Ms.  Hughes'  italics].  Finally, she  gives  advice  to  Western leaders:  they should  act "to  prevent  [war] first, and worry about  the communist threat  to our way of life when life itself is secure."
Her  other  article  (July  4)  is a meditation  on the untruths of anti-communist assertions, entitled  "Repression?  It's  certainly  well hidden." Here  the  Winnipeg author  tells her readers about  "phone calls from New York ... where newspapers have  reported  riots, suppression  and  arrests"  in  Prague,  and  about  some  "bad press" from  the  Western  radio  according  to  which  the  Peace  Assembly would grant  "freedom  of expression to communists only." She also confesses that, on her way to Prague,  she was anxious  not to "be seen as today's  Neville Chamberlain, shouting  Peace in Our  Time!" but  was eventually reassured  that  this would  not be the case when she spoke to "Czechs she met on the street, in obscure shops, in bars," and they all "said  they attended  [the Peace Rally] gladly, and  not just for the tourist  money but  for hope."  There  was some more dining,  vodka  drinking, and dancing,  a "full day group  tour  [through]  factories, schools, day care centres and  a collective farm," and  the exhilarating   (and  certainly  hectic)   days  culmi­ nated  with the  Peace Rally  on Prague's  Old  Town Square,  packed  to  capacity. "Do  you really think,"  asks Ms. Hughes, "the  communists could have driven  the citizens from  their  homes to line the streets  1o deep, forced  them  to  weep and take our pictures, shake our hands?"
Finally, the Winnipeg  reporter  concludes:  No, we Canadian delegates were no
"Lenin's fools" to support the conference. (Lenin's term was "idiots.")

A DEPRESSION DESCENDS ON  ME:  can  I hope to get space in Canadian  Literature  necessary to analyze in detail this Gargantuan  collection
of misconceptions?  Hardly. I cannot  ask the  editor to  reject  other  contributors whose themes are  more  relevant  to the issue of literature.  A depression, indeed, descends on me. How  many  people read Canadian  Literature  anyway?  Possibly fewer than  those who read  The  Winnipeg Sun.  Habent  sua  fata libelli, and  the fate  of articles -and  books -like  this one  is that  they  are  rarely  perused  by those for whom they have been written, but mostly only by those who do not need their arguments because they know them by heart.
But  perhaps  one should  not  give up, even though  das Spiel  ist ganz und  gar
verloren because, hopefully, dennoch  wird es weitergehen. If I cannot  go into all the details necessary for the clarification  of the myopic vision of our  Alice in the Czech Wonderland let me at least try to be systematic.

SKVORECKY

Ms. Hughes' first article displays a fallacy of the naive Canadian psyche which
I would describe as:


1.  The  Canadian  Insensitivity

It strikes me as odd that none of the Canadian delegates found it odd  to travel to a peace conference held in a country which only fifteen years ago fell prey to a military ambush  of gigantic proportions  (about  seven times as many soldiers plus hardware took part in it as is the personnel of the entire Canadian army). During that  military  adventure  about  roo civilians died, and  ever since the  country  has lived under  virtual  Soviet military  occupation. The  main  of several Soviet  mili­ tary  bases is only  20 miles east  of  Prague,  at  Mlada, a  mere  hour's  drive  for armoured vehicles. Missile sites (naturally, with atomic  warheads)  loom  behind many  a  Czech  village, though  the  delegates saw  none  near  the  collective  farm where they spent a few minutes, probably snacking  and  wining. It could not have been more than  a few minutes since, in the course of one single day, they visited "factories,  schools, day  care  centres  and  a  collective  farm."  Ms.  Hughes  saw Bohemia-as the Czech saying goes-from an express train.
But if I find all this odd what am I to think about  the sensitivity of the woman who titled  her  article  "A  Prague  spring  without  tanks"?  Apparently, the  word she chose was  just a word  to her,  with  no  reality  behind  it. A  useful  gimmick to coin a catchy  phrase for her headline.  For the millions of Czechs, however­ including  the  70,000 who now live in Canada -Ms. Hughes' chosen word  has a more material  meaning. For there are thousands  of their loved ones in Czecho­ slovakia  who  lost their  jobs, their  professional  careers,  their  social status,  their personal liberty,  and  even their life as a direct  result of  the action  of the  meta­ phoric  tanks.  But  Ms. Hughes  did  not  meet  any  of  those. She  was  a  friendly visitor; friendly, that is, to the government.

2. The  Canadian  Ignorance

Here part of the blame should probably  be placed on the shoulders of our ethnocultural institutions which financially support  folk dancing,  pork feasts, and other  extinct  forms of European  village life. In  the  minds  of some  people,  the jumping  of the  sexy girl-Ph.D.'s  in short-skirted   "national costumes,"  so often seen in  Toronto at  the  Caravan   Festival  and  on  other  occasions,  creates  and enhances  the  image  of a  universal  ethnic  East  European as  a  simple-minded, semi-literate  hillbilly. This was apparently  Ms. Hughes'  idea of the typical Czech. She seems never to have heard of sophisticated  Czech literature and  film;  names

SKVORECKY


like Capek  or Kundera tell her  nothing; neither  do words  like Martinu or Mucha or, for that  matter, the  Bren  gun,  the Skoda  AA cannon, the  Panzerjiiger-but that, perhaps, because  she loves peace. When, instead  of simpletons in mud  huts, she  found  English-speaking denim-clad youths,  who  very  probably know  much more  about Mick  Jagger than herself  (and possibly more  about Faulkner), she was shocked.
She also met  the  "punk-rockers, defying the system  just like the  ones at  home"
[italics mine].


3. The  Canadian  Inability to See the Importance  of Quantity in Quality

I love-that  is, I hate-the  phrase  "just   like."  When  Vaclav Havel,   the playwright, was  arrested for  the  first  time  for  having  smuggled the  manuscript memoirs of an  ancient Socialist  minister  to  our  Czech  publishing house  in  To­ ronto, I met a Canadian colleague, and  when  I told her  about this, she uttered: "Just like Daniel  Ellsberg."
Well, yes. Both  Havel  and  Ellsberg  committed, in a way, the same  crime: they leaked  documents their  governments wished to keep secret.  There were some differences, though :  the  difference between  the  private memoirs of  an  octoge­ narian former   politician, and  military documents labelled Top  Secret;  the  dif­ ference  between  sending the  manuscript abroad with  no  demands of  remunera­ tion,  and  selling  them  for  a  handsome price  to the  rich  American  papers.  Then also the  difference between Ellsberg's later  fortunes: acquittal, a  lecture  circuit; and  those of Havel: four  years in jail and now round-the-clock police surveillance.
Even  more illuminating of this Canadian fallacy  was another encounter I had with  another youngish lady,  this  time  over  the  frame-up of  the  socialist  leader Milada  Horakova  which   resulted   in  her  execution;  she   was  the   only  Czech woman ever  executed  by  the  Czechs  for  political  "crimes." "Just  like  Angela Davis!" my interlocutor commented on  the  frame-up trial.  Now,  that  made  me mad, and  I lost self-control. "Oh  really?  But  that  trial  was in  California, wasn't it?"  I cried.  "I thought the  Yanks  put  Angela  in  a  gas  chamber!" The   lady has avoided  me ever since.
Similarly  with  the  Czech  punks.  Yes, they do defy the government. But instead of permitting them  to hold  monster-concerts in big halls and  stadiums, the govern­ ment -only   about  a   month  after   Ms.   Hughes'  departure  from   Prague - clamped down   on  the  punk-folk, disbanned  about   thirty  punk-rock and   New Wave  bands,  took away  the  licences of their  musicians,  fired  the  entire  editorial board  of  the  only  pop-music monthly  M elodie, and  apparently is about   to  dis­ solve  the  Jazz  Section   of  the  Musicians' Union, the   chief  spokesman  for  the punks. Not "just like" at all. Just  "a little like."

SKVORECKY

4. The  Canadian Neglect of Pertinent Literature

Ms. Hughes  was taken through  all the stages of subtle  brainwashing described in detail  (with  many examples)  in Paul Hollander's Political Pilgrims, one of sev­ eral  books  Canadians  intent  on  travelling   behind   the   Curtain   should   read. With all due respect to her, Ms. Hughes is a provincial  Canadian  journalist who dines with "high-placed Russians" and  with the female stars of  the universe only occasionally.  In  Prague,  however, she  received  a  V.I.P.  treatment. The   high­ placed  KGB  man  even gave  her  a  piece  of  interesting  information   and  she, overawed  by the  friendly  kindness of such  greats,  believed  his information  just as strongly  as she disbelieves the information  offered  to  Canadians not  only  by us, biased exiles, but also by scholarly books and  acclaimed  novels, readily avail­ able  in  Canada. Some were even written  by Canadians, such  as the  books on Czechoslovakia  by the eminent  Professor  H.  Gordon  Skilling  of  the  University of Toronto. Disregarding  such  works of  scholarship,   Ms.  Hughes  expressed  a wish to "see for herself," not through  the eyes of propaganda. After seventy years of totalitarian trickery, however, the primitive  methods  of Count  Potiemkin  have been  vastly improved.  Travelling  to  a totalitarian country  in  order  to  "see  for yourself," without  having done substantial  homework  first, guarantees  the  very opposite of what  Ms. Hughes wanted  to achieve  by "being  there."  It guarantees  that you will be unable "to see beyond appearances to reality."

5.  The Canadian Inability to Realize that the Totalitarians ARE  Different
From Us

"Prevent war  first, and  worry  about  the  communist   threat   afterwards!"  A nice-sounding  slogan. It  reminds me of a graffito  I found  on the  wall of Sidney Smith  Hall  under  a Communist  Party  election  poster:  "Vote  Now, Pay  Later!" The  trouble  here is that it is impossible to separate  peace from freedom.  By free­ dom, naturally, I mean not national independence but the individual  liberty of the citizen.  In  the  sense of national  independence, one  of the  "freest"  nations  was certainly that of Germany under Hitler. However, the state of  individual  freedom in  Herr  Hitler's  Reich  was non-existent,  and  is best  characterized  by  just  one word:  Auschwitz.
There does exist a genuine, government  non-sponsored  peace movement in Czechoslovakia.  But  its delegates  were  not  admitted  to  the  dining-and-wining parties, nor were they permitted  to speak. This movement  stresses the indivisibility of the question of peace and  the question of freedom. To  simplify this matter  for our Alices: the civil freedoms and  human  rights that  exist in our Western society guarantee that  people like Ms. Hughes can, quite  effectively I'm  afraid,  fight for disarmament -in our part of the world. The  lack of such  rights, such freedoms,

SKVORECKY

in totalitarian countries  of whatever  political stripe can lend effective support  to Ms.  Hughes'  fight  for  disarmament-in our  part  of  the  world.  If the  Ms. Hugheses  have  their  way -and  there  is a chance  they  might-there will be disarmament-in our  part of the  world. The  long word for this is "unilateral."
Now,  the  experience  of  both  remote  and  recent  history  teaches  us that   the autocrat, the tyrant, the dictator,  the totalitarian ruler understands, unfortunately, but one international language: that of material  strength.  He is unmoved  by the presumably  human  feelings that  move Ms. Hughes. After all, the men  who lead a state  which  has  killed  between  30  and  70  million  of  its  own  citizens  can hardly be soft-hearted. But they do understand the language  of military strength. The  Nazis in  World  War  II, for instance,  never  used poisonous gas, yet a  gas­ mask box was attached to  the  belt of every German  soldier from  the  first  day of the  war to the last. For the Allies, too, had gas, and  would have used  it, had the Germans  started  gas warfare.  It was solely this knowledge  which  prevented Hitler from resorting to the diabolic invention of his predecessors in World War I. But if the Allies had  not been in possession of the chemical  weapon  would  it  be reasonable to assume that  Hitler,  from humanitarian considerations,  would have refrained from yperiting  the Yanks, the Tommies,  the Bolshies, all of them?
A more recent  example  from  the same category of killing:  the  North  Vietna­ mese certainly  had  access to  Russian-made  gas during  the  war  in  Vietnam­ but  they  used it  only  after  the  Americans  had  departed,  against  the  primitive tribesmen in the mountains, who do not even possess bazookas.
This  is the  reason  why people of my experience,  both  personal  and  bookish, think it important that  Western atomic defences be not weakened, or even  aban­ doned altogether.  We do not want  to die in an atomic  war,  just as Ms.  Hughes  doesn't.  However,  we have reason, supported  by logic and  history, to fear  that  if the West should disarm atomically, we would have not peace but war. Non-atomic  perhaps;  but if the conventional  forces of NATO  put up stiff  resistance, we prob­ ably  would  live  to  experience  even  the  atomic  variety.  Limited,   perhaps,  but atomic  nevertheless. Did you read Sacharov's  report on  the party  and  the  guests in that  remote top-secret Siberian  place where they celebrated  the successful com­ pletion of the  Soviet  bomb?  Sacharov,  the  father  of  that  weapon,  proposed  a toast:  "That this terrible  bomb may never be used!" To  which one of the  jolly­ looking, rotund  Soviet generals responded:  "Thank you, comrade  Sacharov,  for delivering this baby. As to how it should be used, please, leave that  to us!"
It is, unfortunately, impossible  to secure  peace  first, and  worry  about  com­ munism later.  You cannot  separate  the two endeavours. It would be nice if you could, but you can not.
No, I have no ready-made advice to give to those who want to preserve peace. I only know -because history has taught  me this lesson -how  peace can go to


293

SKVORECKY

pieces. Pacifism, the naive or cowardly efforts to extricate ourselves from our common North American destiny in a world of powerful  totalitarianism, is a guaranteed road to war.


6.  The  Ahistoricity of Canadian Observations

How often, in our Canadian newspapers, have you come across sentences like: "Mr. Jaruzelski, the leader of the military  junta  which grabbed  power in Poland a  year  ago, said ..."  or  "Mr. Arafat,  the  leader  of  the  anti-Israeli guerrillas, declared ..." etc.?  Apparently   it  is  presumed   that   Canadians have  either   a pathologically short memory, or a lamentable  lack of knowledge of the affairs of the world.
Ms.  Hughes  asks her  rhetorical  question   about   the  communists'  ability  to drive their  citizens to the streets in support  of  pax Sovietica.  Yes, such  a  thing would be impossible in this country. But Ms. Hughes  does not seem to know that people now living in Czechoslovakia have  a  past  very much  different  from  the past of people now living in Canada. The  Czechs are the veterans of six years of Nazi  occupation   with  its  fear-enforced   mass  gatherings   (in  the  same  Prague square)   protesting  the "perfidious  assassination  of Herr  stellvertretende  Reichs­ protektor, General der SS  Reinhard  Heydrich"; they have  lived  through  Stalin­ ism with its 300-soo  political executions (including the above-mentioned Milada  Horakova), with  aboutI oo,ooo  political  prisoners  mining  uranium  ore  for  the production  of Soviet A-bombs;  with hundreds  of  thousands of intellectuals,  law­ yers, clerks, small businessmen, farmers, teachers, and  scholars sent to the  mines, to  the  "black   (working)   battalions," to  the  factories  and  state  farms  for  "re­  education"; with  widespread  screening,  police surveillance,  harassment,  "volun­  tary" mandatory weekend brigades, etc. These people are the fathers and  mothers of children who would have very little chance of being admitted to higher school­ ing, not  to speak of university, if  their  parents  refused  to  "fight  for  peace."  In short:  Ms. Hughes  seems to be  unaware  of the very concrete,  non-metaphorical bloodiness of the  communist  system in the  first years after  its coming  to  power, and  of its unabated  repressiveness ever since. After  the  unleashing  of their  halo­ caustic  actions, these regimes do not  have  to drive  people  to rallies with  whips. The  fear of  their power and  of their readiness to crack  down  on you, Jaruzelski­ like, suffices. You  are slowly manoeuvred  into  a  frame  of  mind  where  you  no longer give a damn  about  anything.  You say to yourself:  So what?  We  rallied against the criminal  British paras who killed our good socialist friend  Obergrup­ penfilhrer Heydrich. We rallied to demand  death-sentences for the defendants in the Slansky trial, and later were told that the hanged  comrades  had been innocent
-so what?  We  rallied  against  the  lies of  the  imperialist   Kennedy  about   the


294

SKVORECKY


presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba,  and a few days later  we rallied in support  of the peace-gesture of Nikita Khrushchev  when he removed the non-existent missiles from that  island. We rallied in support  of the good communist  Dubcek,  and  we rallied when the Soviets invaded  to depose him;  only a couple of years later  we rallied  in support  of the  Brotherly  Soviet Help  and  against  the  bad  communist Dubcek. So what?  Why not rally for peace? It's  just another  Kremlin  trick, and you'd better be present.
Two more things Ms. Hughes does not seem to know:  mostly, these mass dem­ onstrations  are  held during  working  hours, with  no loss of salary.  In  this sense, the  participants are  paid  for  participation. If the  rally  falls  on  a  holiday,  the above-mentioned   powers of  persuasion  still function.  And,  usually,  one  has  to have one's name  marked  off on lists checked by foremen  and  other  bosses in the side streets where the voluntary  demonstrators  gather.  Then  one  marches  down Paris  Street,  in  the  direction  of Old  Town  Square-a huge  river  of humans.  Through the  side streets,  rivulets  of  people, their  banners  and  flags rolled  up, flow in an opposite direction.  They are headed for the many  pubs in Old  Town Prague,  to celebrate  a sunny  day spent on an enjoyable walk and  crowned  by a convivial beer-drinking party in the colourful medieval rooms where, a thousand  years ago  (who  knows?),  the  Good  King  Wenceslas himself might  have  dined and beered with sexy bathing-house attendants.
Had  Ms. Hughes  known  all this, would she be so surprised  that  people, with
whom she obviously did not speak in Czech, and  possibly through  an interpreter, expressed such orthodox  views in the  presence of an apparently fellow-travelling foreigner?1


7. The  Canadian Habit to judge Others by Ourselves

Reading  in U.S. newspapers about  protests and arrests in Prague,  Ms. Hughes expected to witness something  on the scale of U.S. riots, but she failed  to notice anything of that sort. Once again, she did not take into account the well-developed fear which is the best guardian of civil obedience, a fear  stemming,  in this case, also from  the  claustrophobic situation  of  a  small nation  living  under  a  police regime. There  is simply no way of escape. An American  draft-dodger easily slips across the  border  to  friendly  Canada, sometimes even  in  his  car.  The  crimi­ nal  rents  a  hotel  room  under  an  assumed  name,  and   puts  on  a  false  mous­ tache.  Even  when  caught  by  the  police, a  youngster  who  has  just  smashed  a window at  the American   Embassy  will have no problem  continuing  his studies at university.
No such  possibilities exist in  Czechoslovakia. To  slip across the  Iron  Curtain is rather  difficult-and if Ms. Hughes thinks that the Curtain is just a metaphor


295

SKVORECKY

invented  by the old reactionary  Winston  Churchill,  she should  have  travelled  to Prague  by car and, while still in Germany,  taken a walk along the border.  As for hotels, you cannot  rent a room without  showing  your  identity  card  to  the  desk clerk who has to present the list of guests to the police on demand. A false beard will not  help you. And if you are a student  and  smash  a window  in  the Soviet Embassy, well....
That's why Ms. Hughes did not observe any huge crowds of protesters, battal­ ions of police, and  dozens of patrol  wagons overloaded  with  beaten-up  humans.  But there was a protest march in downtown  Prague,  reported  not only in Western media  but  also acknowledged  (privately)   by the  Reverend  John  Morgan   who was  also  dining  and  wining  in  Prague  at  that   time.  Only  about  goo  people marched, mostly very young, and  they  were  handled   with  ease  by  the  police. What  the future  has in store for them, I don't  know. The totalitarian press never informs its readership about such matters.
And  then  there  was the  meeting,  much  written  about  in  West  German   and British papers, of the representatives of Charter 77, the Czech Peace and  Human Rights movement,  with the delegates from the German  Green  and  Social Demo­ cratic  parties. It took place on the White  Hill, on the outskirts of  Prague, where goo years ago the Czechs lost their freedom to the authoritarian  rule of the Aus­ trian  Hapsburgs. The  historical  hill, on this  later  occasion,  was surrounded by police, the  participants were rounded  up, cameras  were  taken out  of the  hands of Western peace delegates, and films were tom out of the cameras and  exposed to the shining sun. But Ms. Hughes has neither seen this, nor read about it. Canadian papers did not cover the event very much;  Czech papers did  not cover it at  all. Ms. Hughes  does not read German  and  probably  ignores the British conservative press.
In  the end, as predicted  by the Americans,  freedom  of expression was indeed granted  "to  communists only" -certainly  in the final  document  of the  Confer­ ence.  Does this  document  protest  against  the  two  main  atomic  arsenals  in  the world with  equal  vehemence? Does it protest  against  one of the  two at  all? Or does  it  just  rave  against  the  warmongering Yankees,  those  inefficient  trigger­ happy  militarists who, for at least a decade,  had  a monopoly on atomic  weapons and  yet, somehow, failed to launch  a war on the  then  non-atomic  and  therefore defenceless Soviet Russia?
Ms. Hughes,  presumably, voted for that  document.  I am afraid she fits Lenin's description rather well; the one she mentions in one of her articles.

OH MY! 1  WANTED  TO   WRITE  about   this  beautiful  land;
about  its golden skyscrapers silhouetted  against  the skies of the Indian  Summer;

SKVORECKY


about the  joy of its libraries; about  the  sweet  charm  of freedom I and  my  wife and  all my good old countrymen found  here, under  the  protective umbrella of the Yanks.  But  damn politics  got  me  like the  blues, and  the  naivete  of so many  of my fellow  Canadians does  not  help  me  out.  I am  far  from  being  the  stuff  that Sisyphus  was made of, and  yet, again  and  again,  I push  this boulder up the steep slope of incomprehension.
How silly of me!

NOTES

1 In  December  1983, the  Czechoslovak  News Agency CTK, in  a  press release,  in­ formed the world that "hundreds of thousands of demonstrators welcomed the deci­ sion of the  Supreme Soviet  and  of the  Czechoslovak government   to  place  Soviet missiles with atomic  warheads  on Czechoslovak territory." Apparently, these  were the same crowds  that  only six months  ago demonstrated for  peace.  Now they  re­ joiced over the fact that  their country had been made a target  for American atomic missiles. What  a strange  people, the Czechs!















297

THE OR)ICLE

DavidSolway


"The wise prince  makes decisive changes, new succeeds upon  the old." Sweet Chinese.
"It is the barren womb  that  fructifies,
a lineage shall arise." Good Hebrew. "The warrior shall sacrifice the past, his wound  be his acquittal." Sly Greek.
What was it the oracle meant to speak?
In  choice of wives, next time you sit and  cast

the coins, the yarrow stalks, the cards, the dice, the  twigs upon  the fire, beware  of too
infatuate a trust in destiny
or fate. The  oracle is mischievous.
Was it to leave the old wife for the new, or yield the first her newfound mastery?










GOLDFISH JIND BUMBLEBEES

Glen Sorestad


for Joe

The poet sits at a small table in this hometown restaurant. Confident in his own territory
he selects poems from his early work and  opens his world to us all.

Sometimes he is the goldfish
and  we the gawkers  peer through glass. Yet the  image is clear
as the water  he glides through stroking each  poem with ease.

Sometimes he is the bumblebee wrapped in the flower's closing locked  into love's last bloom
as winter  stills the world of bees. But song transcends the season.

His singing swims and  buzzes
over and  around and  through us all
with murmurs of Dickinson and  McEwen, of Yeats and  Pound, and  those
who have  touched his tongue.

Closer  and  closer we are drawn into  this nectared world of words and  sounds  that  dip and  flutter
through the glass and  petals of language and  into  the world that  is his poem.

Toronto, September Ig8!1










299

SJITURD]IY ]IFTERNOON JIT KENSINGTON MJIRKET

Raymond Souster


for Bill Brooks

Commerce, by which  I don't  mean the Canadian Imperial Bank of, but hand-to-hand transactions,
smiles on the faces of buyers and  sellers, a laugh  here, a shouted joke there,
live fowls in splattered cages,
a counter with a hundred pairs
of fish eyes not so glassily staring,
dresses of rainbowed colourings, an old face withdrawn behind  a shawl staring out
from  a store's dark  cavern, oranges Mr Sunkist couldn't dream  of, beautiful chesterfields carried
from endless Portuguese furniture stores, more overpowering fruit-of-the-sea smells with  DANGER EXCEPT  FOR FISH  LOVERS more apt  than  its store owner dreams of,
birthday cakes four wine-glassed  tiers high,
a woman  hefting sacks of potatoes
and  setting  each down as easily as a shrug of the shoulders:

sun's glare streaming down on all of it
with a shine of spring,  with the warm magic  breath of living.

















300

SJINTJIYJINJI
 



Francis Sparshott



The ocean's peace  betrays. Our  empty canvas
drifts  into drought, the wheel betrays that helmsman who cleared  the mouths of heresy, the whirlpools
of hesitation.

The Middle Sea, tonic of ancient gamuts,
rang  his heart home; but loud above its burden
he heard the  reef's white  noise. Ironic  backgrounds cancelled his cadence  -

a vast blue ocean,  the green earth  beyond it heavy  with  voices and  an unlearned wisdom. His father and  his mother lost those islands
and  left  them empty.

Avila bore him,  but could never hold him;
Spain was not Spain  enough, clear streams  turned westward out of the hills and sought  through devious deltas
a grey Atlantic.

His spirit  on the waves mapped antique orders, checkerboard essences he had  no faith  in: animal mistrust ran its hot eraser
round the wax contours.

Squeezed between  James  and  Royce, those firm believers, His mind  slipped  down  the corridors of Harvard,
A citrus  pip between  the grubby  fingers of Yankee  know-how.

Writing in Rome,  his pen ran blue with Boston:
steadfast and  classical, like all romantics, kept for his core a mad, dramatic wholeness
put  to good uses.

I saw him mantled in the shawls of age,
Don  Quixote sane.... Odysseus left Calypso to farm  in Ithaca. Trees  round  his grave bear
lemons  and  olives.


301

TWO POEMS

Andrew Suknaski


TONY'S CRJIBJIPPLE TREE

1982 In Regina


life's tough
confirms  urban  muzhika
tough
for an urban muzhik  tryin to keep an edge
on the nudging recession ...

now it all begins with a weakness for tall girls
and  tall boys that  tony tomato master
from  odessa prunes perfectly
in the narrow
garden next
to the glaring whitewall
of a garage and  summer

now it all threatens to end
when  tony's crabapple tree begins to bow
with  heavy fruit abundance becoming something else
to intoxicate
in indian  summer




302

SUKNASKI

no time for rambling or details
the pilfering muzhik  is there "don't bother going home for a ladder
there's one in the garage" murmurs
tony's  faithful wife
from  odessa

"take them all ... " suggests tony oxfords stained  red by the crushed rotting
crabapples
ccthe tree's worn me out all these years ... "
is his single
thought

no time for expansion muzhik  milks a gallon in mere seconds
so it seems
the  boundless greed sweliing
cccod, mercy  my  Lord an Master
I can't  stop now ... "

muzhik  moves the ladder ascends even higher
picks a second  gallon hands growing perceptibly
numb
"God, Lord  mercy where  will it
all end?"

no time for even the poem just things  at hand
muzhik  rushes up for a third  gallon
heaven within


303

SUKNASKI

sight now the tree
its heavy
insatiable boughs undulating at  their own free will
muzhik's knees growing  numb weak hands
seeming wood in the fine sleet
where cartilage bone
flesh
and  fruit  merge in glorious illusion
"God  ... Master
this tree
will swallow me ... "

no time for guilt or glimmerings of absolution
lust is magnetic
muzhik  is hypnotized by greed where  they ascend
the endless ladder
tripping over one another to consummate all
dreams
in the fourth gallon
the city disappears in the falling snow mindless muzhik
only an eye already has
a half gallon
when he plummets like a stone
to the green earth
"ah God,
for once there is time ...
even a limit!"

SUKNASKI

for once
the century is on pilot
crushed apples
next to his heart muzhik  is fully
... relaxed




FLOJITING ENTRY I
from "Divining for West"  of CELESTIAL MECHANICS
/ life  fragment in progress


peral  erina  deep into her reverie on the perch within
the second story
house
on the edge of ghostly
wood mountain
where  she is guardian spirit
to her late parents
and  others  who slowly
abandon the place
... one by one
Lemnu Domnului t
they go west Lemnu Domnului "The Lord's Tree" my Lord above
ani
am old an crippled am  jist sitting here on my perch Lemnu Domnului

SUKNASKI

my Lord above ready to fly to Him ready
to fly west
where the darkness comes

... an my Lord above my second chance will be east
someday
where He will come again an His vestments will
be shining white as
the snow
an His face will be brighter than
the sun
my Lord above
Lemnu Domnului
but they will not see it an the goats will be terrified
an crawl
back into
their graves
where the sheep have left my Lord above
Lemnu Domnului
bless me with
that last flight into
The  Light
Lemnu
... Domnului

november 12th, 1983 I wood mountain november 14th, 1983 I regina

t Lemnu Domnului, ''The Lord's Tree" in Romanian, grows as a small hedge along  the  walkways  of most  Romanian homes  in  the  west.  The  seeds  were brought   by  the  first  immigrants from   Romania  just  after   the  turn   of  the century.


TWO POEMS

Anne Szumigalski


CL]IRRIE

one day in spring you find yourself watching from  an  upstairs window  holding  your breath waiting for the year's first rainstorm	next morning among the soaked petals which  have fallen  in a rosy shower  from your crabtree
you find an envelope transparent with rain in it a blotched telegram

AUNT DIED THIS MORNING INTESTATE OF COURSE STOP SHE  SPOKE OF YOU AT  THE LAST STOP FUNERAL THURSDAY     APRIL

well who is april?   or perhaps when?    where is the funeral?   which aunt has died?

minnie of the  jampots, quince and  medlar constance of the high grey hair     aunt  luard who always wearsjwore a velvet band around her scrawny  throat

none of these would  mention you on her deathbed but it is thursday and so you
put on your  brown  smock your long necklace of cowries you tell the shells like beads
repeat over and  over the names of those girls in their  short  frocks and cloche
hats, those women  with their  knitting and picnics,  those old biddies in their cosy cottages with  their  cakes and  tea their little  nips of elderberry from the corner cupboard

later  you trowel  out a shallow  grave and lay the telegram to rest under  a handful or two of crumbled earth  then stick in
a twisted  candle left over from a birthday

SZUMIGALSKI

the flame flickers palely beneath the bright sun

but that's not the end of it the message doesn't lie easy    often  when you pass the spot you think  you hear  the faint  crinkle of paper moving among the shallow  roots of the spring weeds and  you know you'll be forced  to remember or invent  someone  else :

that's clarrie  with her arched nose and spiteful  tongue  her fingers resting  not too lightly on the keys of an out-of-tune
piano 	the dyed hair  the chipped scarlet nails
the tumbler  of cheap  wine on the  bench  beside her 	boogie woogie woogie go her hands on the keys boogie woogie woogie  the breathy voice from  the wrinkled  mouth while a
crooked old foot in a rundown canvas shoe searches for the loud pedal     chili baby
chili on a hot sunday in may












S)INDBLIND )IT THE CROSSING

in the distance  she sees a very tall dog
a great  dane  with a narrow elegant muzzle

in the distance  he sees a print sack blowing on the line

he sees a boat with a calico sail
the wind blows her across the intersection

the dog comes nearer  and  is a thin-legged boy carrying a delicate cat with cobalt  eyes

SZUMIGALSKI

this woman, the boy thinks, dressed  in a meadow of flowers is an old white-haired animal the smell of her skin
still flavoured with breastmilk

the woman wants  to greet  the child but simply inclines  her head
she cannot bring  herself to speak
he's disappointed for he had meant  to tell her the story of his stolen cat how he has taught it to caress his face with unsheathed claws

not really scratching
but leaving long strokes
of soft white down  his olive cheek














TWO POEMS



TURGENEV'S HUNTSMEN

In Moscow, in April the nightingales sing

At least one nightingale sang that  night,  in the Lenin  Hills

In a small thicket  near  the river
near  the building with  the blinking red star

Some citizens of Moscow on tiptoe, others  on their  knees

On  the damp ground, on alder  twigs
with stiff legs remembering Turgenev's huntsmen,

Their wishful singing and  black magic and  black horses tethered in the distance

Some citizens of Moscow listen
in the tense and  voluptuous dark.
 


Sharon Thesen





POEM IN MEMORY OF JIN EJIRLIER POEM

A moment ago
the light was perfect

& the poem itself
a perfect  memory  -its occasion another light, perfection
so confusing I was there without getting there.

310

THESEN

They  have  clocks now that  talk back  to you. Malcolm Lowry
always wrote  standing up, for his soul needed  to avoid being fixed -

I sympathize, my whole face raining.

The sky presses 5 colours down  against
the horizon, I wander

the yard  with a bag of tulip  bulbs looking  for earth.

Enough noise is made.

I swam in the sea a couple
of times, peering at freighters.

Those days it seemed
I was quicker to judge & fragile like a rock.








BASMATI RICE

An Essay about Words


Audrey Thomas





MY STUDY  IS  ON  THE SECOND FLOOR of our ho"'e and faces East. I like that  and  I get up early to write,  perhaps  not simply  because I enjoy  the  sunrise  (especially in  winter,  when  all  has  been  so  black,  and  then gradually   light,  like  hope,  returns)   but  out  of  some  atavistic   hope  that   my thoughts,  too, will rise with the sun and illumine  the blank  pages in front  of me.
We live in a corner house and  my study  is right  above  a  busy street.  People
whom I cannot see often pass beneath  my window and throw  up snatches of  con­ versation  before moving out of earshot. And I hear footsteps, light,  heavy, singly or in groups, and the sound of buggy wheels or grocery carts.  Now, I can see the sidewalk on the other side of the street, see people hurrying  along or dawdling,  the young woman from the St. James Daycare a block away, out for a walk with her little charges who all seem to march  (or skip or run)   to a different drummer, a father  with his baby tucked inside his ski jacket, a blind  man,  a woman  with her arms full of grocery bags. I cannot  hear  their  footsteps  nor  anything  they might be saying  and  sometimes a  wonderful  thing  happens  where  someone  will  pass beneath my window, and say something while someone is walking by on the other side of the street, and so I get the wonderful absurdity of seeing the old lady in the red coat who lives at the Senior Citizen Lodge at 16th and  Macdonald (I  know because she asked me to take her picture, waving her hand-made Union Jack,  the day  the Queen  came down  16th  Avenue)  going  by on  one side and  hearing  a gruff teenage male voice saying, "so I said to him nobody talks like that to me and.
. . ."The movie I watch has the wrong soundtrack!
I am interested in such absurdities, in the word absurd  itself, from the Latin  for inharmonious, foolish. L.  ab,  from,  surdus,  deaf,  inaudible, harsh   (used  meta­ phorically here, deaf to reason, hence irrational). I am interested  in the fact that I spend a lot of my days at a desk, or table, and that  the desk or table needs always to face a window. This is not just so I will have something  to look  at  when "illu­ mination" comes slowly (or  not  at  all)   but  because,  in  what  is  essentially an inside occupation  (and a very lonely one at that,  I can't even stand to have a radio on when I'm  working)  I am able to feel even a little bit  connected  with the out-


312

THOMAS


side. I often see myself like a diver  in one of those old-fashioned diving  bells, both in and  apart from  everything in the universe around me. There is a little  piece of brown paper taped to the  window  frame. I got  it from  a  bread  wrapper several years ago when  I was spending a winter  in Montreal. It says

PAIN
FRAIS DU  JOUR

in blue letters and  underneath

BREAD
BAKED  FRESH  DAILY

Some days, if I'm  wrestling with  a piece or a passage that  seems especially difficult
I fold the paper  so that  it reads:

PAIN
BAKED  FRESH  DAILY

and  for some perverse reason  that  cheers me up. That the  French word for bread and  the  English  word  for  misery  of one  kind  or  another look  alike  is another of those  absurdities that   interest   me.  There is no  real  connection, as  there  is, say, with  the  English  blessed and  the  French blesser, to wound-it's just chance. But my mind,  when  in a certain state  of heightened awareness (which I might  point out,  can  just as easily be brought on by laughter as by tears), makes  that  kind  of connection easily.
Here's another. It was early  November when  I began thinking about  this essay, and  the tree outside  my window  was almost bare of leaves. The weather was turn­ ing  cold  and   a  cold  rain   was  falling.   "Autumn leaves"   I wrote   on  my  pad, "autumn leaves." Over  and  over. And then suddenly  "wiNTER enters." Again,  no real  linguistic  connection, but  writing  the  phrase  over  and  over  gave  me  a  new way of looking at the leaves.
I love words.  I love the  way they suddenly  surprise  you;  I love the  way  every­ one,  high  or low,  uses them  to  paint  pictures-that is to say  metaphorically. In the past week a phrase, not new, but surely not much  in vogue of recent  years, has been  said  in my  hearing, or  I've  read  it in the  paper,  no less than  five times:  so and  so is "between a rock and  a hard  place." Once  in a line-up at  the  main  post office  downtown, once  spoken   by  a  friend,   and   in  three   different  newspaper articles. Where does this phrase come from?  I can't find it in Bartlett's, at least not under "rock," or  "place," or  "hard." Why  is it  suddenly being  said?  It is cer­ tainly  a most  poetic   (and uncomfortable)  image.  I wouldn't want  to  be  there,  nor would  you. Somebody says, of  somebody else, "I've got  him  eating  out  of my hand," probably unaware of the root  of the  word  "manipulate." When  I was a child  I heard  constant warnings about  kids who were "too big for their  britches"

THOMAS

or "too  big for their  boots" and  we were all, without  exception,  potential  big­ eared little pitchers. And yet it seemed to me that  all the adults I knew -parents, relatives, teachers,  corrected me if I played around  with  words myself-or  with grammar  or sentence structure.  It was as though  all the metaphorical language  in the world had  already  been invented  and  I wasn't  there on the day that  it hap­  pened. Once  I started  reading poetry I realized  that  poets seemed to have  a cer­ tain  freedom  that  ordinary,  hard-working  decent  folks didn't   (or  didn't   allow themselves)  to have. They invented and re-invented  language  all the time.  (Prose that  got too metaphorical was  considered  suspect  unless it  were in  the  Sunday  Sermon or spoken by Roosevelt or Churchill.) That was when  I decided  I would become a poet, and  probably why. My poems were terrible-a lot of them  were very "Christian" in a romantic way, full of Crusaders,  lepers, infidels, and angels
-and some of them, I regret to say, won prizes. But I do remember  the day we were asked to write limericks (Grade  4? Grade  5?)  and  I came  up with  this in about five minutes:

There was once a fellow named Farrell
Whose life was in terrible peril
He fell in with some rogues
Who stole all but his brogues
And had to slink home in a barrel.

(I don't  know  where  I got  "brogues"  from  or  how  I  knew  what  it  meant; it certainly wasn't a word used in our family.)
I wrote  dozens of limericks after  that  first one.  I knew it wasn't  Real  Poetry but  I also suspected  the other  stuff, the stuff  my  teachers  and  my  mother  and various judges liked wasn't Real Poetry either.  Nevertheless, for all my desire to write poetry, what  I was always better at was prose. Who  knows why one writer works better in one genre than  another?  What  I'd  really like to be is "ambidex­ trous," like Michael  Ondaatje or Margaret Atwood, but I'm  not. It's always prose for me. (Why  do most of us see poetry as "higher"? Because it seems more of a distillate of the creative unconscious than  prose? Perfume  as opposed to cologne? I once had  a  poet in a graduate prose class in  Montreal.  He  needed  one  more course to get his degree and had chosen mine. We were all working on stories and one night  he said to me, in much  despair,  "I've never  written  'he said'  and  'she said' before." Of course he wasn't a narrative  poet:  not for him  Beowulf or The  Idylls of the King, or, closer to home, The  Titanic, or Brebeuf and his Brethren.)
I still sometimes have the awful feeling that  I failed because I failed to write poetry, even while I know that  prose can be just as exciting  or dense, "packed," innova­ tive as any poem. It probably has something  to do with the fact that  we write our notes, our  memos, our letters, in prose, we speak  in  prose to one  another,  even

THOMAS


when we speak metaphorically: "Lay off me, will you?", "I'm really blue today," "What's for dinner,  honey?", "You're driving me up the wall."
Sometimes a sentence or a phrase gives me the idea for an entire story  (once,
even, for the very last line of a novel I didn't  write for another  three years, when I overheard  a man in a pay phone say to whomever was on the other  end:  "Get rid of it." That's all I  heard  him say and  then  he hung  up). This  summer  my daughter  and  I were in Greece. We witnessed a very bizarre incident  involving a young English boy, an octopus, and a man in a panama  hat.  I knew that  that  in itself could provide  the central  image for a new story but  then,  a few days later, I  heard  a  French   woman  on  another  beach  say "La   meduse;   il faut   prener garde," and  suddenly,  because of this incident  with the  octopus,  I saw  not  the jelly fish to  which  she  had  been  referring  but  the  great  snaky  tentacles  of  an octopus  and  then  I saw that  what  I  really wanted  to write  about  was all  that sexuality that was there on the beach, in that heat, under the intense blue sky: the bare-breasted  European woman,  the young Greek men showing off to their  girl­ friends and  whoever else would watch. All the bodies. The  story is seen  through  the eyes of a  12-year-old English  boy, very properly  brought  up,  for  whom  the octopus  becomes  the  symbol of everything  most feared  and  most  desired,  "the  nightmare  spread  out  upon  the  rock."  Later  on, on  quite  a  different  island,  a Greek man said two things that  have become incorporated  into the octopus story. He said, when  we were listening to some very sad  Greek  music, "There are  no happy  men in Greece, only happy  childrens."  He also  asked, "you  like this ice­ land" and  since  the  temperature was over  8o 0  we  stared  at  him.  He  meant "island" but it took us a while to figure that out. Now, in my story, the young boy hears words and  phrases he doesn't  completely  understand  ("Ia  meduse;  il faut prener  garde" "you  like this ice-land?") and  this just adds  to his general  sense of unease.
Another  recent  story was inspired  by a newspaper  clipping  about  a man  who had been charged  with common assault for massaging the feet of strange  women. I began to do some foot research and  discovered something  I must  have learned in my university zoology course, that  the number  of bones in the  human  foot is the same as the number  of letters in the alphabet. And so the story begins: "There are twenty-six bones in the foot;  that  is the alphabet  of the foot" and  goes on  to tell a story which is a complete fabrication  except for the fact  that  both men  (the "real" man and  the man  in my story)  get arrested, charged  and fined.
Another story, which is the title story of the collection I'm  presently working on, came  as a message written  on a mirror  in  the George Dawson  Inn  in  Dawson Creek. The  message was not intended  for me but showed up on the mirror  in the bathroom  after  my  daughter had  taken  a  very hot shower.  It said,  "Good-bye Harold, Good Luck"  and  whoever had  written  it must  have counted  on the fact

THOMAS

that  Harold  would  take a shower.  (And  the  maid  had  obviously not  gone over the mirror  with Windex.) We had a lot of fun trying  to figure out  who Harold was and  whether  the message was written  in anger  or love. In  the story, "they" (a mother who is contemplating  a divorce and her child)  do meet up with Harold, but of course he doesn't  know that  they have seen the  message  (and  they're  not absolutely sure he has).
I  cut  things  out  of newspapers,  often  really  horrible  things  and   I'm   never sure why.
MURDERER SET WIFE ADRIFT ON RAFT TIGER BITES TRAINER TO  DEATH
(Horrified Wife Looks On)

DOLPHINS  NUDGE BOYS BODY TO SHORE

That  last one really haunts me, not just the image,  but  that  word "nudge." The dolphins with their blunt "noses," gently nudging the dead  boy towards the shore. That one will probably end up in a story.

PLAN YOUR PLOT

(this one was in the gardening  column of the Province)  and  one from  the Van­
couver Courier recently prompted  a note to a friend.

POUND WARNS PETS

I cut it out, and wrote underneath, "You're  an old bitch gone in the teeth."
And so it goes. And so it goes. And so it goes on and  on. I read  Rev. Skeat,  I read  Bartlett's,  I  read  Fowler's Modern  English  Usage,  given  to  me  by an  ex­ boyfriend who wrote, as a greeting, the definition of oxymoron, which  just  about summed  up our  relationship! I have the Shorter  Oxford  Dictionary  but  long to have the real one, all those volumes as full of goodies as good Christmas puddings. I  have  the  Bible,  the  Book of  Common   Prayer,  Shakespeare   and  Partridge's Origins. I have Collins' phrase books in several languages  ("that man is following me everywhere"). I have maps and rocks and shells and  bits of coral from various places to which I have travelled. I scan the  personal  columns,  the  names of the ships in port. And I have my eyes and ears.
I  am  a  dilettante   (related  to  the  Italian   for  "delight"). I  never  learn  any language  properly  but  love to dabble  in  them.  I  have  studied,  at  one  time  or another,  Latin,  Anglo-Saxon,  Middle  English,  Old  Norse,  French,  Italian   and, most recently Greek. I spent  a winter in Athens  a few years ago and saw, every day,  little  green  vans scurrying  around   the  city  with  META<l>oPH   posted  on  a card  in the front  windshield.  "Metaphors." When  I enquired   I  discovered  that these vans are  for hire and  they transfer goods from  one  section of  the  city to another.  Now I long to write an essay called "A  Metaphor is not a Truck."

THOMAS


Last year I took two terms of sign language  at night school. I was amused  by the fact  that  in ASL  (American  Sign Language)   the sign for  "woman" has to do with the tying of bonnet strings and the sign for man  with the tipping  of a hat. These  are  charming archaisms,  like "horsepower"  in  English.  (I  am  also  inter­ ested in mirrors, mirror images, going into and through  mirrors, so signing, which one does to someone facing  you, is fascinating -and  very difficult. I often  came home with an aching  hand.) I would like to take more sign language; I  would like to become, as an African  man  once said  to me, about  English,  "absolutely fluid in that language."
Words  words  words. Sometimes  it all gets on  top  of me  and  I feel like the monster made out of words in The  Fairie Queene. I can't  leave them  alone;  I am obsessed. I move through  the city watching  for signs with letters missing  ("Beef live  with onions" advertises a cheap cafe near Granville and Broadway, " ELF SERVE" says a gas station out on Hastings)  and I am always on the lookout for messages within  words:  can you see the harm in pharmacy,  the dent  in accident, the over in lover? In short, I play.
There  is a  phenomenon, most  commonly  observed  in  photography  but  also talked  about  by people  who  make  stained  glass. It is called  "halation" and  it refers to the spreading  of light beyond its proper boundary.  (With  stained  glass it happens  when  two colours are  next to one another.)   I think  words  can  do that too, or  perhaps  I should say that  I would like to think  that  there  is no "proper boundary" for words. Let them spill over from one language  to another, let them leap out at us like kittens at play. "Wit," said Mark Van  Doren, "is the only wall between us and  the dark."  If a writer, if an artist of any sort, stops approaching his materials  with wit, with laughter,  then he is lost. The  other  day I was making a curry  and  listening to some old Beatles' songs on the  radio.  John  or Paul  was yelling, "Can't Buy Me Love" and  I was thinking about  Basmati  rice. Suddenly I  realized "Basmati  rice"  had  the same  number  of syllables as "Can't Buy Me Love," so every time  John  or  Paul  or  whoever got  to  the  chorus  I  yelled out "Basmati  Rice!" and  did a little soft shoe shuffle while I stirred  the  curry sauce. (Everybody  had a good time.)






THREE POEMS



JIUTOBIOGRJIPHY

I refuse
the straight black line of rage, the run of moments
not fully lived,
and  even at the best of times a fear of ends, delusion, hardly  a spin
on the carousel  of morning
before God the barker calls the next ride

I am circling  the world like a moon, flaunting
my sunlit face, my roundness above the flat blue planes of sky

I refuse all other  geometry, vow that  in the end
mine will be
a long pure spark of waking eye to eye with the stars





SOLJIR FUGUE

They say I wrestled  with  the sun; I do not remember

I do not remember
dancing on the threshold of a leaf while the green eye of summer looked upon  me, saw me young

I do not remember entering the leaf, my diminutive green cathedral
 


Eva Tihanyi

TIHANYI

I was young once, took for my talisman
a light  that  soared soprano, shattered windows  with its song

I do not remember singing  like the light

There is much  in me that  has lapsed
into  a colourless silence,
or sunk or slipped  off

Somewhere behind  me
there  is a love and  a worship but  I do not recall  the sun







BRE]IKTHROUGH

You once thought of him as a fawn but  he turned satyr;
horns  rose from  his head
and  he gouged  your heart  with  them, bucked  you to the wall

Now, in his absence, you fill your  heart
with  a violent  fire cacophony, vow to give it form

It will be a tryst
between  you and  the words, the final love affair;
you will press yourself into  paper, your blood will be the watermark

The night stares  at your hand through the window,  moves closer, a black fox

TIHANYI

You have gathered yourself together for this;
you have been waiting,  building
all your life this complex sepulchre, this hymn for your heart's
last
mad-muscle dancing; and  as the blood ascends to its flowering,
you throw your fist into the page

which sings at last as you will it: like a heavy bludgeon  thunder echoing  in frozen snow


























320

NOT Jl  POEM

Lola Lemire Tostevin


tonight   while reading Art and  Life: The  Metaphorical Relationship
my son comes in    tells me that  the body of the nine year old who disappeared
ten days ago 	has just been found inside a refrigerator
a few blocks from our home
and  as he continues to stand  there     silent
I notice a crushing weight  about  his shoulders

oh God 	I do not want  my son to carry that  weight 	to feel responsible
for those who murder children
for rape     pornography	and  for all those men  and  women  who refuse to see
the connection	and  most of all
I do not want  my son to feel responsible for his own sister
who was also abducted at fifteen

there  are  no words to comfort him
just as there  are  no words to write this with no form 	no language to set us apart as distinctively creative   or even human
yet in the mind's endless search  for reasons
clarity	hardly a day goes by that  I don't remember my daughter's misshapen and  bruised face
her blackened eyes 	teeth  marks  that  cut  through her right  cheek 	her upper lip
the strangulation marks left on her throat
by the leather strap  of her shoulder bag the perfect shape of a human mouth
on the back of her neck
"there is a garden in her face ... " a young  man  said to me once
if you think  rape  is bad
you should  have  been in Vietnam


321

TOSTEVIN

and  not wanting to compare pain monopolize 	I simply said yes that must have  been terrible
but to myself I thought   consent
is already  a form  of communication you    could have said no to that  war but I would  never have said that
out loud

now the realization is too real for words to alter
no poetry can contain this
no function   no distance   no metaphor to transfer  what  the mind  registers

there  is    a fear
that  keeps hovering
and  anger  that  is barely controlled
and  as I write there  is    embarrassment
at the thought that  someday  I may stand before an audience and  read  this

and there is unmediated clarity an unvoiced  cry
a battered face a refrigerator
with a small body inside

NOTE:  "There is a garden  in  her  face ..." is from  Song   of Songs and  also from  Campion's poetry.  In  both  cases it  refers  to  the  serenity  and  beauty  of the Virgin.








322


INFLUENCES


Guy Vanderhaeghe




IT WAS ONLy AFTER I PUBLISHED A  BOOK   thatI  was fo,ced to consider the question of influence on my writing. Until  that  point I had merely written.  But reviewers made  me aware  of the  problem  of influence,  drawing  as
they did convincing  parallels  between my short stories and  the work of writers I had  never  read.  Interviewers, too, were keen to  unearth   literary  debts.  Which writers and books, they asked, had most influenced me?
It was a question I wanted  to answer honestly. But I was not sure I could. For one thing I had the impression I was really being asked which  books and writers I admired  most, asked that  in the certainty that  the answer to both questions was the same. That might  be so, but  isn't  necessarily. Ulysses, for instance,  is one of those universally admired  works which has influenced writers less than  one would think. Remembrance of Things  Past is another.
What  I was coming  to suspect  was that  literary  influences  are  more  various and  varied  than  I had  imagined.  In  my  case, the  threads  of  these  influences resolved themselves into a Gordian  knot which stubbornly  resisted all my efforts to untangle  it. For instance, when asked to produce a list of those authors  whom I particularly admired  I was inevitably struck  by the  heterogeneity  of the list I compiled. I could not but help imagine these authors  incongruously  yoked in conversation  at literary  cocktail  parties. Flannery  O'Connor and  Anthony  Pow­ ell? Christopher  Isherwood  and  Rudy  Wiebe? Alice Munro  and  Evelyn  Waugh?
I could not see how these converging vectors of probable influence  had shaped
my writing.  Worse, I felt I was suppressing another,  perhaps  equally  important list of names. Names such as Zane Grey, Walter Scott, John  Buchan,  and  Robert Louis Stevenson came immediately  to mind. Yet I was afraid  of being thought facetious if I gave these writers the nod of acknowledgement.
It  was only when  I read  Vladimir  Nabokov's  autobiography Speak,  Memory
that  I seriously began  to define and  elaborate  a dim suspicion  I had  been  har­ bouring: that  "bad" writing  is as influential  in the  development  of a  writer  as "good" writing.  A brief  reference  of Nabokov's  to an  article  he  had  read  as a child in the Boy's Own  Paper strengthened  that suspicion because it  helped carry me back, back beyond my first acquaintance with Zane Grey, Stevenson, Buchan,

VANDERHAEGHE

and  Scott,  back  to  my earliest  reading,  to  my  introduction  to  the  Boy's  Own
Annual.
During  Nabokov's Edwardian childhood the Boy's Own  Paper was one of those bellicose boys' magazines  which  tub-thumped  for  the  British  Empire   and  the "right  little, tight little Island!" It may seem strange  that  such a paper  found  its way into  the  Nabokov  home,  but  Vladimir   Nabokov's  father   was  a  wealthy anglophile  who insisted on English governesses, governesses who, in turn,  insisted that  their  little  Russian  charges  read  and  wrote  English  before  they  read  and wrote Russian. Thus the Boy's Own Paper.
All this smacks a bit of Alice in Wonderland. There  is surely something  absurd in the notion of a young Russian aristocrat,  citizen of a xenophobe  empire, read­ ing, in English, the rival claims to glory of a competing  xenophobe  empire. The only thing  possibly more absurd  is that  almost  exactly  fifty years  later,  in  1957 or  thereabouts, I  was poring  over  a  like-minded   publication,  the  Boy's  Own  Annual.  My volume too was Edwardian, an  issue that  Nabokov  might  conceiv­ ably have read  on dark St. Petersburg  winter  evenings,  a book  that  had  lost its covers and was corning apart  in my hands and  which  I, at the age of six, took to be a reasonably accurate  account of the world outside my  bailiwick. No one told me that  the  fabulous  world described  in  its  pages  had  expired  in  the  mud  of Flanders more than forty years before.
Or  perhaps it was just that  I refused not to believe in what  I  was reading.  In any case, I held on to the illusion for something  like three  years before it  evap­ orated.  During  that  time  I  confined  my  reading   basically  to  two  books  (aside from  the insipid  things assigned in school)  and  those  books were an  old  school text of my mother's,  A History of the World, and  the  previously  mentioned  vol­ ume of the Boy's Own  Annual. In the beginning  I found  A  History of the World the more intriguing  because of its illustrations:  photographs  of antiquities such as  Mycenaean   daggers  and  Etruscan   coins,  and   reproductions of  "historical" paintings  which  showed  Egyptian  charioteers  dramatically dying,  transfixed  by Hittite  arrows. The  Boy's Own  Annual supplanted the  History in my affections only as my ability to read improved. Only then  did it become  the staple  nourish­ ment of my imagination. I never read, or had  read to me, for instance, any of the children's  classics such as Winnie  the Pooh, The   jungle  Book, or The  Wind   in the Willows. In retrospect I can say it would have been a good thing if I had  read other  books, but  at  the time  I  certainly  didn't  suffer  from  these omissions. My pre-World  War I issue of  the Boy's Own  Annual  kept me entranced. I needed  no other books. I was like a fundamentalist  with his Bible.
The  Boy's Own  Annual  fell into my hands  by way of an  elderly English lady who was cleaning  out  her  attic.  This  lady  was  typically  English -or  at  least what  North  American  readers  of Agatha   Christie  mysteries  might  imagine  as

VANDERHAEGHE


typically English. A widow, she lived for her huge garden,  her budgerigars,  and a cocker spaniel named  Rusty. She presented me the tattered  copy with the assur­ ance that it was "just  the thing for a lively young fellow." Against all odds it was.
The  contents  of the  Boy's Own, as I  remember  it, divided  fairly  evenly into
three broad  categories. Practical  knowledge; historical yarns which even I  recog­ nized as historical;  and  "contemporary" tales  which  were, at  the  time  I  read them,  already  more  than  forty years old. The  latter  I insisted on  thinking  of as accurate  reflections of life in the British Isles and  Empire.  With  hindsight  I con­ clude  that  this  misconception  of mine  probably  continued  to  flourish  primarily because my parents  didn't  own a television. A TV set would have rubbed  my nose in the grit of reality. But I also must have practised self-delusion on a grand  scale, some part  of my mind  censoring  all evidence  that  contradicted the  Boy's  Own  picture of the world. Still, in my defence I can say that  this was the age of Tarzan movies.
Anyway, who wouldn't wish to keep alive such magnificent delusions? How well I recall the Boy's Own  article on self-defence. Here  was practical  knowledge  in­ deed, a step by step, blow by blow account of the proper use of one's walking stick in repulsing assailants. The reader was enjoined to strike glancing blows off threat­ ening blackguards  because glancing blows foil any attempts at seizing one's walking stick, wresting it from  one's grasp, and  turning  it against  one.  (It  being  under­  stood that  blackguards  were clearly not the kind of fellows to carry walking sticks of their own.)  Recommended targets for such glancing  blows were elbows, shins, and, of course, the crown of the head. As a bonus several  policeman's  grips were described and  illustrated.  When  applied  these grips  promised to bring about  the instant submission of felons. Young readers were reminded  to use minimum  force when practising such grips on their chums.
The  article  incited  in  me  a  powerful  longing.  I  knew  that   there   were  no interesting  blackguards stalking  the  streets  of  Esterhazy,  Saskatchewan, of  the type depicted  in Boy's Own. Nor did  I own an  ashplant.  However,  that  didn't mean  I oughtn't to study  the  article  very closely. Particularly since  I  had,  on the spot, determined  to go to England  where there apparently was an abundance of blackguards, villains, and ruffians. All suitable for thrashing.
The rest of Boy's Own was, if possible, even better, stuffed plum-full to bursting with plucky youths. There were the plucky youths of the  past:  a ferreter-out  of the Gunpowder Plot, an  alarm-raiser  at the Great  Fire of London,  an aider  and abettor  of the  escape  of Bonny Prince  Charlie  to France.  Then  there  were  the plucky youths I  mistook for my contemporaries.  My favourite  among  these was a lad who had  stained  his skin with berry  juice, wrapped  his head  in a turban, and embarked  on a steamer  ferrying pilgrims to Mecca. His mission? To  uncover a ring of Arab slavers dealing in British subjects. After making fog-bound  London

VANDERHAEG HE

streets safe  for  respectable  strollers  I  thought   I might  lend  this  chap  a  hand tidying up the Red Sea. My future bloomed.



IF IT WAS  NABOKov's    PERFUNCTORY  COMMENT  about   the Boy's Own  Paper that resurrected memories which had lain mute  under  the dead weight of all the  books that  followed this one  volume,  books deposited  year  by
year, strata  upon strata,  it was something  else in Speak, Memory that  made  me consider whether  my writing  hadn't been flavoured  by this  early infatuation of mine with the Boy's Own Annual.
Reading  Nabokov's  autobiography  I was struck  by a  curious  thing.  I  noted that  although   Nabokov  makes  frequent  reference  to  the  authors   of  the  great European   and  Russian  masterpieces,  he  devotes  more  space  to  a  man  called Captain   Mayne  Reid  than   he  does  to  either   Blok,  Pushkin,  Tolstoy,  Gogol, Kafka, Flaubert, Dostoevsky, or for that matter, any other writer.
Who  was Captain Mayne  Reid?  Captain   Mayne  Reid  ( 1818-83),  Nabokov informs  us, was a  writer  of Wild  West  romances.  At  the  turn  of  the  century translations  of his work were enormously  popular  with  Russian  schoolchildren. Young Vladimir  Nabokov  was, however, because  of the  diligence  of his  gover­ nesses, fluent  enough  in  English  to  have  the  privilege  of  reading  them  in  the original language.  His favourite,  he tells his readers, was Headless Horseman.
From  what  Nabokov has to say in Speak, Memory it is possible to deduce  that Mayne  Reid  completely  captivated   his young  reader.   Nabokov  even  admits  to re-reading  Headless Horseman as an adult,  and  he maintains that  the  book has its points. It is instructive to note what these points are.
First of all Nabokov takes delight in the artificiality  and  intricacy  of Captain Mayne  Reid's  plots. Second, several passages of prose are  quoted  with  approval. There  is the whiskey decanter  behind  a Texan  barman which looks like "an  iris sparkling behind his shoulder," and the barman  himself is improbably  graced with "an  aureole surrounding his perfumed head."  Now it is true that in all this Nabo­ kovian applause  there is more than  a trace of the familiar  Nabokovian  mockery. But  two things  came  to  my mind  also:  Nabokov's  own  prose  touched  as it  is with  the fantastic  and  a  tincture  of the  archaic, and  his own  taste  for studied melodrama  and  gloriously coincidental  plots. One  has, after  all, only to think  of how improbably   the  nymphet's  mother  was  despatched in  Lolita  to  leave  the field free for Humbert Humbert.
On such slender, even feeble evidence it would be foolhardy  to argue a connec­ tion between Reid and  Nabokov, to see the romancer's taste, filtered and  purified by Nabokov's  genius, later  making  a  bow in  the shadows  of  Nabokov's  novels.

VANDERHAEGHE


But  I sensed  that, if clearly  unprovable, it  was still possible.  Nabokov himself  is frank  in admitting that  many  of the  books  he later  read  resonated with  Reidian echoes.  Dwelling on  Louise  Pointdexter, a  young  lady  equipped with  lorgnette that  he discovered in Headless Horseman, Nabokov  writes,

That lorgnette  I found  afterward  in the hands of Madame  Bovary, and  later  Anna Karenin  had  it, and  then it passed into the possession of Chekhov's  Lady  with  the Lapdog  and  was lost by her  on  the  pier at  Yalta.  When  Louise  held  it,  it  was directed  toward  the  speckled shadows  under  the  mesquites, where  the  horseman of her choice was having an innocent  conversation with  the daughter of a wealthy haciendado, Dona Isidora  Covarubio  de los Llanos  (whose 'head  of hair in luxuri­ ance rivalled the tail of a wild steed') .

In  just  this  manner the  turbaned heads  of  Moslem  pilgrims  that   I had   met  in the  Boy's Own Annual  sprang into  view  when  I read   Lord   jim,  and   walking sticks in the  hands of Henry  James' characters were suddenly transformed from the innocent appurtenances of dandies into menacing clubs.




l:ERE WAS SOMETHING ELSE, TOO. I had  come  to  wonder if I had  not  begun  the  process of learning to write  long ago  with  the  Boy's Own. The  one  problem with  the  magazine was  that  it  was  a  serial,  and   I  possessed only a single  volume.  Some  of the stories had  no beginning. Worse,  some  had  no end.  Several   of  the  more   harrowing tales  had   appended  to  their   last  page   a cruel  joke:  To  be  continued. My  favourite character, the  berry-stained  boy,  I had  to  leave  manacled in  the  bottom  of  an  Arab  dhow on  the  point  of  being pitched  overboard to sharks.  What, I asked  myself in  torments of  anxiety, had happened to him?
I like to think  now  that he would  have  remained  forever  frozen  in  that  queer limbo  of near  death if I hadn't assumed  the  responsibility of  rescuing   him.  Be­ cause  at some  point  in my childhood I came  to realize  that  what  I was  reading was  fiction,  a  structure created by  the  imagination. If I  were  daring  enough I might  collaborate in the  making of it. Or  as I saw it then: the  boy can  be saved. So at about the age of seven or eight  I set about  saving  him, manufacturing ploys and  desperate acts  of desperate courage that  would  deliver  him  from  implacable fate.  In  other  words,  I began  an apprenticeship. I was learning to write.
Perhaps all  my  subsequent fiction  has  been  marked  by  this  experience, this revelation. Certain  reviewers   have  remarked  on  my   "traditionalism."  Others have  gently  chided   me  for  my  interest   in  plot  and  "story." Is  the  Boy's  Own Annual  the  obscure root  of  these  tendencies? Have  the  stratagems concocted to elude  the wicked slavers become, in some sense, second nature?

VANDERHAEGHE

I  don't  know. The  only testimony  I  can  offer  is the  confession  that  when  I sit down  to write it is only with the greatest effort of will I manage  to force the turbaned heads down, out of sight below the bulwarks  of the  dhows, or manage to master the violent and intoxicating  urge to conclude every chapter  with a clear suggestion of imminent peril.
It is, I suppose, only a matter  of time  before  the  will weakens and  the  long serialization  begun twenty-five years ago resumes under  a slightly different  guise. I find that once acquired the taste is hard to lose.

















THE ART OF BLACKMAIL

Secrets and Seeing

Aritha van Herk



IN THE vwm  GRACE   OF   Chaplin""Jue tUne, we watch  the jerky dance  of art  and  life with similar horror  and  delight. The  puppets  panto­ miming  us are  beautiful  and  grotesque,  but  watching  them  enact  a  scene, we
spectate  without   recognition.   That   we  view  their  exaggerated   movements  as symbolic is what  enables  us to sit and  watch ourselves -we see only  representa­ tions. We watch  and see and  do not see. We know he is there, but  the puppeteer behind  the screen is hidden.  We know that  they are there,  but the wires that  jerk the  puppet  limbs are  thin,  so thin  invisible to our  observing  eye, even knowing we look at them  we do  not see. The string  by which the  puppeeter  manages  his puppets is known as a  ficelle. Blackmail by  ficelle: that  which we see but  cannot see; that which we see and do not know we see; that which we see and  know we see, but cannot see.
But blackmail  is nothing  so simple as the writer as puppeteer.  It goes far  be­ yond, to the most elemental of human  apprehensions, the idea of secret. Do writers try  to  explain  mysteries  or  make  them?  And  does  the  reader   who  thinks  he apprehends the mystery  (or thinks he understands  the symbolism)  see the  ficelle? There's blackmail  for you:  the art  is not in the movement  of the  puppet,  but  in the unseen movement of the  ficelle. Blackmail requires three things. First, a secret. Second,  the  secret's  possessor, who  wishes to  keep  the  secret  secret.  Third, a discoverer, who uses the possibility of publicizing the secret to extort  whatever­ money, love, attention. The secret is not secret anymore. The power of the black­ mailer  rests not on his knowledge  of the secret, but  on  the secret's  potential  for not-secret,  its opposite.  If that  potential  for  not-secret  matters,  the  blackmailer has power. But if exposure  of the secret does not matter, blackmail  is impossible. The  blackmailer  relies on the opposite of secret for his role. Without  the idea of secret's opposite he cannot  extort.
Opposites are integral  to secrecy and  blackmail, and  especially to the conjunc­ tion of writer  and  reader.  Opposites  attract; only in  opposition  do  we achieve perfect completion.  Lovers love their opposites, not their imitators.  An opposite is contrary  in position;  placed  or lying  ( !) over against  some thing  or  theory, on the farther side of an intervening line. Oppose counterposes or contrasts, counter-

VAN  HERK

balances, balances.  Or  to dismantle  farther, poses, composes, and  deposes. Posi­ tions a whole or a part of the body for effect. Poseurs we are, all opposites, black­ mailers and  blackmailed  alike. Any secret makes us poseurs. The  writer  and  the reader. The  reader is attracted  by the effect and surprise. Pleasure or  pain can be enhanced  by the extent to which one receives the opposite  of what  one expects. Oppose,  then.  Set  a thing  or an  idea or a  person  over  against. Writer  opposes novel to reader: "Here  it is. Read  this. It  will draw  you into  itself, it will draw you out  of yourself." Oppose,  as in "at  variance,  or  adverse  to."  Resist,  as in "seduce  me."  Hinder  or thwart,  as in "fraction, heat." Contend  against  physi­ cally? Fight.  Influence,  argue,  persuade.  Do  opposites  cancel  one  another?   No secret, no blackmailer,  no blackmailed.  Magnets  or  sides:  opposite  sides of  the street  face  each  other,  but  opposite  sides of  a  building  face  away  from  each other.  Faces, then.  Face, fa<;ade, fabricate, fabrication, lie, all lead  to fiction - not-real  life. To  make  fiction:  to make  life  unreal.  Can  shadows  fall  opposite from one another? In a train, objects fly past in an opposite  direction  to the one we are travelling in. Two people can stand together  and look in opposite directions. Two anything  coming from opposite sides meet in collision. That  train  again;  is it a  C.P.R. train?  Collision hostile, antagonistic?  Anger.  Art  is anger.  No  con­ tented  person  writes.  Repugnant  and  repulsive  opponent   or  enemy.  We  can share the same subject and  predicate  but differ in quality  and  quantity. Quality  matters most. Blackmailer and blackmailed are natural opponents.  Position? Here. There.  Between.
Writing  is a question  of the opposites that  the  writer  plays with  the  reader. The  writer  has to exert her  pre-knowledge  to the  extent  of its oppositeness;  she knows the secret. So we begin and  end, in all seductive  fiction, with secret.  Not just the secret of writing  itself, the secretive  writer,  the secrecy of the  act,  but secret within  fiction as the ultimate  and  terrible  conspiracy  between  blackmailer and blackmailed. Secret is the writer's counterstrategy to the deadly  usual. Secret is the  best enemy  of the mechanics  of plot,  character, time,  and  structure and thus, the true friend  of fiction. Secret is the secret  weapon  of the writer, the  real knife/hammer/quill.




SEEING THE  SECRET is the  problem  of the  reader  and  be­ cause all seeing requires a propositional  object,  that  is the  object  of the  reader's quest -to see the secret. Examples of the opposition  of secret and seeing can  be found  throughout literature,  from  Othello   (what   he  thinks  he  sees)  and  Lear (what  he does not see)  to Borges' Tlon, Uqbar, Orbis  Tertius. My favourite  is Edgar   Allan  Poe's  short  story,  "The   Purloined   Letter."1  The  fiction  itself  is


330

VAN  HERK


deceptively candid,  detective  Dupin's  rational  solution to a court intrigue.  In  the story, the Queen  receives a compromising  letter  in her royal boudoir,  and  while she is reading it, the King enters. She is desperate to conceal the letter from him, but she is forced to leave it lying open on the table. The  King sees it and does not notice it, but a Minister,  coming in, sees the letter and  recognizes both the hand­ writing and  the Queen's confusion. Because the Queen  dares say nothing in  the presence of the King, the Minister takes the letter quite openly, thus notifying the Queen  of his blackmail,  or as Dupin says, "'the robber's  knowledge of the loser's knowledge of the  robber."'2   The  King  notices nothing.  Of  course,  an  attempt is made  to  retrieve  the  letter.  The  police, called  in  by  the  Queen,  search  the Minister and  his apartment several times, but find no letter. The  police, of course, are offered up as excessively careful and  excessively stupid  and  excessively blind. They  make two errors:  they assume that  the letter must  be  concealed,  and  they assume that  because the Minister is a poet, he is a fool. Dupin, on the other hand,  has no difficulty retrieving the letter. He visits the  Minister's apartment and spots it  immediately,  in  plain  view, but  completely  altered  in  appearance, tom  and smudged as though  it were a letter of no importance.  Dupin  hands  the letter over to the  police upon  affirmation  of the  "secret"  that  there  is a substantial  reward involved  (one of three  "secrets"  that  the  Prefect  of police reveals) . This  fiction confronts every aspect of opposition, the binaries of secret and seeing which under­  line the duplicity  of the secret at the story's core. It opposes deception  and  com­ plicity, seeing  and  being  blind,  interpreting and  misinterpreting, knowing  and denying.3  The  King looks at the letter but does not see it. The  Minister  looks at the letter and sees it, but sees also its potential  (its imploded  secret) . The  Queen  sees the Minister  take  the letter  and  knows she will be blackmailed,  but  can  do nothing  without  making the King aware. In the same way, the police look at the letter hidden  in plain  view but do not see it, while Dupin  looks at  the letter  and recognizes it despite  its disguise, which  puts  him in  a  position to  blackmail  the Minister.  Blackmail  is the  privileged  possession of secret;  the  writer's  privilege. Purloined   (stolen)  letter  (component   of a  word) : the  story  is about  a  poet's attempt  to use secret.  Blackmail  with a letter,  the letter jwords  stolen,  used,  ex­ ploited. The writer exploits the secret, the opposite of what is expected.
What  is important is not what  is seen but  what  is noticed. The  writer  creates both  noticed  and  seen, then  brings the  two  into  conjunction, a  perfect  binary, male and  female, old and  young, rich and  poor, black and  white, love and  hate. So are plot, character, setting, and  theme the real enemies of fiction? Or  police/ readers, seeing but blind? Or is fiction's enemy the secret that  the discoverer does not  want  to  discover,  his disavowal,  continuing  and  persistent  myopia?  Or   a slavish lust for miracles, the spectator  seeing only what  he wishes? The  fictional secret needs more  than  blind  miracle  to work. The  enemies of fiction  see, like


33 1

VAN  HERK

Othello's  blind  love, "not  wisely, but  too  well"; 4   and  Seneca's  epigram  warns "The  Purloined  Letter": "Nothing is more  offensive to  wisdom  than  excessive acuteness.''
Blackmail  then.  The  writer  bears  the  duplicity   of  creation,   to  make  both
answer and question in the same fiction; only the skilful puppeteer  is needed  to reveal them to the seeing eye. The  writer blackmails,  knows the secret, fabricates and simulates the discoveries, leads the reader in search  of misinformation. Before knowledge one has monuments  or muses; they survive  obsolete. Temporal order is not fictional order and truth  has nothing to do with false; it is only the opposite of secret. Fiction is the fine art of blackmail, arbiter  between secret and sight.

NOTES

1 "The  Purloined Letter," Selected  Prose, Poetry,  and  Eureka,  ed.  W.  H.  Auden
(New York: Holt, Rinehart and  Winston, 1950), p. 95·
2  Ibid., p. 97·
8  See  Peter   Wollen, "The  Hermeneutic Code," Readings   and  Writings:  Semiotic
Counter  Strategies  (London: Verso Editions, 1982), p. 41.
4 Othello, v. ii. 344·










332

QUJITRE POEMES



POEME

Etrangement l'extreme Est un adoucissement. Le pied passe l'herbe.

L'atome et le thalamus,
La mesange affoiee d'un doigt.

Je cousine
Avec l'oeil sans voisin.
Le bandeau fait  la lumiere.

Ah l'extremement bon, Le retabli.
L'ombre est a portee  d'un geste
Trace sur la feuille.

Masque indien  du tigre
Dans  la carrure de l'ecrit barre.

17 aoilt- 7 septembre 1980





LJICIS

Au lac au reve aux  tues a l'ombre
Un  reve est le feu porte
Sur  I',epaule et comment ne pas faire
En sorte que l'extreme du champ d'herbe Touche a I'inexpiable .ala  potence  reduite Que beaucoup de gouvernes epargnent
D'un sentier  a l'autre lacis des domestications
 


Michel van Schendel


Ainsi l'image est venue  de la levre et du lac
Par  le rire d'un Noir de train.
D'un balancement souple il amassait  les dechets  de plastique.


333

VAN SCHENDEL

Il racontait l'histoire d'un lievre blanc. Il egayait  les voyageurs.

En train, 18 octobre 1981



REPJIRTITION


A l'apaisement,
le bras fluide encore,
La cicatrice eblouie d'une lampe un peu forte

(Hier,
 



ou s'avive le doigt

quelqu'un de proche  y prouvait l'insistance du gite) Comme  lorsqu'a l'aube une ombre desuete glisse,
Achevant de river sa propre  odeur
au clou d'une fleur morte;

Il s'abandonne au pilier,
 
pres des marches de bois;

Il n'entend que le cri multiplie par  le haut des branches
(Hier,
un arbre  a dix pas de chez moi,
peuple  de plumes  pillant le ciel extreme) Il a faim.
Montreal,31 mars 1982



SUITE POUR UN SILENCE

1

Un  kilim est un tapis, un sac, une couverture. Nous l'avons  pose sur notre  lit.
Les nuits ont le gout de la menthe
Et les £leurs jaunes en buissons tapissent la mantee du ciel.

2

La chaise vide arrange l'ordre des dalles. Nous sommes la chaise, le vent.
Le vide est une emblavure
Ou  peut-etre une lampe.


334

VAN SCHENDEL

3

Elle a dit: "Ne  pars pas."
Elle a dit: "L'acacia doit adoucir le ciel
Et balayer la maison."
Elle a des yeux tres etonnes
Qu'elle encadre des mains.

4

lei les insectes  morts intacts
Accroissent la transparence des fenetres. Le vitrail est notre  patience.
Les marches font  l'ourlet,
Nous apprenons a coudre  avec de I'air opaque.

5

En meme  temps  nous avons le temps, Tout le temps.
La chauve-souris est arrivee
A l'heure imprevue,
Elle a pose sur le ciel de la fenetre un aveugle, Nous l'avons longuement dessine sur nos mains.

Les Roches Saint-Paul, 5-28 juillet 1980






335

TWO POEMS



THE NEW SEJISONS: LIGHT  JIND DJIRK

1

In winter
we tread dead  names in all our cities, mornings
we imagine  origins
and  read
our  country's history in our own pulse
and  vein.

In spring
we find ourselves in blades of grass
in fields in provinces, and  listening
we hear
old prairie  winds composing the refrain of secret legacies.

2

In autumn
we stand  on banks of asphalt
as the night  descends
and  wonder
will this city space surv1ve
to hear our  rivers sing
of daylight and clean water above the roar of words
and  flooding numbers
that  issue from  machines?
 


Miriam Waddington

WADDINGTON

3

It may be
citizens  will endure
to march like Birnam  Wood against the whim
of buttons the mindless
push  of levers and
the vanities that  seethe in board-rooms;

Then citizens
will calculate with ploughs the contours of each corner of this earth,
and  they will plant
their  wheat  and  flowers and  raise
the flag of life
to celebrate our love of country
and  declare ourselves rooted  and  revealed
in place.










THE GIFT

Ghostly  hands on my breasts a ghostly  body on my own

(Hush it is nothing only the wind blowing up
from  the valley)

Ghostly  kisses in my ear stars  bursting in my blood


337

WADDINGTON

(Hush  it is nothing only the wind fretting against
the windows)

There are branches on the bed there is snow in my mouth

(Hush  it is nothing only the wind blowing open
the door)

Hands kisses branches of snow
a blanched world spinning in light

(Hush  it is nothing only the wind blowing away
your breath

And hush
he is bringing you a gift
your body's death)









ON COMING TO BRITISH COLUMBIA

Some Personal & Literary Reflections


David Watmough

0ALL   THE  BANES AND   BEN1SONS  affo,ded   by life in
coastal British Columbia,  the relative isolation is surely the greatest  blessing that
could befall a writer. This has certainly  proved to be my own experience -over a  period  roughly  commensurate  with  the  life  of  Canadian  Literature  whose Jubilee we are currently celebrating.
In  1959, when  I first saw Victoria  and  Vancouver,  I was wholly ignorant  of such  matters.  Indeed,  all  my initial  responses to Vancouver,  and  by extension, British Columbia  and  Canada-over-the-Rockies, were quite  negative. Coming immediately  from  the  United  States  where  I had  arrived  in  1952,  I was  un­ prepared  for the residual puritanism  I encountered. The only cheerful thing about Sundays was the name: otherwise it was no bars, no theatres,  no restaurants. And I  was  to  learn  shortly  thereafter, no internationally  competitive literature,  no important  playwriting  or  serious  composing.  Yes,  there  was  a  slight  painting activity,  but  that  was characterized by being a  pale  and  hesitant  replica  of an already  wan watercolour  tradition of  nineteenth-century  British genesis.
What  did I find to like then? Or why the hell did I stay? My responses to those questions were not exactly original.  I loved the beauty of the landscape,  and from my natal  Western  European viewpoint, the weather  represented  a happy  home­ coming after years as a restless inhabitant of New York humidity  and  California  climatic monotony. Here again, thank God, was the "gentle  rain" of  Portia  which could be so happily twinned  to mercy !
However,  the  flora  and  fauna  were for  the  most part  alien  to me  and  as a writer for whom it has always been important to accurately  invoke my natural environment, I immediately  set myself the task of learning  a new  landscape  by heart.  It  wasn't  until  1973  that  a  book  compiled  by  the  Vancouver   Natural History Society entitled  Nature West Coast: As seen in Lighthouse Park appeared, but it immediately  became  my secular  bible and  I applied  myself to the  task of familiarizing myself with its contents in a detailed manner.


339

WATMOUGH

This  establishment   (or  re-establishment,  in  my  case)   of  roots  in  the  sense emphasized  by Simone Weil in her book DEnracinement is something  to which the  geographic, social, and  historical  soil of  Vancouver   and  its environs  is  pe­ culiarly susceptible.  For there  is no heavy weight  of history on a  city only  now celebrating  its centenary;  and in a climate  which  never shouts snow and  ice and parching  drought  but only whispers rain, there is little problem in coming to terms for either  the immigrant  from east of the  Fraser  Valley, or east of the  Atlantic Ocean.  And  for  the writer  who needs the  silence and  space  of  separation, the venue has an allure and an informing sense which I believe is both  progressively and  properly  discernible in the subsequent  literary  expressions of those who have settled here.
Although  the various thralls of literary fashion, common  to all North American creative writing  (but perhaps particularly  with poetry)  are to be evidenced in the coastal  strip  of  British Columbia,  my  perception   is  that   the  orthodoxy  is less intense  here.  Which,  of course, in  comparison  with  our  more  meteorologically dramatic neighbour  to the south as an example,  is hardly  surprising. It has long amused  me that  media  people, from  comics to  commentators, based  in  central Canada, will confidently speak of Canadian  weather  and  thus  climatically  dis­ enfranchise some million and three quarters Canadians of the Greater Vancouver  and Vancouver Island areas.
But  the  error  moves from  geographic  ignorance  to  cultural   blindness  as the arts  of the  coast deepen  with time  and  accumulatively take  on  the  colour  and clime  of the  unique  region  sustaining  them.  That blindness,  unfortunately,  is prevalent  across contemporary  Canada but my confidence is that  the steady evo­ lution  of literary  patterns  in  B.C.,  and  the  deepening  of  roots,  will  make  the divergences of expression facilely visible, even to a child,  by the end  of  the cen­ tury. Using the United  States as example,  we readily accept  the literary  ethos of The South  or Nineteenth-Century New England, the mid-West  idiom  of aSher­ wood Anderson  or Sinclair  Lewis, and  the  fictionally  defined  West  of such  as Wallace  Stegner,  John  Steinbeck, and  Walter  van  Tilburg Clark.  However,  we of the Canadian west coast are not yet as evolved  as the American  counterparts. We have, for  just a little while longer, to relegate these promptings  to the  realm of the intangible  and imprecise:  just gut  feelings, perhaps,  for the close observer of our  west coast  writing, and  the  practitioner  aware  of these  influences  upon himself and his peers in both poetry and prose.
But  my specific concern  in  these  reflections  is to  delineate  my  own  literary growth  as it has been moulded  by the  decision to pitch  my tent  permanently  in Kitsilano,  the  Vancouver  neighbourhood  which  has  been my home  ever since I arrived  in the city. It has been a growth that  while being definitely influenced  by the isolation from  centralist pressures of fashion  and  the  decisions of critics and


340

WATMOUGH

reviewers who are contingent  upon the Great  Lakes literary  establishment, never­ theless has been both sharply  formed and  fed by certain  literary structures much closer to home. For a variety of reasons-not least because I was never invited­ I did not take the Creative  Writing School/English Department route of many of my colleagues. This  meant  that  I was forced  to  rely on such  ancillary  activities as literary  journalism  in both  the print  and  electronic media  to provide  a liveli­ hood as I pursued  my fiction. In the  1g6o's this proved adequate. I could make a reasonable  if not extravagant living from  newspapers, magazines, and  above  all, from the CBC in both  radio and TV. But  by the end of that  first decade  which had seen my Canadian citizenship, my forging profound  links with fellow writers and other artists, I could see that  I had to make some hard  decisions which would basically  affect  my  life and -for me  of  paramount  importance -the  proper husbandry  of what artistic talent I possessed.



E          at the subjective, personal level, of the first stirrings of that  long-drawn  process of centralization  of Canadian culture  as exemplified  within  the  CBC,  was my decision  to  look  for  a  further   source  of income  to sustain  the  fiction  "habit." And  this I  did  by taking  my  individual chronicles  of my ongoing  protagonist,  Davey  Bryant,  and  make  "monodramas" out  of them  by  performing  them  in theatres  or venues which  at least  had  such theatrical  appurtenances as lighting  systems and  some  kind  of stage  on  which I could  place  a  music stand  and  thus  perform  (rather than  merely  read)   my adapted  and  modified short  stories, prose poems, or  chapters.  The  initial  result was not only a  critical  success but  fiscally gratifying  too. Within  a  year  I  had given over two  hundred monodrama presentations,  and  by the  third  year  more than  thrice  that   number   at  venues  across  Canada,   the  United  States,  and  in England and West Germany.
But the very success of the  project  was also the source  of its lethal  problems. To expand further I added  the resources of a personal manager,  and  that  in turn led  to  all  the  costly  paraphernalia of  publicity  (pamphlets,  posters,  handbills, etc.), and  very soon my writerly self was in acute  danger  of being swamped  by a theatrical  self which was as false to my being as it was uncongenial.  To  make matters worse, the cost of creating and promoting a slick theatrical  package necessitated my spending  more  and  more time  "on  the  road."  Apart  from  the fact  that  I could see myself getting further  and  further  into  debt  and  having  to move  frenziedly  for  ever  more  bookings,  I was denying   myself  the  adequate amount  of time  at my desk to write. In fact  it was that  chafing  restriction,  plus the discomfort  of endless travel  to give performances, that  finally determined  my decision to call it quits.  It  is not  without  significance, I  think,  that  it  was only


34 1

WATMOUGH

after the period of presenting monodramas  that  I could experiment  with the vari­ ous other literary forms that  I have subsequently  used in the purveying of  the life of Davey Bryant.  For example,  to come up  with  the linked  chronicles  I  used in the structure of my quasi-novel, No More into the Garden.
I do not think it takes an excess of sanguinity  to believe, as I now do, that  the acquired  craft  of turning  story into playscript  for monodrama presentation, and then once more into the narrative  of the short story or  the sequential  chronicle, provided me with a profound  awareness of my own  writing  in unique  degree - sentence by sentence, word by word. Not that  the labelling,  per se, is of any sig­ nificance, speaking  objectively. Then  I think  that  our  Creative  Writing  Schools do a disservice to literature  in their dividing up of fiction into neat genre concepts and  thus courses for students  to take. Such  appellations  are,  of course, practical and valuable for the scholar and critic, but it is too often a suffocation, or at least
a manacle, for the creative writer.
Once  more I elected to live the west coast isolation and  returned  gladly to the restrictions of the desk. However, this only proved possible in the light of reduced local markets from the CBC and the lesser fees for mere readings after  negotiated fees for full-blown  performances, by the subsidy of a domestic  partner  to handle such basics as food, rent, and transportation. I have more than  once wondered  if the overall picture of cultural  Canada  will ever include the nature  and amount  of subsidization that  is yielded from the partners  of the creative  artists who compose it. Perhaps a requisite statue  to The  Unknown Subsidiser, faceless and  genderless, should  adorn  our  downtown  squares and  civic parks.... Of  course, the  coming to a new place to live and create, even granted  a familiar  type of climate and  the freedom from the imposition of alien fashions, doesn't  guarantee a growth and perfecting of one's work. In  many  respects I came  to west coast Canada with  a literary  signature  evolved and  with  a  style  already  set.  And  one  of  the  costs, perhaps  for me the most important one as a writer, is to  have come to Canada when the a priori constituents of my style and voice were the bases of an irritation which  native-born  Canadians simply had  to  throw  off in  order  to  quicken  the tempo of cultural  expression and find their own  appropriate stances and  voices. As it happens  I do not discern any signs whatsoever  of there  being such  in any uniquely Canadian way. The literary emancipation I have observed all about  me since  I entered   Canada   as  an  immigrant   has  taken   place  in  the  cast  of  a North American sensibility and a North American literary language.  I have heard, of course, of those maple leaf nationalists who scream otherwise. But I remain unconvinced.  There  is no  third  dialect  between  British  and  American  English which affords Canadians their own literary oxygen.
But I digress. What  I wish to stress is that  although  I happily  pay the  price of
being  a British  immigrant   writer  living in  contemporary Canada I am  by  no


342

WATMOUGH


means blind  to the cost or fail to see it working continuously  in my  professional life. Let me daborate. There  was a time, for several years in fact, when I confused my Canadian enthusiasm  with  my British literary background   and,  indeed,  dis­ counted  the latter. The  west coast isolation may well have compounded the fact. It  was not  until  I made  an  LP album  in Toronto  of three  of my  monodramas under  the heading  of Pictures  from a Dying Landscape which strove to wed my voice to my Cornish  texts that  I think the seeds of my proper self-awareness as a New Canadian were effectively planted.
Had   I been  a  poet  then  the  problem -if  such  it  is -would   never  have
arisen. For the divergence between British and  North American  poetry is so great today  that  we might  just as well be talking about  two languages  as disparate  as Spanish  and  Italian. And  the  harsh  corollary of that  is the  poet  writing  in  the British idiom  has little  chance  of publication  or developing a serious reputation in this country or the U.S.A.
In the summer  of I g8 I I was talking to the Australian-hom poet Peter  Porter who has made  London  his home since the  rgso's.  Discussing this matter  of poetic idioms for the various English-speaking countries he flatly took the view that, essentially, no one  community  is slightly interested  in  another  at  this  juncture. That just as neither he, nor Larkin,  nor Redgrove would command  much  interest or enthusiasm  in  Canada, nor  would  our  contemporary   poetic  luminaries  rate high in the  United  Kingdom. For  better or worse, the several  English-language cultures nurture a poetry that shares only the words themselves.
The  situation  is less dramatic in  prose but  exists in some significant  degree.
What  it boils down  to, I think,  is the very raison d'etre  of English  creative  lan­ guage at this point in time. If it is the honed communication  of experience, ideas, and  spirit  of  place, then  the  current   North  American  style  (within  which,  of course, exist the personal signatures of individual literary artists)  admirably  fulfils that function  and aesthetic. But with the British idiom, the aesthetic  goal is more a balance  of semantic  communication with modal sound and  a word-play  which often appears  as prolix if that  British attitude  towards words as sound  and  ikon doesn't  receive special  acceptance. It  is an  attitude  which stems from  a  culture which is primarily  literary  rather  than  visual and  the difference  is underscored  in every television street interview  from  London, New York, or Toronto.
The  distinction  is also indicated  in alliteration  and  a  thirst  for synonym  and breadth  of vocabulary  which are perceived as desirable aims in the conveyance of literary image or within the general fabric of story-telling. It marks the difference between  the  tales of an  Ethel  Wilson  (who  had  that  British  tradition to  draw upon), a V. S. Pritchett, and  a Nadine  Gordimer,  on the one hand,  and  a John Cheever, an Alice Munro,  and  a Mordecai  Richler on the other.
The  trouble is that  while we have a ready awareness of our spoken differences


343

WATMOUGH

in terms  of accent  and  employed  rhythms -as  immediate   example  I  think  of the  Carson  McCullers  title:  Ballad  of t'he Sad  Cafe, which  can  hardly  be  ren­ dered  aloud  with  British stresses, or  at  least  not  as  a  satisfactory   title -the written,  i.e., silent,  word, is more elusive. So that  I  only gradually  gTew  aware that  my prose fiction tended  to find favour  with  those whose inner  ear  detected,  and  more important, appreciated, that  approach of mine which was determined, I suspect, before I was in my Cornish teens.
This is in no way to deny other factors in a writer's  prose-extending all the way from  just plain good or bad writing to those subjective factors  which appeal to  one  reader  and  not  to  another.   But  my  personal  coming  to  terms  with  a further  isolation than my British Columbian  geographical one was an important if painful  step  in my overall accommodation to a  niche  in  the  west coast literary scene. But the realization and acceptance  of that  fact led me to a further aware­ ness which has finally afforded me a confidence which I doubt  I might ever have had had  I not chosen to make Vancouver  my own deeply felt, personal  territory. It  is an  awareness  of the sheer literariness  of  the  goal  I  pursue  in  my  Davey Bryant  chronicles which, in their aggregate,  I hope will add  up to a  panoramic  "novel"  of one man  and  his century:   his private  history against  the  backdrop  of the public one.



LIVING IN  A  PLACE where the salal is a screen, the arbutus  a visual caress and  the mountains  a protection,  I  have  learned  to ask myself only one question  with every page. Can  this be immediately  translated to the screens of film or television? If so, and  to the degTee that  it is so, I have failed  the  ulti­ mate literary  vision. The  word-play,  the verbal  juxtaposition,  the  apportionment of adjective  and  adverb,  the  pursuit  of the  truly  apt  word  from  the  riches  of choice our  language  uniquely  affords -these  are  my most  fervent  and  exhila­ rating  concerns. But here lie treacherous  waters. An  exceptionally  high  doctrine over verbal texture and deliberate richness of  vocabulary  can all too easily lead to an artificiality  and  self-consciousness so  heavy that  it can submerge  the  sense in the writing. Even the pursuance  of what in a Dylan Thomas  was often called "a poetic prose," that  is an honouring  of  words for their  own sake, invariably  has a marked  cost in terms of readers. I  have learned  from  my mail as well as critical commentary upon  my work that it  relies for its appeal  on a very restricted  kind of public. And here again I am grateful for that intensive experience I have had in public reading  which taught  me to liberate  the word  from  the  page, to create  a performance and  thus  reach  a  further  audience.  For  I  am  convinced  that  for every reader  an  author  has a  potential  listener  and  one  of the  most signal  and encouraging  signs of our  Canadian literary  growth  has  been  in  this  particular


344

WATMOUGH


area.  When  I  arrived  in  Canada the  ability of women,  particularly,  to deliver their  poetry  (none   offered  prose)   was  abysmal.  Generations   of  Scots-puritan teaching  that  young  girls should  either  be mute  or  soft-voiced  as testament  to their femininity and sexual purity resulted in an array of female poets who either whispered their words or self-consciously preached them in a sonorous, parsonical fashion that  was as monotonous  as it was irritating.  Indeed,  this great  blasphemy against the spoken word  has still not been entirely banished  from the land.  I still hear  women  poets who  should  leave  their  poetry  to  the  vocal  imaginations  of others. There  are more than  enough men who are equally awful,  but  correspond­ ingly,  there  are  fewer  men  in  current  Canada comparable   in  poetic  or  prose talent  to the distaff contingent. That, of course, has nothing  to do with women's liberation  or sexist balancing  but  a plain observation.  It may  well be otherwise tomorrow.
When  the cultural  self-confidence which erupted  across the  whole country  in the  1g6o's reached  these western shores it did not seem to Cornish-influenced me to express itself in any strong  regional intensity  but, taking  the  United  States  as role model, was generally content  to express North American  experience  through Canadian voices. Only gradually  did the sense of specific place start  to seep into narrative. And  here  I  am  certainly  not  referring  to  a  peppering  of  prose with topographical data.  I  mean  the effective use of place as backdrop  to  character or gesture, and  the impact  of place as an objective informant of the  people one creates and the moods evoked. This  process is quite different  from the utilization of place-as-mood for the purposes of a Sinclair Ross in As For Me and My  House, or the  Canada-based novels of Margaret  Laurence  or  Richler's  Montreal-based Jewish cosmos. But mood in such cases is more palpable than  place. What  is now beginning  to develop  is the  concretization  of literary  place  in  Canada which  is more comparable to a Hardy's Wessex or Les Landes of a Franr;ois Mauriac.
The  British  Columbia I  inhabit  is particularly  susceptible  to  this  manner  of literary  regionalism, and  the city of Vancouver  distinctive enough  to give urban reinforcement  to  the  geo-meteorological  world  of the  coastal  belt.  Free  of the grip  of a  centralist  conception  and  the  oppressive  paraphernalia of  irrevelant cultural  "capitals," I perceive the steady evolution of a fiction, even of a poetry, which is quintessentially of its  place and  only "Canadian" in  that  it is no  part of the  United  States.  If labels are  a  necessary clarification  then  second-century British  Columbia  might  be likened  to the  relation  of Wales or  the  Celtic  West to the  rest of the  United   Kingdom.  The  Brittany  or  Provence,  if you  like,  of metropolitan France.  If that  is so, then  at  a  personal  creative  level  with  my Cornish-Celtic   background, I  have  perhaps  not  journeyed  artistically  very  far at all from that other  beautiful  and distinctive land of my upbringing and literary shaping.


345

TWO POEMS

Wilfred Watson


DIJINJI RIGG

la belle dame  sans 	1 	merc1
1 	portrait of
1
2
her ladyship with 	2	the steel blue eyes
2	still,
3
3
from  the blur 	3   machine
la belle dame  sans 	4 	merc1
4
4    jerk-art
5
5
portrait	5    of cornwall's wife
6    close-up,
6
with  the cornflower			6    blue steel eyes from  the blur 	7	machine
7	ezra pound's



lady of the vortex,

9   diana rigg in iron filings
9    la belle dame  sans merci
9
7

8    clues
8    portrait of
8
from  the blur
1
machine, re adorno's
la belle dame  sans
1
merc1

1

paradox of
2
domination by the
the amusing mrs.
2
peel's amazing
the fingers and
2
faces
subjugated, upstaging

3    lear
stepdaughter

3   la belle dame
of corporate power

3

346

WATSON


and  olivier, dea breath, from  the
la belle dame  sans
5
5    sans merci
5    la belle dame sans merci
 4    exmachina
4    blur machine
4    merci








SONNET TIMES THREE
for Jack Shadbolt, Archipenko, BJ


1
0
uneclipsed
1


1

moon
2
0

2
cloud-scattering

2

newfoundland
3
fixed
sky-detergent
3

stark
ever-changing unchanging
3
stands  the
4 	moon
wall-scaling

4 	claustrophobic
mother

4 	sorrowing

5


5


the d. of

gentleman-lunatic paint
paintings, mouldy

all of them:
bacons,  plush  picassos
9 	raton laveur,
9 	those
9
 5 	devonshire is a
6
6 	but  I will
6 	worth  many
7
7	you a scene worth
7	giottos, well-hung
8 	raconteur
8 	Push
8



347


WATSON



cry



1



'I

frayed
1
hands towards

saint
1
archipenko's   ans.

invented
2
the hole

the ragged unholy
2
skies

re yr henry
2
moore

in 1914
3


question
3



3


for I am

4 	blind



4 	dolorosa

dolorosa

4

5



5 	gloster



5














WOOD

Tom Wayman


Back of the highway, in fannhouse or
cabin, men and  women can meet,
decide  to live together,
have  children, grow out of love,
set up strange and  unique  arrangements or stay alone
but the winter's wood has to be cut.
Around these homesteads, in the hills or along  the rivers
the mills and smelter  can be thriving or reduced to one shift a week
or shut  down,  but the wood has to be found
up old forestry roads
or new microwave access routes, somewhere on the property
or crown  land. What the stove requires
must  be loaded, trucked  to the place,
split, and  stacked  to dry. Pickup, chainsaw, sharpening file, axe:
when  the spring snow
has melted  enough in the trees until  deep  into  the fall,
the loud  hammering whine
of the saw motor, the chunk  and  creak
of a piece of spruce  on the block, smell of oil and  gasoline. Some people believe
a person's value  can  be judged
by their  woodshed  -if this winter's supply is already stored
you're  adequate; if you have a year's extra that's better; if you are two years ahead you're a success. But this
indicates nothing about  quality:
cedar for a fast start,  birch for a long burn  ...




349

WAYMAN

As drifts  rise
from first frost to the eaves the piled fuel slowly retreats toward  the rear of the sheds. By April, in these buildings
more of the ground is exposed - covered  with the chips, bark
and  twigs that  proclaim: time
to get in your wood
















350

TWO POEMS

Phyllis Webb


FOLLOWING
for Daphne Marlatt


Botticelli- I say it and the chord  breaks into  its component parts
la li    la li

That which  is beautiful in Botticelli disintegrates,
gathers again  in women:
a woman  in white, a lily,
a dream in the eye
of Botticelli.

He is standing apart from  Primavera.
He is painting forever her in this full moon winter's night.

A woman in light leans out
and  over me,
waving  a wand of  old language unspoken beyond these words,
touching the black and white  keys
of the walnut piano.

(Glenn's last session in the studio
also producing the pure,  the immaculate art of circumstance.)

Her white sails crossing the water-


351

WEBB

I follow:
a flower is held out
and  placed  in the shell of Venus who rises, wet,
to greet her.






PERFORMJINCE

Who  is this I infesting  my poems?  Is it I hiding behind  the  Basker­ ville  type on  the  page  of  the  book  you are  reading? Is it  a  photo­ graph of me on the cover  of Wilson's Bowl?  Is it I?  I  said,  I say, I am saying-

I am  the  mask,  the  voice,  the  one  who  begins  those  lyrical  poems, I  wandered   lonely  as a cloud  ... I  hear  the  Shadowy Horses,  their long  manes  a-shake  ... I  am  of Ireland   f And   the  Holy  Land   of Ireland  ... I, the   poet    William  Yeats ... I  am   worn   out   with
dreams... .

Or  am I reading, as they say, "in  person," in  the first person?  I step up  to the  microphone. I  wait  for  you  to  cough  with  my  damaged lungs.  "I am  with  you."  The poem  ends.  I move  into  my  higher consciousness,  my lower  voice, my sense of  the  present,  my  invoca­ tion,  my prayer, my tiny faith  in  the  typewritten words  before  me. The poem begins.

Listen: Do you hear  the  I running away  with  the  man  in  the green hat? Look  again. I is off  and  diving into  Fulford Harbour to  run with  the whales. I spout. I make  whalesong. Passengers  on  the  ferry swarm  to starboard to see me disporting myself. I fwe know  they  are out  to get us. Yes, they are  mad  for  education. They'll pen  us up  at Sealand and  we'll  die.  We  don't build   big  and   we  can't shoot.  I commits suicide  in  the  watery  commune, the  vocal  pod.  We  swims on.

I am  performing this  poem  thinking of  Bill  Bissett  at  whose  last performance he did  not  perform. He  put  on  a  record  and  left  the room.  "Wow," as  Bill  would   say.  But   the   whales   have   made   it through Active  Pass. They  pass on  the  message: Put  on  the  record. Sonar  pulses ring  for  miles. Paul  Hom is in  the  Temple of Heaven playing  flute ... Put on the  record.

352

WEBB

I devise.  You  devise.  We  devise.  To  be  together briefly  with   the page,  the fallen  timber.  Or  with  me here  standing before  you  won­ dering if the mike is on, if my mask is on,  persona, wondering what  to  read  next,  or  whether you'll  tum  the  page.  Like  the  state,  I do not wither away,  though the end is near.

I enter the  Edge  of  Night. I join  the  cast  of  General Hospital. I hear the  Shadowy  Horses, their  long manes  a-shake ... I  am  only a  partial fiction.   Look.  I hand   you a  golden   jonquil. Here.  Now. Always. On  the  outgoing breath  of the whales.



























353

ON DEATH AND WRITING



Rudy Wiebe



"T
IHE TWENTIETH  CENTURY SHALL  BE  the century  of  Can­ ada!" So declaimed Sir Wilfrid Laurier,  Prime  Minister  of Canada, in  1904. He may have gotten  the idea from  the speech made  in Boston two years  earlier  by the Attorney  General of Nova Scotia, James  Longley, who said, "The nineteenth  century  was the century of the United  States. The  twentieth  century  is Canada's century," but  whatever  the source, Laurier  laid  claim  to this  century  again  and again for over a year. Eighty-three years into the century  we can see more clearly; even allowing for normal political balderdash,  the statement  is ridiculous.*
And  it would have been ridiculous even if Theodore Roosevelt  had  said  it at that  time about  the United States;  or N. Lenin,  exiled in London  and  dreaming about  the nation of workers and  peasants he was convinced he would found in his native  land,  a  proletariat  which,  when  he had  a  chance  to found  that  nation, would prove as intractable  as any nobility and  he would end by founding  a nation not ruled by a dictatorial and repressive czar, but by a party so brutally oppressive that  anyone,  even Lenin I think in his worst nightmares,  would  have  prayed  to avoid it; if he had had anyone to pray to, besides himself perhaps.
If the  twentieth  century  belongs to any one  nation,  surely it is the  nation  of the  dead.  I mean  that  enormous  nation  of  the  man-made dead  which  during this  century   continues  to  develop  with  such  deliberate,  such  dreadful,   steady speed. The  tiniest, most poverty-stricken of countries  have often contributed  most to its gross national  product.  Its  geographical  territory  is everywhere,  from  the veldt of South  Africa to the "civilized"  cities of Europe  and  the  jungles of  Viet­ nam, or the sands of the Middle East and  the bleak rock of the Falkland  Islands. At times its population  has grown by ten, twelve, and  even fifteen  million  people a year;  today  its inhabitants number  at  least  one  hundred   and  eighty  million, perhaps more for no real census has ever been, or can be, taken. Of  these citizens, no more than  25 percent are soldiers; the rest are civilians  (who always constitute the  bulk of any  nation) , the children,  the  old  men  and  women,  the  farm  and factory  workers,  the mothers,  the  sick and  the  crippled,  all  caught   within  the

*First given  as  a  talk,  in  slightly  altered   form,  at  the  annual  meeting   of  the  Association   of
Canadian Studies  in the United  States,  Maine,  September 1983.


354

WIEBE


boundaries  of their  proper  countries by the relentless maw of this century's  death machine,  and  ground  down  into violent emigration  by that  machine.
Scientifically, that  machine  has been developed to such a point of imaginative brilliance  that  in I g83 it provides the nation  of the dead  with  an overwhelming capacity  for growth.  Indeed,  it seems quite  likely that  the  end  of the  twentieth century  will see only one nation  left on earth, and if we are ever going to have a name  for  it,  perhaps  we  better  hurry  and  suggest one  now.  How  about  The United  Republics  of Total  Death?
Death  is the  normal  end  of life;  I  am  not  talking  about  a  normality.  I am talking  about  death  deliberately  planned  and  man-made, about  human  activity which has no other  objective  than  to kill other human  beings. In  one sense, such activity has been with us throughout human  history; for example,  the  Tatars in their wars with the Russian people used to pile the severed heads of their victims in pyramids around  the cities they destroyed. It is difficult, but  I believe one can grasp  the  "human-ness" of eighty-four  neat  stacks of human  heads  numbering, shall  we say, between  400 and  62 I each;  one could  even  pick  them  up,  hold them one by one in the palm of one's hand, and consider them,  ponder  them like Hamlet-all  before they rotted  completely away. But the issue becomes imagi­ natively ungraspable when the leader of one superpower  declares that  his nation would win a nuclear  war  with  no more than  35, at most 45 million of his own citizens killed, because the enemy would suffer more deaths than that.
I am  referring  strictly  to numbers.  When  we consider  morality,  the  issue  be­ comes even  more  difficult.  For  if morality  concerns  the  relation  between  indi­ viduals, or between an individual  and the larger society, then every human death caused  by human   violence  carries  with  it  a  moral  value,  an  aura  of  morality impugned.  People do not die in masses; the heads in the pyramid  were cut off one by one even if it could be done simultaneously;  every person we kill  has a name. A so-called  mass killer, whether  it be Eichmann  or the  Yorkshire  Ripper,  can really only be judged for each single killing because every one of his victims could claim that  her individual death  had a certain  absolute moral  value. As such, the un-morality  of some killers, whether  they be individuals  or nations sending forth expertly trained  killers in the name of a principle or their  own  national  security, becomes morally incomprehensible  to the contemplative  mind. That a few people should  be able  to kill every  human  being on  earth,  including  themselves, is of course now technologically possible but it is not, I think, morally graspable. For as Hegel says, at a certain  point  a quantitative change, if large  enough,  becomes a qualitative  difference.  We  cannot  understand, we cannot  express  in  words  the immorality  (do you notice  how  weak that  word is?), the measureless immorality of the  Founding Fathers  of  The  United  Republics of Total  Death.  It drives as far  beyond our  moral  comprehension  as our  grappling  wtih  the  imponderable


355

WIEBE

curve of space:  what is outside the edge of the universe, beyond that  which even­ tually must  return  to coincide with itself? We cannot  speak, or think,  of  it;  we have no words.




HAVING BEGUN WITH THIS MOST HEAVY of all possible intro­ ductions, what  can I possibly say to justify my own recalcitrant and  dogged  per­ sistence in  writing  fiction? There  seems no  more  social  point  to  making  novels in the twentieth  century than  there would be in crocheting  doilies if the Ice Age were once again  advancing  over our continent.  And if I persist in  writing  novels, who will be a reader?  I belong to no impoverished so-called  "developing" nation; if I did, my work might be of romantic or revolutionary interest, condescended  to perhaps  but at least considered. Nor am I a citizen of  the supernations; if I were a significant writer there, it is highly likely that  I  would  be published  in all parts of the world  because it is essential for every  nation  on  earth  to  know  what  the U.S.A. or the U.S.S.R. considers important. No, I belong to the unlikely northern  half of North  America,  a nation  materially  rich enough  to  be envied  by almost everyone but socially and politically meaningless. Canada makes the world  news only when the Soviet Union destroys our hockey team,  again, in an ice arena,  or when a Canadian Very Public Person spends a weekend in a New York hotel with a U.S. rock star. Is there any point in my writing novels?
Well, let me tell you something:  I once had a brilliant  chance. It happened five years before I was born;  in the fall of 1929  when  my parents  bundled  up their young family and  tried to get out of the Soviet  Union.  Together  with  thousands of other  Mennonites  who had  been living there  for seven  generations,  they  left their  villages and  what  property  they  had  and  flooded  into  Moscow.  Officially there was no hope for them, but they wanted  to make one last desperate  attempt, by means of a massive gathering  together, to importune, to force, to shame, what­ ever you want to call it, the government  into letting them leave the Soviet  Union.  And it worked, to an extent. For no known reason, in November 1929 about g,8oo Mennonites  were given exit visas, put on trains  as "landless  refugees of German origin," and shipped  helter-skelter to Hindenberg's Germany. Some  I4,ooo  others were sent back, either to their villages or, almost as often,  to prison  camps some­ where in the farthest reaches of the world's largest nation.  My problem is that  my mother, father,  two brothers, and three sisters were among those g,8oo  who were shipped out.
I  began  to get  a clearer view of my problem  in  the  middle  sixties when  the writings of Alexander  Solzhenitsyn began to be known in the West; this climaxed of course with  the  vivid drama  of his expulsion  from  the Soviet  Union.  I  read

WIEBE


everything he published, books upon books, and they were truly magnificent. Dear God,  what  a  writer!  And  what  a  platform  from  which  to address  the  world: secret  police, torture,  hunger,  imprisonment,  and  exile, all rooted  in  the  Stalin purges by terror  which affect everyone on earth  to this day much  more  directly than  the horrors of Hitler.  I even thought  of a possible short story called "Lucky Solzhenitsyn."  Then,  this  past summer,  all that  Russian  awareness  was revived for me with a particular strength.
Two of my father's  brothers and their families also made that  flight to Moscow in  I 929; they were sent  back, and  the  brothers  disappeared  into  Stalin's  Gulag never to be heard  of again.  But one of their sons, my cousin Peter,  I9  years old that  autumn in Moscow, did survive fifty years in the Soviet Union  and  in  I979 he was allowed to settle in Germany  under the Soviet-West German  Umseidlcr agreement  negotiated  by Willy Brandt.  InI 980 I lectured  at the  German  Asso­ ciation  of Canadian Studies  in Gummersbach, and  at  that  time  my  cousin  was living within two miles of where I spoke; but neither of us knew the other existed. Now in July  I983, we discovered one another.  When  I saw him  coming  towards me through  a crowd of people, it seemed I was seeing the face of  my father  as he was just before he died. And Peter greeted me in that marvellous Russian manner  of full embrace  and  triple  kissing, laughing,  "You  look just like  a Wiebe,  a real Wiebe!" A wonderfully cheerful, tiny man who had been to the Gulag  twice, the last time in I952  when he was arrested because a group met in his home regularly to read  the Bible and  pray. Though  they couldn't  prove that  he  was spreading  anti-Soviet propaganda (officially there is religious freedom in  the Soviet Union) he was nevertheless sentenced  under Article 58 of the Criminal  Code, sentenced to 25 years of hard labour.  Now he tells me, "It was all right, I had only four years, only four,  they let me out  in the  Khrushchev  Amnesty after  Stalin  died."  And he holds me, laughing  and  laughing,  there is no limit to his happiness  at meeting me.
InI 956  when  he returned  home four  thousand  miles from  that  prison camp near  the  Chinese  border,  I  was graduating from  a  Canadian  university  and  I wanted  to become  a writer.  I had  every chance,  to be whatever  I wanted.  But what could I write, really? An immigrant  child born in an obscure corner  of an unimportant land.  I have been writing fiction for 25 years now and  the question is still there, it does not go away. What  can I write? Or should I say whom?




IN I92I OSIP  MANDELSTAM WROTE:   "Just  as a  person  does not choose his parents,  a people does not choose its poets." I would  not begin  to compare  myself to  the  greatest  Russian  poet  of the  twentieth  century,  but  his


357

WIEBE

words, for me, are  profound.  The  poet is parent  to  his people;  the  poet  makes his people  known  and  recognizable,  an  acting  and  speaking  manifestation;  he begets them, he enfleshes them, yet, he gives birth  to them.  I was born and  grew up  in  a  rocky  bushland  of  northern  Saskatchewan, a  landscape   homesteaded, cleared, and  broken to the plough  (wherever  it was cleared,  most of it was still poplar  and  spruce  thick as hair,  you had  to  walk sideways  to  get  between  the trees, literally), a place where the temperature varied  150 degrees, easily, between winter  and  summer, born  among  a people who had  run  to the opposite side of the world to escape one of the bloodiest revolutions and  civil wars and  anarchies and starvations  known in history, and to me it was all invisible. It was the world I fell into at birth, and I could not see it. "How  do you write in a new country?" my friend  Robert  Kroetsch  asks. How  can  you see yourself without  a  reflector? Kroetsch  continues:  "People  who feel invisible try to borrow visibility from those who are  visible. To  understand  others is surely difficult. But to understand  our­
selves becomes impossible if we do not see images of ourselves in  the  mirror - be that  mirror  theatre  or literature  or historical  writing.  A local  pride  [he  uses
the phrase of William Carlos WilliamsJ does not exclude the rest of the world or
other experiences, rather, it makes them possible."
The  true writer writes her people, her place into existence. Out  of herself; and in this sense "birth" is a more natural  image than  "inventing." People and  land­ scapes and  historical  events do  not  create  poets:  it  is exactly  the  reverse.  The American  Civil War did not make William  Faulkner,  nor the Russian  Civil War Mikhail  Sholokov. The  literature  I devoured  as a child  was  most definitely  not made  by people  who  had  lived  on  the  prairie  or  rocky  Canadian  bush;  they knew nothing  of picking rocks and  Mennonite  hymn  singing  and  Low German  and  the swampy ooze of muskegs breathing steam from subterranean fires in the rigid winter like spirits breathing  upwards through  the snow. So, growing  up in such  a  place,  among  such  people,  what  could  I  write?  Whom could  I  write? Listen, let me tell you. Let me tell you the story of a Cree man  named  Maskepe­ toon, The  Broken Arm, who was born somewhere  around   1805  near  the  North Saskatchewan  River, whose picture  George  Caitlin  once  painted. All the  places where he lived can be seen to this day, as can the place in the Peace Hills  (south of Wetaskiwin,  Alberta)   where  he met  the  Blackfoot  man  who  had  killed  his father.  But, instead of killing him immediately,  Maskepetoon  told  him to mount  his own horse:

The Blackfoot looked at his friends without hope, then mounted in one swift move­ ment and waited, his face clenched to accept whatever hit him first. Maskepetoon looked up at him.
"Both my hands are empty," he said then. "You took my father from me, so now
I ask you to be my father. Wear my clothes, ride my horse, and when your people

WIEBE

ask you how it is you are still alive, tell them it is because The Young Chief has taken his revenge."
Slowly the old Blackfoot slid from the horse and  faced  Maskepetoon empty­
handed. Then he took him in his arms and held him hard against his heart.
"My son," he said, "you have killed me."

Listen, let me  tell you  another  story, of an  American  woman  who  comes to Alberta  from Illinois with her husband  and  three sons in  1go6  to "make  a better life for themselves" as they say, and how her first apprehensions  about  the prairie gradually  gather  into a profound  fear. The story is called "Mter Thirty  Years of Marriage," and  she fears not merely loneliness, it is space, it is the singleness of woman's  work, it is her silent self. This goes beyond fear  into  primordial  terror so deep she cannot even talk of it, but she must finally face it in her winter house, which is both  her shelter and  her prison; only when she puts her  very head  into the centre of the terror  is she able to sleep without  headache  or dream,  to sleep at last.
There  are a thousand  stories for any prairie writer to tell, whether  the world at large listens or not. I have told only a very few of them, and once the stories have been made, of course, they will be there forever;  or at least as long as there  is a human  ear  and  eye to  perceive them.  This  came to me in  a  new  way recently while I was reading  aloud  "The Angel of the Tar  Sands." That very short story tells how the operator  of a giant  bucket  dredging  up sand  for oil processing at Fort  McMurray cuts into the body of an angel buried  fifty feet below the earth's surface.  Who  knows what  we will encounter  now that  we have  the  technology to rip up the entire earth in an organized way.
And that  thought  about  the Athabasca  Tar  Sands, of course, brought  me back irrevocably to  my United  Republics of Total  Death;  for the sands are right there in  the  northern  Alberta  space  of the  Primrose  Air  Weapons  Range  where  the United  States  government   wants  to  test the  ground-hugging Cruise  missile  be­ cause the  terrain  of northern Alberta  is so much  like the  terrain  of the  Soviet Union.  Developing the endless, brutal  possibilities of our  United Republics.
So though  I would like to speak of men and of angels, I am nevertheless brought
back  to  death -where  I  began.  I  do  not  believe that   writing  is like  death. Making  things with words is not at all like being killed. I once wrote that  writing was like climbing  a mountain, a mountain  which did  not and  would  never exist unless you climbed it. That is still a good way of saying it, but  perhaps  it is too ego-oriented. Let me try again.
Let  me say that  writing  is like taking  a long  journey. You  must  travel  every day,  and  every day  you decide  roughly where you would  like to go, what  you would  hope  to see, but  you never  know if you will actually  get  there.  You  do not really know where you will eat that day, or what, nor where you will be able


359

WIEBE

to rest, if at all, and you may not even have a place to sleep when  night  catches you. The  only certainty  is that  you are travelling  and  that  travelling  with  you is another  person. This  is a  person you love;  you are  together  in everything  you encounter,  whatever  you eat, wherever you  rest or sleep;  whatever  the  circum­ stances there you two are together. And that  is enough.  Together  you are enough for anything, anything in this world.



















g6o

KENSINGTON G]IRDENS, M]IY 1982

Christopher Wiseman


Subdued. Headlines have stared  at us
All day with  news of ships sunk in the South Atlantic by sudden missiles nothing could stop. We've come to sit, to find normality.
Shirt-sleeves. Summer dresses. Distant traffic.
Children play or are wheeled  by in the sun. Ducks  lead  trails of camouflaged offspring, Seeking  bread. A convoy of them glides past When a gull appears from  nowhere,  huge, ugly, Skimming the surface  of the green water,
Takes  the last duckling and  carries  it
To a flat stone in the middle of the pond
Where another waits. They  hold it down  and beak Its guts and  eyes through a desperate downy  flutter. A thin unbroken scream goes on and on.

Kensington Gardens. The right  place for small Contentments. Today  the headlines and  now this. There's anger  in me. The gulls preen on their  rock, Then one takes off again,  seeking the convoys.
I leave my paper, its news of war and bodies,
Turn my back, stride quickly  away, hearing
Terrible wings, fast wings over water.







A CYCLE OF IND



George Woodcock




And in your excitement at the trip, the last thing in the world that would occur to you is that the strangest glimpses you may have of any creature in the distant lands will be those you catch of  your­ self.
MARGARET LAURENCE, The  Prophet's Camel Bell



IHAVE BEEN TRAVELLING TO  INDIA, on and off, for more than twenty years. I went there first in 1g6r,  by one of the old P & 0 boats through  the Suez Canal,  making  the ritual  stops at  Port  Said  and  Aden  and  landing  finally
at Bombay. I returned  from my most recent trip, by crowded  airliner, via Tokyo, in the early weeks of 1983. Over  the years I have written  five books, and  at least a hundred  articles, reviews, and  broadcasts  in some way connected  with  India, and  I suppose the accumulated knowledge and  observation  they represent  would justify me in assuming the dubious title of Old India  Hand. I am, at this moment, engaged in my sixth Indian  book, and it is the increasing difficulty of the relations between my travelling persona and  the country  I have been visiting so long that prompts  me to write this essay, since I  realize  that  my  ways of  perceiving  the country have changed over two decades and I am led to speculate  on how far the changes are within me, the perceiver, and how far they are in the land  perceived.
The  first visit, on which my wife Inge accompanied me as she has done on all the later  journeys, and took a series of evocative photographs, resulted in the first of my Indian  books, which I called Faces of India; it was published in 1964, two years after I returned. The very title tells something about  the differences between my perceptions  then  and  now, when  I am  contemplating calling  my  new book Walls  of India. Faces give more access than  walls. And  there  is no doubt  that  I wrote  Faces  of India   with  a  sense of  having  gained  great  access into  Indian societies and cultures and a considerable understanding of them.
There  is a considerable  pre-history  to that  first journey.  My interest  in  India was coterminous  with  my  interest  in  Gandhi, which  began  during  the  193o's when  I  was converted  to pacifism;  pacifism brought  me  to  anarchism,  since it

WOODCOCK


made me reject the claim of the state to dictate  my actions, and  anarchism  in an oblique way confirmed my pacifism, since I concluded that  there was no coercion more extreme  than  the killing of a man. So I rejected all idea of violent  revolu­ tion, yet I recognized that  my ideals of peace, freedom, and  equality could only be achieved through  major  changes in society, and I found-or thought  I found
-the solution  to this problem  of radically changing society without  killing  any­ body in the kind of mass civil disobedience which Gandhi  developed in the Indian  struggle for independence and which he called Satyagraha, or  "Soul-Force."
I began  to read  everything  I could find by and  about  Gandhi and  to search out books on India,  and  particularly  the novels by Indians  that  in the  I 93o's and I 94o's  were  beginning  to  be published  in  London.  I  was greatly  attracted, for their  social  awareness  and  their  exotic  colouring,  by  the  novels  of  Mulk  Raj
Anand,  like Coolie and Two Leaves and a Bud, and a little later, moving around
in the bohemian  half-world  of wartime  London,  I encountered  Anand,  and  we became good friends. It was he who introduced  me to George Orwell.
Time  went on. I rejoiced  at  India's  liberation  in  I947•  and  mourned  greatly over Gandhi's death  in  I 948, not only because he had  been murdered  by fellow Indians,  but  also because with  his departure India  seemed irrevocably  set under Nehru's  direction  on  the  path  towards  becoming  a  military  and  industrialized nation-state  on the western model. Then,  for awhile, my interest  in India  hiber­ nated.  I came to Canada in I 949, and,  travelling to Mexico in  I 953 and Peru in I956, I had enough strange cultures to assimilate and write about. But in the back of my mind  the thought  of visiting India  lingered. I began  to develop  a  curious feeling that  a missing part  of myself was waiting  to be recovered  there, and  by I 959 I was anxious to go. I was still concerned with the influence Gandhi's  teach­ ing and example might still wield in liberated  India,  and  I persuaded  the CBC to commission a radio  documentary on the subject.  My  publishers,  who were then Faber  & Faber,  commissioned  a  book,  and  the  Canada  Council,   by  now  in operation,  paid my fare.
When  we reached  India  things seemed to fall together  in the same propitious way. There,  in Bombay  when  I landed,  was my old  London  friend,  Mulk  Raj Anand,  and  a letter of introduction brought  me to the  house of Patwant  Singh, editor of Design; between them Mulk and Patwant  introduced  us to a great range of literati  and  artists, among  whom  I  remember  the shy, ironic  figure of R.  K. Narayan,  whom I thought   (and  still think)  the finest of all the Indian  writers in English. Later, by chance in the corridors of All India  Radio,  where I was getting help in making  my radio  programmes,  we encountered  the Tibetan scholar  Lob­ sang  Lhalungpa, through   whose  introductions  in  the  refugee  community  we eventually  met  the  Dalai  Lama,  and  became  involved  in  aid  work  that  would largely dominate  most of our  next two decades. Later,  by bus, by car, by air,  by

WOODCOCK

river boat, we wandered on a vast sweep through  India, from the Kashmir  border to Darjeeling  in the north, and southward  as far as Cochin  and  Madurai, finally leaving  India  by the  ferry  that  crossed to  Ceylon  (as  it  then  was)   at  Adam's Bridge.
Re-reading the book I wrote from that  journey, Faces of India, what strikes me
first is a vividness and  clarity of visual perception  and  description,  and  next  a quality of innocence that extended from my younger self to the country I describe, or vice versa. Perhaps  inevitably one's first view of a country  is sharper  and  more freshly coloured than later ones; it is almost a commonplace of travel writing that the narratives  of rapid  journeys through  an  unfamiliar country  by a  perceptive traveller are usually quite different from the accounts  given by people who have lived for a longish  period in the same  country,  and  whose  perception  of detail gets blurred  by custom even if their knowledge of the local life by the same token becomes more profound.
I went  on that  first journey to India  with  two  advantages. First, our  earlier
travels in Mexico and Peru had inoculated me against  the culture shock that often comes from the first encounter with deep poverty;  in Mexico I had been so shaken that  I  was  paralyzed  as a  writer  for  several  months,  but  nothing  of  this  kind happened  in India,  where  I was moved  by what  I saw  but  not  incapacitated. Secondly, the fact that  I had come with a specific project -the radio documen­ tary on Gandhi -which required that  I search out and interview a large number  of people, gave me a kind of access to Indian  life that would have been much more difficult  for  the  mere  wanderer,  and  this  advantage  was  supplemented   as  we became involved with the Tibetans  by a series of especially interesting  encounters  all the way along the Himalayan  foothills from Dharamsala to Kalimpong.
These factors may explain the variety of Faces of India in terms of human encounters,  and  the  fact of an  expectant  eye meeting  an  entirely  strange  land­ scape and  townscape  may explain the visual vividness of the  book. But it  is the innocent  quality  that  at  this stage, two  decades  later,  impresses me.  It  cannot entirely have been the novelty of the scene. It  was partly,  I think,  my own  desire to find a country not irrevocably committed  to the paths of centralized nationalism and  industrialism   which  it seemed  to  me  were  destroying  the  societies of  the West, and  partly also because India,  at that  time, did  give the impression that  it contained  possibilities lost already  in the West. The  quest  for  Gandhi's influence was of course a manifestation  of my approach; I hoped  to  find, fourteen  years after the country's  liberation,  the evidence that  Gandhi's great  plan of a decen­ tralized  society  based  on  village  regeneration   was  still  alive  in  the  minds  of Indians, and my findings were perhaps coloured  by my desire. But India  was still that  country  of immense  variety  which  the  British  had nurtured,  perhaps  not entirely  deliberately,  by  preserving  the  double  system  of  directly  administered

WOODCOCK


territories  and  native  states.  The  native  princes  had  been  unseated  and  their realms incorporated into larger units, but still enough remained  of the traditional differences they had  preserved to give India  a quality of exotic diversity which it has since slowly lost. Perhaps  indeed  we were going at  the  best time, when  the old tyrannies,  both British and  native, had come to an end, but the ancient  local ways of life that   had  managed   to survive  under  their  sway  were  still  largely untouched  by alien influences.
In  fact,  even while we were in  the  country  on that   journey of  Ig6I-62, the
events were happening that  would irrevocably transform  India.  One  day, trying to get from Agra  to Delhi, we found  that  all the trains  had  been cancelled, and we had  to  hire  a car  at  an  exorbitant  price  because of  the suddenly  increased demand. The  railways were in fact being used for the invasion of Goa. This  was not Nehru's first military adventure; he had sent his troops into Hyderabad when the Nizarn was talking  about  making it a sovereign state in the middle of India, and  he had  done  the same in Kashmir  when Pakistani  irregulars  carne over the border. But the first could be interpreted  as an internal  policing operation  and  the second as an act of self-defence in disputed territory. The attack  on Goa, whatever its moral aspects, was politically an aggression against the possessions of a foreign power and  its possible repercussions were quite  different.  A few  weeks later  we were in south India,  attending a dinner at the Maharaja's College in Mysore, and as we sat out on the lawn afterwards, the conversation turned  to the Goa incident, which,  as south  Indians,  most of the  professors who  were  present  treated   with detachment as an adventure of the "Men  of Delhi," as they called Nehru  and  his ministers.

One of the younger professors was particularly concerned with the danger  of a chain reaction that  might run through the whole of Asia. He saw the possibility of the smaller nations, like Indonesia, using India's example to justify their own attempts  to  take by force what  they could  not get  by quick negotiation. "And perhaps it will not only be the smaller nations," he said. "One  never knows where such a process may end. I fear that Nehru and Krishna Menon have set something in motion whose consequences they will soon be regretting."  Within  a  year his fears were confirmed when the Chinese armies marched over the mountains into Assam, but on that  warm, tranquil  night in Mysore it seemed no more than  an interesting speculation between cigarette and cigarette. (Faces  of India, p.  241.)


IWENT TO  INDIA  AGAIN  over the winter of I 963-64. This  time we were on a longer  journey, which began in Karachi  and  ended in Tokyo, and the book I wrote as a result of it, Asia, Gods and Cities, covered not only India,
but  also West  Pakistan   and  East  Pakistan   (which  later  became  Bangladesh),

WOODCOCK

Thailand, Cambodia, Malaysia  (and  Singapore,  which it then  included), Hong Kong and Macao, and Japan. I had vaguely in mind  the revelation of some com­ mon strain  uniting  all these countries, but to discover that  would  have  needed a long period -possibly years -in the area, and for the most part Asia, Gods and Cities turned out to be a series of long self-contained essays, the main theme bring­ ing them together being the problems and ardours of travels between the countries described, which had made going from Thailand to Cambodia difficult and going to Burma impossible. Nevertheless, there was a unity about  the earlier  part  of the book, entitled "The Double Land," since-apart from the embedded  chapter  on our return  to the republic of India -it  concerned  the lost half of British India,  Pakistan,  which came into existence when liberation  in  1947  was so precipitately conducted  by Mountbatten that it inevitably involved partition. Here again  I had an  assignment-another  CBC  documentary-which gave  access  that   might otherwise have been difficult to many interesting Pakistanis.
Looking again  at  Asia, Gods and  Cities,  I find  it  an  altogether  darker  book than  Faces of India, and  this  applies  especially  to  the  first  section.  My  own attitude  was less optixnistic, and inevitably less innocent,  since I had  been  follow­ ing carefully  the news of strife -India  and  Pakistan,  India  and  China-that had been erupting  from this area since our first visit, and  I realized  that  changes were taking  place in India  that  would make any turn  towards  a  new Gandhian society even  less likely than  it  had  been in  xg6x. But  apart  from  my  personal assessments of the political situation, there is no doubt that  the general atmosphere  of the two divided parts of the old India had become much darker  than  I remem­ bered from  two years before. In  Pakistan,  Parliamentary  democracy  had  foun­ dered,  and  Ayub  Khan   was  trying  to  temper  his  dictatorship with  a  curious indirect voting system called "Basic Democracy," though  the army was still clearly in power. The  martial  races of  West Pakistan  were still relatively happy  with this situation,  but already in East Pakistan  on the far side of India  we found  resent­ ment growing bitter  because of what the Moslem Bengalis of this region regarded  as geographical  discrimination.  Whether  it  was  the  fault  of  the  authorities   in Karachi  or whether of an inherent  flaw in the Bengali economy, the poverty there was on a vaster and  more unrelieved scale than  anything we had  seen in India; in  towns  like  Dacca  and  Chittagong    (which   I  came   to  describe  as  rectum mundi), infinitely decrepit  and filled with positive herds  of diseased  beggars, we felt  nothing  but  despair  at  the future  of Asia. The  relation  between  India  and Pakistan  had  descended into a fratricidal  hatred  on  both sides;  India's  humilia­ tion by China,  which it could not hope to humble in return,  seemed to have been diverted into a greater fury against Pakistan.
Within India  we spent our time largely travelling in the Himalayan hill regions, which  we visited  to  arrange  aid  for  the  Tibetan refugees,  an  occupation   that

WOODCOCK


inevitably  cast  a  certain  seriousness  over  our  personal  view  of  the  world  we entered.  But quite outside such subjective factors, we found  there an atmosphere of fear and suspicion quite  different from anything we had experienced  two years before.  The   roads  were  full  of  military  convoys, building   up  India's  armed presence  on  the  northern  frontier.  Foreigners  who associated  with  the  Tibetan refugees were carefully watched. Permits were now needed, not only to go to Kalimpong and the autonomous state of Sikkim, which were actually on the verge of Chinese-controlled  Tibet,  but even to visit Darjeeling.  We had  friends in Sik­ kim, and  with a great  deal of difficulty managed  to gain  a permit  to visit  them, but  a  day  before  we  left  Delhi  the  permit  was inexplicably   cancelled.  Such incidents,  and  the general atmosphere  of suspicion and  intrigue  from  which they emanated, inevitably  changed  and  charged  what  I wrote on  India  at this  time, and the different mood of Asia, Gods and Cities, as compared  with Faces of India,  was due partly  to the great  political shifts that  were occurring  in South Asia and its environs at this period, but partly also to the subjective shifts on my  part  that led me not only to expect less than  I had found on my first trip  but  also to react pessimistically to those changes  I saw. It  was experience taking  over  from  inno­ cence.


BuT IN   A  WAY INNOCENCE  fought  to re-establish  itself. For
I went on that  journey of I963-64  with a second book, as well as Asia, Gods and
Cities, in my mind. On  our first trip I had  been fascinated  by the Graeco-lndian sculptures  from  the  area  of Gandhara around  modem  Peshawar   which  I  had found  in  the  National   Museum  in  Delhi  and  the  much   more  lavish  Indian Museum  in Calcutta. I began  to study the background  of this fascinating  hybrid art in the strange history of the Greek kingdoms that  arose in Bactria  (now Afghanistan) after  Alexander  died and spilled over the Hindu  Kush  into  India. At Taxila  and  other  places in what is now Pakistan  I  was able to visit some of the Greek sites, now strangely forlorn in a landscape which deforestation  has long desiccated.  The  last of the  Greek  kingdoms of North  India  vanished  when  the Parthians  destroyed  the realm  of King Hermaeus  and  his Queen  Calliope  about
40 years before the  birth  of Christ,  somewhere near  Peshawar,   but  Greek  mer­ chants  continued   to  trade  from  Alexandria  to  the  Malabar  Coast  and  Greek mercenaries to serve as bodyguards  to south Indian  rajas for centuries afterwards.  Nobody had yet written  their whole story, and I did so in The  Greeks in India.
But why, I now ask myself, when I re-read that  book, did I find it necessary to write it as well as Asia, Gods and Cities? It  was, I think,  an  attempt  to recover that  sense of pristine  wonder  at an unknown  world which  I had  experienced  on

WOODCOCK

the travels that led to Faces of India. True,  the story that  I told of the Greeks who penetrated  into India beyond the limits of Alexander's  conquests was intrinsically a fascinating  one. But it was especially so in a  personal  way because it enabled me, even as I looked at India  with  a far  more  pessimistic eye than  on our  first journey, to see the country once again  with  an  innocent  eye when  I put  myself in the mind of King Menander  riding into the wild and  half-tribal  India  of two millennia ago and finding there a strange marriage  between the logical clarity of his own Hellenic mind and the inspired rationalism of the Buddhism which the sage Nagasena  taught   him  in  that  extraordinary  Platonic   dialogue  transplanted to Indian soil, theMilindapanha (The Questions of King M enander).
Clearly  history  rather  than  another  travel  book  was the  medium  in  which  I
could keep alive in my mind that  India which I had first encountered, and  whose loss even a few years later was already distressing me, and  when Alan  Pringle of Faber  & Faber  suggested to me that  there  was probably  a very interesting  book to be written  on the  Malabar  Coast,  I agreed,  but  specified  that  it must  be a history rather  than  a travel book. It was the past and  its myths that  I needed  to understand the present.
Inge and  I went to the Malabar  Coast with  notebook,  camera,  tape  recorder,
and  half-a-dozen  auspicious introductions,  and  several months  later  we emerged with a massive  (and  still unpublished)   diary  of  encounters  and  experiences  in what is still probably  the most interesting  region of India, with its extraordinary interweaving of Hindu, Christian,  Moslem, and Jewish traditions.  I used this as a basis for further  research, and the book I eventually  wrote-Kerala: A Portrait of the Malabar Coast-seems, when I read it again,  the nearest of all my later books to Faces of India, even though  one is a history decorated  by myth  and  the other  a narrative of travel.  For what  I did  in Kerala-which some Malayalia regard  as the truest history of their state -was  to journey through  the  past and find there  that  very diversity of culture,  that  very plenitude  of mythical  intima­ tions, which, travelling in the present, had once seemed to me the most compelling aspect of India. I was travelling still; only the dimensions had changed.
Our  journey  to the  Malabar  Coast  was done  between  Ig6s  and  Ig66,  and Kerala was published in I g67. A period of ill-health  prevented  me from returning immediately.  I spent  the  winter  of  I967-68  at  Lugano  in  Switzerland,  writing about a Victorian  naturalist of the Amazons, but in  I g6g we were again in India. This time I went with no intention  of writing  a book, and  we lived mainly  with our friends,  James  and  Carol  George;  Jim  was then  Canadian High  Commis­ sioner  in Delhi,  and  he and  Carol  installed  us in a  kind  of  apartment in  the residency from  which we could make our expeditions  to the Tibetan settlements in northern  and southern  India  that  we had  helped  to  organize.  I was, I have since thought,  rediscovering the innocent  encounter in  yet another  way, through

WOODCOCK


practical and  largely  physical  work  to help  that  sad symbolic  figure  of our  age, the  refugee.  I wrote  nothing about  this  work  that  I  wanted to  preserve,  though I may  eventually do so. But,  curiously,  when  I returned home  I felt  the  need  to produce something that  would  form  a kind  of period  to our  Indian decade,  and when  Frank Kermode asked  me  to write  the  volume  on  Gandhi in  the  Modern Masters  series he was editing, it seemed  singularly  appropriate that  I should  end where  I began.
I agreed,  and  wrote  the little  book, Mohandas Gandhi, my fifth book on India,
which  turned out  to  be  less a  biography   than  a  discursive  essay, almost  a  dis­ guised  dialogue with  the  master  who  had  played  such  an  important role  in  my mental development. I argued that  even if India had  failed  to listen  to  Gandhi's teaching, it was still alive, lying there like some great  mental bomb waiting  for the right  time  to explode  into  a desperate world.  It was a kind  of  exorcism  so far  as I was concerned. If the writing of histories had  turned  my  journeys from  temporal to spatial ones,  the  writing of this quasi-biography  enabled me  to externalize my Indian preoccupations, to project  them  on the world,  and  so to become  liberated from a long fascination.
This did not mean  that  I had lost my feeling for India. Far  from  it. I continued to  read   Indian  books  and   Indian  news,  to  review  Indian  writers   and   Indian events.  I  took stances  and, by now  accepted  as a minor  authority, signed  mani­ festoes during the  197o's  protesting against  Mrs.  Gandhi's actions, acting  with  a kind of acquired patriotic fury against  those who, I felt,  were  ruining what  I had come  to  regard   as  an  adoptive fatherland. When  visitors  came  from India  to Vancouver, whether  they  were  interesting strangers   like  Nirad   Chaudhuri, or friends-old  friends  by now-like the  Dalai  Lama  or  Balachandra Rajan-I welcomed   them  like  fellow  countrymen. Yet  for  a  decade I  travelled   to  other  places,  in  the  South   Pacific  and  Europe, led  partly  by  circumstance and  oppor­ tunity,  partly  by a feeling that  a cycle in my life was ended.




BuT IT IS A  BASIC ASSUMPTION  of  Indian  philosophies that cycles repeat  themselves,  that  one's  past returns to influence, if not  to haunt  one. And  one  of  those  strange and   compelling   clusters  of  circumstances  that   Jung calls synchronicity eventually awakened in me the urge  (perhaps even,  if  one sees it in Indian eyes, the karmic necessity)  to return.
India began  calling  in its debts  when  Patwant Singh,  one  of the  two  Indians who had opened  the country to me in 1 g61, reappeared almost  twenty  years later, a  man  transformed. In  the  past  he  had  looked  with  eyebrows  raised  almost  to the rim of his turban at our efforts to help Tibetan refugees; he was a young  man

WOODCOCK

engaged   with  life and  all  its  prides  and  pleasures  and   thus  in  full  accord   with Indian concepts  of the stages of personality  development. Now,  a man  advancing into  late middle  age, he came  not only to share  with  me  an  indulgent viewing  of our  younger selves, but also to tell how experience had  brought him  to another of the Indian stages of life:  that  of a man  who  assumes  humane  responsibilities.
A heart  attack, in which  Patwant had  received  the  treatment of a  privileged city man,  had  brought the compassionate vision of a peasant  in the same  predica­ ment,  far  from  a hospital  and  doomed  to die.  He  thought of a  network  of small health  centres, scattered in the remote village  regions of India to give relief in  just such  emergencies and  even  to prevent  them.  He  resolved  to  build  such  a  centre  as a model, and  as soon as he recovered  he bullied  a state government into  giving him a stretch  of barren  land,  charmed his architect  friends into  designing a  hos­ pital  he could  build  cheaply  from  local  fieldstone,  recruited sympathetic doctors  and  nurses,  called  on his vast circle of friends  for  funds,  and  set up  his centre  in Haryana state,  not merely as a hospital,  but  as a multi-functional facility  intended to change  the quality  of life in the villages.
What  Patwant did  with  his Kabliji Hospital and  Rural Health Centre is too complex  a  tale  for  this essay, to which  its  main   relevance is that  it  gave  me  a reason  to return  again  to India. Inge  and  I and  a few other  people  established  a Canada India Village  Aid Society to spread  the  idea  of village  regeneration -in sanitation, in  local  industry, in  family  planning, in  the  liberation of  women - that  Kabliji encapsuled. For me it revived  in practical form  the  Gandhian  ideals with which  I had first gone to India  inI g6 I.
Among  the  people  who  became  deeply  involved  with  us was  the  West  Coast painter, Toni  Onley.  One  day Toni  suggested  to  me  that  we might  raise  money quickly  for the  hospital  if we went to India to prepare a book-his watercolours and  my  writing  -and  afterwards sell his  paintings into  the  bargain. I  agreed, and   in  December  I982   we  went  there   together,  travelling  to  the   Rajasthani deserts  and  the  Kerala lagoons,  to  the  Himalayan  mountains and   the  temple­ studded fields of Orissa,  to prepare for  my sixth  book  on  India and  Toni's first. That is the  book  we are  calling  The  Walls  of India. Toni, newr  having  visited India before,  has  painted, as I once  wrote,  with  the  innocent eye.  I  am  involved in  the strange experiment of stereoscopy  that   juxtaposes the  eye  of  innocence to that  of experience. But what  we both  see are  walls, and  they  are  not  merely  the walls of ancient  buildings and immemorial mountains. They  are the walls of social divisions,  of  caste  and  language and   region,  that   were  there  always   but  have assumed,  in  the  India  where  Gandhi sought  to level  all  barriers, a  new  solidity.
But there  are faces within  those walls, and  as I write  they draw  near  in memory, and  imperceptibly the India I left a few months ago  with  a great  deal  of sadness

WOODCOCK

mingles with the India  I knew first a third of a lifetime ago. The  newness is gone, the brightness is dimmed,  the faces are older and  more disillusioned. The  walls are  those of an old home seen again,  like childhood,  with  the  clear  grey eye of homecoming.
































371

THREE POEMS

Derk U)nand


TWIN

No use to him  now, the masters  of forgetting: his twin  persists as an  urge  inside  him,  more   than   memory,   more   than   desire.  What perfume  of his brain's own  devising,  sap  of no  muddy rose, has  she not  worn  to  arouse  him  as  he  has  foreseen,   although  the  specific scents and  their effect on him not even he could  have  imagined? And on  the grass at  the edge of the  pool, when  the  rains  still kept  it full, did  they not kneel to their  own reflections  and  find  them  same?  And the  ants:   unable  to find  shelter  on  their  skin,  for  did  they  not  con­ stantly  explore  it  or,  at  night,  dream, each  his  hand   on  the  other flesh? What  room for ants  then?  The  ants:  thirsting for such earthly perfumes.  Now the master  of forgetting, impractical realist, has come to stop the rains,  to drive  the ants  back  into  their  nests, to drain   the pool where one twin persists in mourning the loss of the other,  bend­  ing low and  lower, to keep the  loss visible, ambiguous,  real.






OUTW]IRD FROM THE  POOL'S DRY EDGE

Then  anyone  squalls  at  birth,  anticipating something, nothing in particular. Then fits more  and  more  tightly  into  his skin,  the  folds soon  unfolding.  And  lallates,   pleased   with   his  own   voice.  Then, delighted   with  the  voices of others,  echoes  the  doting phrases.  And names  his  parts  as  instructed, starting  likely  as  not  with  the  toes, working  up  to the  more  abstract nose,  which  remains  most  like  the shadows not yet named. And stands  up. Sniffs  the charged air. Starts naming  the animals  hesitating into  his field of vision. Pursues  them. Catches. Then  tires  of  the  merely   necessary  sport.   Invents better prey:  scratches  her  image  into  stone,  into  birches,  peels and  carries home  the strips of bark.  Admires  the image.  What an improvement, she says. Anyone  then  would  be flattered. Is.  Therefore rises again to  pursue  her.  To  see  what  other   sounds  she  may  express.  Learns

372

WYNAND


them. Then chases   after another. Calls   her  woman. Invents better names.  Worse.  Speaks some.   Bites  back   the  others, but   thinks  of them. Remembers them   and   burns slowly  with   them. And   tires  of the  sport, to devise  at last a better one.  I deal, they say, all  the  women he has  called by their various sounds and names while  chasing them. The women, true  to their  word, act  on it,  become an  image  only,  but ideal, nowhere to be found, maybe worth pursuing, maybe not. Any­ one  then   left  to  look  at  his  hands. Count the  fingers. Scoop  up  the sand   at   the  edge   of  the  pool.  Let  it  go.  Develop familiar  lines  of thought.  Invent names for  each   of  the  winds. Record  them.  Start again, likely  as not  with  the  feet.  What tracks they  leave. Then work  backward, trace them  backward, then  forward, until  they cross  with  others. Remain within earshot. And  hear this  process called  a move­ ment, a  purpose, a  way  of life.







THE  OTHER VERSION

In the  other version, of course, he  became entirely enraptured  by the  girl,  who  stirred in him  obsessions  that  might have been  defined, however approximately,  only   by  the  foremost  of  ancient  poets   in obscure metaphors that exhausted the  range of  things the  obsessions were  not. Time was  no  river,  love  no  hibiscus blossoming. Neither windows nor  doors, these  eyes, ears,  mouths. If the  metaphors  were ever  written, then   they  have  long  been  forgotten, although the  rec­ ord  of  their intensity remains an  ideal   toward which current  poets  still  claim to  strive. But  he  was  no  poet; he  lacked the  devices  that would  allow him  more  comfortable lies. Thus, he  loved  the  girl  and  everything about her,  but  could  not  define it.  She  carries  herself like
... she  opens  herself like ... her  voice  summons me- oh,  anyone!
-like. ... Once, it is said,  he  told  her  that he  could not  easily  live without her.  He  would  soon  die,  therefore, if she  did   not  return  his love.  He  would   throw himself  from   the  steepest of  cliffs-perhaps he  said  "abyss"-if  she  required such  a  simple gesture of  his  sin­ cerity. From this  version  stem  no slanders whatever about him  and about her.






373

THE PJIRTY LINE

Dale :()erath


A black box in the hall, ringing three long, two short
and  your neighbour on the line:

Tillie's  house went down
a great  flame against  the night  and  she's running in and  bringing out  jars of money her and  her weak brother

The  bridge is out,  the ditch twisted the nails out of planks
softened  the edges between  here and  there
and Billy Wilson drove over anyway
as if there  was anything that  good in town like a woman or that  poolhall

And you have to remember to click off or your neighbour's house will ring
and  no one can stop that  sound coming  down the wires 	so new even the kids can't  understand it, just go out to the animal  calm

She calls again,  lonely and this time Old  Man
Eliniski fell off his road
into a ditch  plugged  with spring, may be dead,  not even the special dogs ht>lpt>d, shivt>ring
in the slush, on the road  leading under the Catholic onion dome

And you develop
something in your ear, that  wasn't there before, knowledge  of your neighbours' silence as they hear you
talking  to your father, about
the accident  and  the way the car  went  down


374

ZIEROTH

You know  their  pleasure as they
put  down  the phone,  their  need for voices breaking beyond  their home

because  at  night  when the call comes through you are always
on your own, moving  through the dark and you already hate what  the box knows
that  your neighbours are sleeping and  there  is no time to prepare	Your private sentence begins now


























375
