$I .25 per copy


CANADIAN
liTERATURE
N°·16







PLJIYS JIND FOLK SONGS



Articles

BY MICHAEL TAIT, PAUL WEST, EDITH FOWKE, ALVIN LEE, ROBERT MCCORMACK


Reviews
BY ROBERT WEAVER, GILLES ARCHAMBAULT, J. R. COLOMBO, ROBERT HARLOW, LOUIS DUDEK, GEORGE  WOODCOCK, KILDARE DOBBS, MARYA  FIAMENGO, AND  OTHERS






A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW










SALT AND	SAYOUR





PERHAPS IT IS a little far-fetched  to make analogies  between cultivation  and  culture,  but  there  are  good and  bad  harvests among  books just as there  are  among  farmers'  crops. Last year, when Canadian Literature  under­ took for  the  first time  the  awarding  of the  University of British  Columbia's Medal  for  Popular   Biography,  the  judges discovered that   Ig6I  had  been such a lean  year  that  there seemed no book worthy  of an  award;  none,  accordingly,  was given. On  the other  hand,  Ig62  was a relatively good  year for biography  in Canada, and  the  panel of judges, consisting of Arnold  Edinborough, S. E. Read  and  George  Woodcock,  found  that  the  choice  lay  between  a  fair  number   of books which for various reasons were eminently  worth consideration.
Inevitably,  there  was the usual underbrush  of dull lives of worthy  citizens and inept  memoirs  by  public  figures who would  better  have  remained  content  with the merits of whatever  action  their lives contained.  But a group  of good, compe­ tent biographical  works remained. They included McGillivray, Lord  of the North­ west  by  Marjorie Wilkins  Campbell; F.  A.  McGregor's  interesting  study  of  a politician  out  of office, The Rise  and  Fall  of Mackenzie King:  1911-1919; Margaret  Wade  Labarge's scholarly Simon  de Montfort;  George Whalley's study of one  of  Canada's incredible  wanderers,  The   Legend   of  john  Hornby. All of these were works which contributed  something new to their particular fields, and which  presented  serious  research  and  original  conclusions. There  was also that  delightful  maverick  among  autobiographies,  Kildare Dobbs' Running to Paradise which, with a rather  appropriate whimsicality, the jury for the Governor-General's Awards decided  to regard  as a work of fiction. All these books have been or will be reviewed in Canadian Literature.

3

EDITORIAL



In  the end, the book that seemed most appropriate to the judges for an award, under  the definition of "Popular Biography" that  accompanies the University of British Columbia's  medal, was The  Tiger  of Canada  West  by W. H. Graham, a Life of William  Dunlop,  one of the most eccentric  but  also one of the most  im­ portant pioneers  in  the development  of Upper  Canada. The  Tiger  of  Canada West  is an  accurate,  well-researched book, based on contemporary  records, and written  with  the kind  of verve that  Dunlop  himself would  have appreciated. It presents  a  man  who  is important   in  relation  to  his age  and  country,  but  also fascinating  in  his  personal  oddity;  it  records  the  wayward  vigour  of Dunlop's  character, but  it  also  portrays  in  vivid  detail  the  frontier  society in  which  he flourished;  it shows his triumphs  with admiration and illuminates  with sympathy the  tragedy  of his last days, lived out in a world  whose rapid  changes  had  left no place for men of his kind. Mr. Graham competently  reconstructs  a personality and  its age;  more  than  that,  he breathes life into  them.  His book will be valu­ able  to scholars;  it  will be eminently  readable  to those  who  make  no scholarly pretensions.
In  accordance  with a past custom  that  has associated  the  Canadian Authors'
Association  with  the  University  of  British  Columbia's Medal,  the  presentation will take place at the Association's annual  meeting  this summer.



























4



PLAYWRIGHTS IN A VACUUM

English-Canadian Drama in the Nineteenth Century



Michael Tait



0F  ALL    THE  BRANCHES of  Canadian lit"ature,  rune­
teenth-century drama  has  received  least  attention  for  reasons  that   are  entirely
understandable.  Formlessness, ineffective  characterization, pretentious moral atti­ tudes,  lack  of  stylistic  distinction, stupefying   prolixity,  together with  other  un­  fortunate qualities vitiate  most  of the  serious  attempts at  drama in  Canada be­ tween  I 86o and  I 9 I 4· A variety  of factors  account  for this conspicuous absence of merit, but  perhaps the  most  decisive was the separation of  the nineteenth-century Canadian  playwright from  the  active  theatre of his  time.  From   about  I920 to the  present  we have  witnessed  sporadic efforts, first by amateurs and  more  recently by  professional  companies, to  bridge  the  gap.  If none of these  attempts has had sustained   success,  they  have  been  evidence  of  an  awareness of  the  issue. In  the nineteenth century the  gulf  was absolute.  This early  period  offers  the  anomalous spectacle of Canadian dramatists writing  in total isolation  from  the most energetic  popular theatre Canada has  ever enjoyed. Of  course,  as most  of the  players  and almost  all the  plays were  imports, this vitality  was, in a sense, specious.  For  want  of even  a  minority demand for  the  performance of native  plays,  these  would-be dramatists were compelled  willy-nilly to write for the closet rather than  the stage.  Denied   a  vitalizing  contact  with  the  coarse  realities  of stage  presentation, they produced works at once petrified  and  undisciplined.
However, if none  of  these  plays qualifies  for close analysis  as  an  autonomous work  of art,  they nevertheless hold  a measure  of interest. For  one thing,  although unsuccessful in  their  entirety, a few of them  show a degree  of skill, poetic  if not dramatic, in isolated  sections.  For  another they reflect, in an oblique and  singular way, the temper of the period.

5

PLAYWRIGHTS IN  A VACUUM



Any account  of nineteenth-century  Canadian drama  must begin with Charles Heavysege  whose  uncertain  claim  on  the  attention of posterity  is based  chiefly upon Saul, a formidable dramatization in three parts and some ten thousand  lines of the  biblical  narrative.  There  is considerable  pathos in the fate of Saul. It was this work  which  received, after  its first edition  in  I 857, such extravagant  praise from  Coventry  Patmore  whose account  of it  appeared  in the  North  British  Re­ view. Patmore  found it "exceedingly artistic, akin to Shakespeare  in its character­ ization and scope". Emerson in a letter referred to its "high merits"; Longfellow is reported   to  have  called  Heavysege the  "greatest   dramatist   since  Shakespeare". The  critics were reinforced  by the politicians. Sir John  A.  MacDonald wrote to the  author  in  I 865:  "I  read  'Saul'  when it first appeared  with equal  pride and pleasure  ... and  as a Canadian I felt proud  of our  first  drama." The  level of his  contemporary  reputation   may  be  gauged  by  a  scene  from  Mr.  Robertson Davies'  Leaven  of Malice in which it is suggested a study of  the collected works of  Heavysege  represents  the last ludicrous  infirmity  of  the  academic  mind.
There  is pathos too in the personal history of Heavysege himself. He was born
in  I8I6 in  Huddersfield,  England,  into  a  puritan  working  class family  who  re­ garded   his  literary  interests  with  suspicion.  His  formal  schooling  came  to  an end at the age of nine when he was apprenticed to a trade.  In  r853 he emigrated  with his family to Montreal  where he earned  his way first as a cabinetmaker and then  as a staff reporter  on the Montreal  Witness.  In  a letter  written  in  I86o  he remarks  that  throughout his life "he  has  been  obliged  to  work on the  average twelve or  thirteen  hours  a day".  His literary  endeavours  then  were confined  to brief intervals of leisure or to the occasions when he found it possible to compose in  his head  while working at  his carpenter's bench.  The impression  he gave his contemporaries was of an aloof, self-reliant figure. John  Reade,  one-time literary editor of the Montreal  Gazette and a contemporary of  Heavysege's, wrote of him, "His  reading  was not discursive. The  Bible and Shakespeare  were his two books. He had  a high opinion of his own work and  was obstinate about  having anything cut  out  by  his friends.  Being a man  without  general  culture  he could  not  dis­ tinguish  in his own  work between what  was good and  what  was bad.  He never willingly  consented  to  sacrifice a  line  that  he  had  once  penned." Saul  offers evidence  of these limitations. His rage for  inclusion  prolongs the work intermin­  ably.  The   manipulation of  his great  mass  of  material  into  an  artistic  shape  is quite  beyond  Heavysege's powers. In  fact,  considerations  of form  either  in  the whole or in the part appear  never to have occurred  to him. As a result the impact of potentially effective speeches is consistently dissipated in an avalanche of words.

6

PLAYWRIGHTS IN A VACUUM



The  formal inadequacies of Saul are more  than  matched by stylistic ones. It is Heavysege's use of language that  most immediately betrays  his lack  of education and  narrow literary experience. The  flaws are  many  and  various.  At  the simplest level  his grammar is shaky  and  his understanding of the  meaning of words im­ perfect. But  it is his  attempt to approximate the high  style  that  gives rise to  the most  apparent weaknesses.  He  contorts  his verse with  inversions  ("clenched his fists" -"austere  he  looked")  and   with  archaic   forms   (neath,  e'en,   methinks,  etc.)   In  most  instances the  result  is stilted  and  inelegant.  Moreover his diction  frequently betrays  a faith  in  the  power  of complicated  words,  and  an  astounding vocabulary is put into  the mouths of most unlikely figures:

SECOND HEBREW:    But  did  you  not  make  stipulations  or  propose  abatement of those said prerogatives?

However, the  echoes  of  Shakespeare and  Milton  that   reverberate through Saul are  the  chief  device  by  which  the  author tries to infuse  his style  with  grandeur. Macbeth is most  often  discernible in the background. Saul  at  one point  addresses
himself to
Ye punishing  ministers
Ye dark invisible demons that do fly
And do heaven's  judgements and  later  bids a physician
Look deeper than the skin
Then  find me amongst thy compounds or thy simples
An anodyne for undeserved distress.

Heavysege has  a particular fondness  for  the  heroic simile  and  the  "even  ... as" construction. Milton  is usually  the  immediate model.  "Lo !" exclaims Saul

As when October  strews the land with leaves
So hath  our fury larded it with dead.

On   occasrons  he  goes  directly   to  Homer. His  literary innocence is sufficiently intact to enable him to set down

Lo, the rosy-fingered morn ...

with  no  hint  of quotation marks.  His derivative diction  has  the inevitable conse­ quences. Instead of investing the  verse with greater scope  and  power, these over­ tones  drain it of vitality, and  invite  disastrous  comparisons between  Saul and  the masterpieces it feeds  upon. Moreover, because  an  elevated style is  not  a natural

7

PLAYWRIGHTS IN A VACUUM



mode  of  expression, for  Heavysege,  he  is liable  to  abrupt descents  to colloquial idioms  and  bathos. ("Are all wives of such  a kidney?" "Bravo, boy") . Occasion­ ally  Heavysege manages a line which  has an  authoritative ring  to it:

Swift and silent as the streaming wind
... Sweeps down from Carmel on the dusky sea.

But  his most striking and  individual verse is of another and  more  eccentric kind. Heavysege clearly  enjoys  and  is rather good  at  describing scenes  of  corruption and  gore.  Viewing the  remains  of Agag  whom  Saul  has slaughtered, a soldier  is
made to say
Listen how
The ground, after the soaking draught of blood, Smacks its brown lips. It seems to like royal wine Beyond small beer leaking from beggar's veins. So were he living he might wear two crowns
His face is cloven like a pomegranate.

This  is the  authentic  Heavysege: vigorous,  macabre, indecorous, an  improbable mixture of Miltonic echoes and  Edgar  Allan  Poe.
It is generally  agreed  that  Heavysege  is typical  of the immigrant author whose
work  bears  no  organic relation  to the  new society  in which  he finds himself,  and as a consequence, is of little value  as a measure of that  society.  From  one stand­ point   this  is obviously  true.  Neither   the  subject nor  the  idiom  of  Saul,  Count Filippo,  or   ]ephtha's   Daughter,  Heavysege's  principal  works,  owes  anything directly  to  a  Canadian environment. Even  in  The  Advocate, his one  impossible  novel  which   is set  in  Montreal, none  of  the  realities  of  life in  mid-nineteenth­ century Canada  are  touched   upon.   In  contrast with such  a  figure  as  Sangster who  during this  period  was groping  towards  a language which would  adequately describe   the  Canadian scene,  Heavysege,  in  his  plays  at  any  rate,  coped  with his surroundings by ignoring them.
However, the  reasons  for  his isolation  are  to be found not  only in  Heavysege's origins  and  limitations as an  artist.  It would  be difficult  to conceive  a milieu  less conducive  to  the   development  of  native   dramatists  than   pre-Confederation
Canada. L.  J. Burpee,  in  rgor   in  a  monograph on  Heavysege, understates the
case  when  he  writes,  "Our people even in these  days  of imperial growth are  not too  sympathetic in  their  treatment of  Canadian men  of  letters  and   Canadian books."  Widespread  indifference to  the  arts  generally   and  a  puritan hostility  to the stage  in particular, the lack of discerning  critics, the lack of public  recognition,

8

PLAYWRIGHTS IN  A VACUUM



personal   financial losses on  unsold  volumes-these familiar  conditions afflicted Heavysege to the  end.  The absence  of any facilities in Canada for the  production of  native   plays  once  induced him  to  try  his luck  in  the  United States.  At  the time  of  his  brief  fame  in  America   he  prepared with  great  labour a  condensed stage  version  of  Saul  which   a  New  York  manager undertook to  present.  How­ ever,  the  author's habitual misfortune overtook  him;  the leading actress suddenly died and  the  production was shelved.
Heavysege bore  his  fate  with  exemplary stoicism;  it  did  not  occur  to  him  to protest  or  rebel.  He  simply  endured, secure  in  his conviction that every word  he committed to paper  was the  fruit  of inspiration. He  had  about him something of the  eccentric evangelist whose  inner  illumination fortifies  him  in  the  teeth  of the world's disdain. If  the  light  Heavysege  followed  was  three  parts  false,  to some incalculable extent  the  reason  was  the  darkness  of the  society  about him.






UNLIKE HEAVYSEGE,  Charles  Mair  was  a native Canadian. Born in  r 838  at  Lanark, Ontario, he spent  the greater part  of his life in the service of  the  federal government helping  to open  and  develop  the  Canadian West.  As an  associate  of  the  Canada First  Group, he  shared   in  the  post-Confederation quickening of  national sentiment and  the  aspirations toward  "Canadian  Inde­ pendence", that ambiguous ideal  which  provided  the  first impetus for the move­  ment  but  ultimately brought about  its dissolution.
Mair  was  among those  who  stressed  the  importance of literature in  fostering a  sense  of  national identity, in  particular of  imaginative works  based  on  inci­ dents out of Canadian history. In the preface  to his long chronicle play, Tecumseh, he writes:

Our   romantic  Canadian story is a  mine of character   and  incident  for  the  poet and  novelist ... and  the Canadian author  who seeks inspiration  there  is helping to  create  for  a  young  people  that  decisive test of  its  intellectual   faculties,  and original  and  distinctive  literature   . . . springing  in  large  measure  from  the  soil and  'tasting  of the wood'.

Tecumseh is Mair's most  ambitious attempt to write  according to these specifi­ cations.  Unfortunately most of the characteristic weaknesses of  nineteenth-century closet  drama are  evident in  Mair's brave  undertaking. The  gravest  fault  is the

9

PLAYWRIGHTS IN  A VACUUM



utter  lack of unity of action. Three  main conflicts are introduced: (the  Indians vs. the  Americans;   the  Americans  vs. the  British;  Tecumseh   vs. his  brother) together  with a variety of satirical and romantic  episodes. None of these elements is  properly  integrated   with  the  others,  and  the  result  is a  lively chaos.  In  his eagerness to translate  a maximum volume of Canadian history into Canadian literature, Mair  simply ignores the problem  of form.  Tecumseh is also defeated by its idiom.  Like  Heavysege, Mair  is imprisoned  by the  linguistic conventions of  nineteenth-century  verse drama   and  his  handling of  them  is, if  anything, even  more  insecure.  Evident  throughout   is an  uncomfortable tension  between Mair's  essentially  practical  cast of mind  and  the specious elevation  of his style. A further  source of incongruity  is the subject  itself. In  contrast  with Heavysege, Mair  is writing  about  Canada,  and specifically the world of the North American Indian  whose natural mode of speech is at some distance  from  the Elizabethan. Place  names  present  a particular  problem. Even Shakespeare's  infinitely  accom­ modating  measure  cannot  stand  the strain  of "Kalapoosa",  "Hurricanaw" and "Kickapoo".
On  another  level, Mair's  militant  Canadianism betrays  him into  a good deal
of tub-thumping and some na'ive anti-American  propaganda. The  vehicle for the latter  is  a  remarkable quartet   of characters  called  Slaugh,  Bloat,  Twang and Gerkin, who, although  redeemed in part by their names, are dramatically expend­ able.  On  the  other  hand,  Mair's  bias is not  indiscriminate and  he  includes  a favourable  portrait  of Harrison,  the American  General  and  President.
In spite of its limitations of theme and style, its formlessness and flat character­
ization, certain  aspects of Tecumseh are interesting  and even curiously impressive. The  tiresome flag-waving is only the surface of a more genuine patriotism. Canada for  Mair  was no political abstraction  but a concrete  and  exhilarating reality. As a  result of extensive explorations  his knowledge of the  Canadian West was inti­ mate  and  his feeling for it intense. Although  life on the frontier  was harsh, it is evident  that  in  Mair's  imagination   this  wild  territory  held  the  qualities  of an earthly  paradise.  In  his poem Kanata,  for example,  the region is described  as a bright new world where Europe's  jaded millions may escape their corrupt societies. In  Tecumseh itself, Mair  invents  the figure of Lefroy,  a  somewhat  implausible prairie bohemian, to express his delight in the virgin wilderness.

The hoary pines-those ancients of the earth
Brim full of legends of the early world,
Stood  thick on their own mountains unsubdued,
And  all things else illumined by the sun ... had  rest ...


IO

PLAYWRIGHTS IN  A VACUUM



The  prairie  realm-vast ocean's paraphrase Rich in wild grasses numberless and flowers Unnamed save in mute Nature's inventory, No civilized barbarian trenched  for gain
And ail that flowed was sweet and uncorrupt.

Mair  further suggests  (drawing more  from  Rousseau  perhaps than  from  his own first-hand  observations)  that   the  Indian  was  the  blameless  inhabitant of  this unfallen  world:

-The sunburnt  savage free-
Free and untainted  by the greed of gain
Great  Nature's  man content with Nature's  food.


A  large  measure of  Mair's animus  towards  the  United States,  "that braggart nation", was  owing   to  America's  destruction of  the  redskin   and   his  innocent wilderness  in a pursuit, as Mair  believed,  of land  and  riches.  In  the  war  of  I 812
Mair's cherished Canadian paradise was menaced  with a similar  sordid  invasion.
The  memory  of this threat explains  the  violence of so many  passages in  the  play.
Some  of  the  purely  descriptive sections  of Tecumseh  are  interesting for  a  dif­ ferent   reason.   It is  a  commonplace  that   Confederation  obliged   the  Canadian writer  to assume  the  role of nation  builder, to define and  communicate an  image  of  Canada which  would  help  make  this country  hospitable to  the  mind as well as  habitable by  the  body.  An  important part  of this  task  was  the  humanization of an  alien  landscape which  not  only  represented physical  danger  but  continued to  threaten  the   psychological security   of  the  community long  after   the  more obvious  menace of  wolves  and   Indians had  been  eliminated.  One  of  the  chief mental hazards of the Canadian scene was, and  to an extent  still is, its land  mass, stretching  arbitrarily  for  inconceivable  distances  in  almost  every  direction. In Tecumseh for  perhaps the  first time  much  of this great  space  begins  to be organ­ ized in the mind  and  made  familiar.
Lefroy describes  to Brock his journey into  the interior:

We left
The silent forest, and day after day
Great  plains swept beyond our aching sight Into the measureless West; uncharted  realms, Voiceless and calm, save when tempestuous wind Roiled the rank herbage into biilows vast,
And rushing tides which never found a shore.


I I

PLAYWRIGHTS IN A VACUUM



This  is not great  verse; however such passages, illuminated  as they are by Mair's private  vision of this vast terrain,  represent a first step in bringing  the Canadian West under imaginative control.






W.LFRED CAMPBELL was in a sense the most ambitious and self-conscious dramatist   Canada   produced  during  this  period.  Unlike  Mair  he was  not  primarily  concerned  with  the  celebration  of  national   heroes  and  the creation  of a distinctive  Canadian literature. His  were loftier  objectives.  In  the preface  to his Poetical Tragedies ( rgoB)  he remarks that  although  the four plays of the volume have very different subjects, they all nevertheless deal "with  those eternal  problems of the human  soul which all the  world's  thinkers  have had  at heart." In  matters  of form Campbell  is equally  uncompromising. Shakespeare is the  only  acceptable  model. He  continues:  "The author  makes no apologies for the form of these plays. Like other writers he has his own literary ideals and with the  great  mass of the sane British peoples, believes that  Shakespeare  is still the great  dramatic poet of the modem  world."  In  conclusion,  he announces  his in­ tention  to compose like his great  predecessor further  collections of histories and comedies if "these  plays in spite of their imperfections  receive a kindly welcome." One  cannot  regret that Campbell  allowed this grandiose  project to wither. His dramas,  in  some  respects better,  certainly  no  worse than  other  Canadian verse plays of  his time,  are  still uniquely  exasperating.  Campbell's  personality  is not attractive. The  modem  reader  is repelled by his lack of  humour,  his provincial­ ism,  pretentiousness  and  purblind  Anglophilia.  It is  perhaps  because  he seems the  spokesman  for so many  negative influences in  Canadian art  and  life which persist  into  the  twentieth  century  that  one  leafs  through  these  plays with  such
boredom  and distaste.
A  passage or  two  from  Mordred, a work  based  on  Mallory's  version of the Arthurian legend, will perhaps  illustrate  the quality  of Campbell's dramatic imagination. This scene depicts the first meeting of Lancelot  and Guinevere. The latter,  having glimpsed Lancelot from her castle window, mistakes him for Arthur and  is instantaneously  consumed  with  passion. She  disguises herself with  a veil and  manages  to encounter  Lancelot  at sunset in a convenient  rose garden.  The scene in outline proceeds thus:



12

PLAYWRIGHTS IN A VACUUM



Enter  Lancelot.
L: This is a sunset  bower for lovers made.
The air seems faint  with pale and ruddy bloom. The red for rosy dreams,  the white for pure
And  holy maiden thoughts all unexpressed.

Enter  Guinevere, veiled.
G:  My lord, forgive  this meeting in this place
(aside) 0, if he like it not!
L: Would'st ask mine aid?
G:  Yea;  would'st thou aid a maiden in distress?
!... : Lady,  all maidens command a true knight's help.

G:   Would'st fight for one like me?  (throwing aside her veil)
L:  (starts  and  stands as one in a dream)
Fair  lady!
(aside) Wondrous heaven,  what  be this?
In all my dreams I never saw such beauty  ........ .
G:  My lord,  hast lost thy tongue?
(aside) I had  not dreamed this.
L: Fair  lady forgive my sudden  lack of speech  ...
There's some fatality that  draws  me to thee
Like I had  known  thee somewhere  long ago.
G:   My lord, ...
(aside) Sweet  heaven  this be too blessed! ...
L:  It seems that  we were never strangers
(folds  her in his arms and kisses her)
G:  All life hath been but shaping  up to this. L: 0! could  this sunset be but gold forever! G:  My lord  Arthur!
L: (starts  back)  Great  God!
G:  Kiss me. Why Great God?
L: Why  callest  thou  me Arthur?
G:  And  art  thou  not?
L: 0 who art  thou  that  callest Arthur lord?
G:  As thou  art  Arthur, I am Guinevere.
(Lancelot starts back in horror)
L: Guinevere! Make  thick your murky curtains!
Day  wake no more! Stars shrink  your eyehole lights, And let this damned earth  shrivel!
G:    (clutching his arm)  And art  thou  not great  Arthur?
Who  art  thou?



13

PLAYWRIGHTS IN A VACUUM



L: Not Arthur, no! But that foul Lancelot
Who 'twixt his hell and Arthur's heaven hath got.
o:  Then I am a doomed maid. (swoons)
L: Black murky fiend of hell! Come in thy form .. .
And I will clang with thee and all thy imps .. .
o:   (rising up)  0 mercy! Damned or not I love thee still!
L: Why does not nature crack and groan?

This  is a  representative  passage. Its flaws are  almost  too numerous  and  evident for exposition.  Most  obvious is the immense discrepancy  between  intention  and performance. The   attempt  is to  portray  a  moment  of  high  passion in  a  rich Elizabethan   idiom.  Artificial  diction,  insecure  grammar, grotesque  rhythms­ all contribute  to the final absurdity. Although the author  bewailed the sensational­ ism of the  popular  stage, this scene like so many  of  Campbell's is itself nothing but  rudimentary melodrama  with mistaken  identities, swoons, asides, mechanical  manipulation of emotions and the rest.
This excerpt  points to a more fundamental flaw at the core not only of Camp­
bell's plays but of virtually all nineteenth-century English literary drama. The fault is rooted in an insuperable linguistic difficulty. The  prevailing source of inspiration for  this  drama   was  of  course  Shakespeare,  whose  language   these  nineteenth­ century  playwrights  attempted  to duplicate.  Imitations are invariably weak, but to explain  why Shakespeare's  nineteenth-century disciples produced  such unlikely disasters one may conveniently borrow a little of Professor Northrop  Frye's critical terminology.  The  Shakespearean  style is the natural accompaniment to a drama  conceived instinctively in the high mimetic mode. The  speech of heroes who still have  about  them  something of the radiance  of  gods is necessarily eloquent.  It is through  language  that  the common man recognizes the stature  of the hero. When we tum  to  mid-nineteenth-century  poetic  drama  it is clear  what  has happened. The   playwright  is still attempting  to  cast  his work  in  the  high  mimetic  mode which for reasons of cultural history is no longer available  to him. At first glance his characters appear  to talk  like demi-gods, but  they quickly betray  themselves as creatures  of their  authors' own Victorian  middle class sensibility;  ( "... white for  pure  and  maiden  thoughts  all unexpressed") . Singular  incongruities  result. In  Campbell's  play,  Lancelot  thrashes  about  like  Pip  in  the  armour  of  Mark Antony.
In  "Shakespeare  and  the  Latter  Day  Drama", his  most  extended   piece  of dramatic criticism,  Campbell  states his case with  querulous  dogmatism.  He  de­ nounces  Ibsen  as "immoral", Shaw as "a  mere cynic",  and  both with Goethe as

PLAYWRIGHTS IN  A VACUUM



"unBritish  in ideals".  He further  protests that  any plays which are not founded on "sublimity,  beauty  and  reason" should not be tolerated.  Although  this article appeared   in  r 907  when  Ibsen  and  Shaw  were gaining  a measure of European acceptance,  it stirred no controversy in Canada.
Quite  clearly  Campbell's quarrel  is not simply with  the new drama, but  with
the  modem  age  in  general  which  he assails for its "love  of pleasure",  "lack  of reverence",   and  most  deplorable  of all,  its "falling  off in  ideal".  The  conflict between  orthodox  Victorian  and  "modem" values forms  the  basis for  his play Morning. In  his preface Campbell  underlines the gravity of the issue. "This play has no historical  foundation ... but its theme is plainly modem  and  deals with the tremendous  problems of modem society. The belief in God and a larger hope, as vitally affecting man's whole life, actions and ideals here, is the central problem of the  play. The  question,  'Is  the worldly cynic right  or wrong in  his summing up of human  nature?' is destined  finally to settle the fate  of our  whole modern civilization  ... Which  ideal is to prevail in society, that  of the cynic, or that  of faith  and  hope?"  In  Morning  the question is dramatized  through  the struggle for the mythical  city of Avos between Leonatus  "A noble minded  citizen" and  Val­ pinus "A clever and scheming citizen ... envious of Leonatus." There is of course nothing  intrinsically  wrong  with  Campbell's  theme.  Ibsen  has  already  demon­ strated  the  dramatic possibilities in  the  conflicting  claims of visionary  idealism and  pragmatic worldliness. Certainly  the matter  had real urgency for a Victorian  society  beginning   with  Ibsen  to  pay  the  piper  for  its long  worship  of  moral abstractions.  What  defeats Campbell's  play aside from the stylistic factors touched on  previously is the  jejeune  treatment  of this complex issue. The  author  never for  a moment  doubts  that  Leonatus,  beneath  whose classical  robe lives a windy Victorian  parson, is altogether  virtuous, and Volpinus wholly evil. Campbell  aims at  tragedy  but  the  crudity  of  his moral  categories  is  reflected  on  the  level of dramatic action  in  stark  melodrama   ("Caught, thou  fox at  last!")  and  lifeless characterization.
The  other  two plays in this volume are Daulac and  Hildebrand. Daulac is an
absurd  historical  piece  which  endeavours,  as Campbell   puts  it,  "to  depict  the ultimate  triumph of the fate  of unsuspecting innocence  over the wiles and  plots of  a  clever  and  scheming  malice."  It is Campbell's  one  attempt   to  dramatize Canadian material,   but  any  truth,  imaginative  or  historical,  is dissipated  once again in the shoddy conventions of romantic melodrama.
The  action  of  Hildebrand   centres  around  Pope  Gregory's  decision to  create a  celibate  clergy.  The  consequences  of the  Pope's inflexible  stand  are  brought

PLAYWRIGHTS IN  A VACUUM



home  to him when  he encounters  his long-lost daughter (presumably  Campbell would  argue  that  Shakespeare  also took liberties  with  history)   wandering  de­ ranged  by the loss of her priest-husband.  The  play is negligible except insofar as it  too  suggests a  thematic  parallel  with  Ibsen.  Both  Morning   and  Hildebrand have as their potential subject the price in suffering exacted  by the uncompromis­  ing  idealist,  a very Ibsenesque  preoccupation.  To  this extent  at  least Campbell was willy-nilly a child of the modem age he so deplored.
A number  of factors beside lack of native gifts explain  Campbell's total failure
as a dramatist. He  chose to embrace  a bankrupt dramatic tradition,  consciously repudiating the new developments which had  begun to revitalize the stage. That he  did  so was  not,  however,  entirely  his private  failure.  It was difficult for  a nineteenth-century Canadian writer to be anything  but conventional  and  insular in  his  literary  attitudes.  Canada   was geographically   remote  from  the  creative centres of civilization and as a nation the product of deep-rooted  conservative impulses.  In  the  field of literature  this was reflected  in  an  acceptance  of those canons  of  taste  shared  uncritically  by  polite  English  society. Shaw  and  Ibsen were, after  all, formidable  revolutionaries. Canada was born of a temperamental resistance to revolution.  Campbell's  rigid conservatism,  however, had  dire conse­ quences  for  his work as a  playwright.  Drama  like other  arts  derives its  vitality from  its dynamic  relation  with the age in which it is written.  Campbell was the spokesman  for a dying era, his mind informed  by a collection of  concepts and  a moral  vocabulary  that  were  rapidly  losing their  force.  As a  result  he remained in his imagination  at several removes from the immediacies  of  human  experience and his plays accordingly emerged still-born.





IN BRIEF,  then,  the  aspmng   playwright  of  this era  was  de­ feated  in the main  by three interrelated  factors. In  the first instance,  he accepted the  English  literary  drama,  at  best a  mediocre  genre,  as his  model.  Its  worst
features-characterization in terms of the crude operation  of a ruling passion, conspicuous  didacticism,  artificial  diction -all,  as we have seen, he assiduously preserved.  In  the  second  place  he capitulated to certain  social pressures which were inimical  to the  free exercise of what  rudimentary dramatic talents  he  pos­ sessed. In  most Canadian communities  of the  time  an  antique  suspicion  of the stage was still strong. It is instructive, for example,  to read in a 1go8 issue of the

16

PLAYWRIGHTS IN  A VACUUM



Canadian  Magazine  how stem  fathers "tore the theatrical pages from  the foreign magazines and  burned them  lest they should  reach  the eyes of the  children of the house". This  anxiety  did  not  have  altogether obvious  repercussions. During the last  quarter of  the  century innumerable theatres   flourished; the  larger  centres had  as a  rule  several  imposing establishments and  almost  every  small  town  had its opera  house.  However, the non-conformist conscience of the community subtly dictated  the   Canadian  dramatist's selection  and   treatment of  his  subject. To neutralize  any  offence  he  might   give  by  writing  in  a  suspect   medium he  was disposed  to choose "safe" themes  either  from history or the Bible, and  his handling of them  was  correspondingly solemn.  In  cases where  character and  plot  were his own  inventions an  impeccable moral  scheme  was invariably observed. The virtu­ ous  triumph in  this  world  or  the  next,  the  vicious are  confounded and  sinners repent. Such  an  excess of propriety does not always make  for  entertainment and it  is  clear  most  of  the  nineteenth-century  dramatists were  aware of  it.  Saul, Tecumseh, and  Hildebrand, among  others,  contain  episodes and characters calcu­  lated  to provide comic  relief.  Unfortunately the detachment and  irony  indispens­  able  for  the success of such  scenes were not qualities these dramatists could  culti­  vate  without jeopardizing their  respectability. Thus  these  comic  characters, suf­ focated  at  birth  by their  creators' inhibition, are uniformly grotesque and  tedious.  As one  might  expect,  the  few  attempts at  political  and  social  satire  in  dramatic form   are  similarly  feeble.   Sara   Curzon's The   Sweet  Girl  Graduate, Nicholas  Davin's The  Fair  Grit and  W. H.  Fuller's  H MS Parliament  (to  name  three) all suffer  from   their  authors' inability   to  cut  sufficiently  free  from   the  confines  of gentility  and public decorum.
I suggested  at the outset  that  of all  the circumstances which  undermined the nineteenth-century Canadian  dramatist his lack of  contact with  the  hurly-burly of  the  practical theatre was  the  most  injurious. The writers themselves  seem  to have  been  aware of the  fact  of their  deprivation although not of its extent. There is evidence  that  a  number of these  figures  did  not  write  closet  drama by choice and  most  resisted  the  realization that  they had  accomplished nothing better. The stage  directions in Tecumseh for example, suggest  that  Mair  had  a  performance half  in  mind,   and   Campbell  was  distinctly   aggrieved   over  Irving's refusal  to produce Mordred. It is  unlikely  of course  that  had  an  indigenous theatre  been available to these early  dramatists, this alone  would  have  transformed their  work. The weakness  of the  dramatic conventions they accepted were  too fundamental. However, the  exigencies   of  the  stage  might  at  the  least  have  encouraged  con­ siderations of economy  and  dramatic relevance.

I7

PLAYWRIGHTS IN  A VACUUM



This  unhappy  divorce of writer and theatre  in Canada invites certain general­ izations. Drama  is nothing if not a staging of conflicts. Two  of the major  condi­ tions  of a  strong  popular  drama  would  appear  to be : first, a  persuasive social awareness of the existence of important conflicts; secondly, a widespread  impulse within  a  society to  have these conflicts played  out  in  its  presence.  Nineteenth­ century  closet drama  was a compromise  based  on only  one of these conditions. The  exertions of these authors suggest a sincere attempt to formulate in dramatic terms  the  tensions of their world in the absence of  audiences  to witness them.
A  discussion  of  recent  dramatic developments  lies outside  the  scope  of  this account. It is clear, however, that the playwright  in the present century, although en joying certain  advantages  denied  his predecessors, has suffered from  the same lack of a supporting and controlling interest in his work, the kind of popular involvement  which  in other  countries  has given  rise to a  recognizable  dramatic tradition. In  consequence,  the conflicts in much  contemporary drama  strike one as those of a single mind  capable  of being honest  with  itself, rather  than  those of the  community  at  large. Although  no modern  Canadian playwright  has  pro­ duced  anything  comparable  to the astonishing  curiosities of the previous age, the conditions  under  which  he writes have, in some cases, encouraged  him  to give free  rein  to eccentricity.  It  may be argued,  I  think,  that  the vacuum  which sur­ rounded   the  nineteenth-century Canadian dramatist, pulling  his work into such a variety of bizarre shapes, still aftlicts his contemporary counterpart and presents an equally complex challenge.






















18



CANADIAN ATTITUDES
Pastoral with Ostriches and Mocking-birds


Paul West






TE FOLLOW>NG  REMARKS neither  derive from  nor llnply any feeling  of  self-exemption.  I  am  addressing  myself to  what  I  have  to  label  as "Canadian attitudes", and especially attitudes of Canadian intellectuals. I suspect that what  I say will only exemplify still further  the grounds of my complaints: an intellectual  complaining  about  intellectuals makes the complaint  seem, to the out­ side world,  not so much  a series of reasoned objections as a chronic disease. All the  same,  I  think  there  is a  place for at  least some criticism  of this  kind;  and I  petition  safe  conduct   by advancing  the following thesis:  Just  as  some ideas,
and   discussion  of  them,  create  power-financial, political  and  technological, so also does  the  arrival  and   discussion of other  ideas  remain  a form  of  self­ adjustment bordering  on  self-consolation. The  intellectual,  presumably,  aims at the  pragmatic; he also likes to think  for the sake and  pleasure  of  thinking.  No wonder,  then,  that  there develops an <estheticism of ideas:  a mind-game  in which educated  people make pragmatic-seeming moves with ineffectual  pieces.
It is perhaps  unfair  to offer French  examples to start  with,  as the French  are
particularly addicted   to mind-games; but  at  this point  I want  to clarify rather than  be fair.  Albert  Camus,  to  name  one example,  advanced some arguments about  Algeria which  were intended  to promote reforms in the world of practical affairs;  perhaps  they  had  some effect at the time. It is hard  to tell now. Camus also made  a  great  deal  of  play with  such concepts as "justice", "mesure"   and "sunlit  thought"; and  it is not  too cynical to say that  he gained  as much solace from  shuffling these  concepts  as, say, Keats  did from  brooding  on  the  Grecian Urn.  So what  I say about  Canadian thinking-and Canadian thinking  about Canadian thinking -has  to be set against a background  of similar  mind-games in other  countries.  Wherever  we look, intellectuals are talking away their feelings

CANADIAN ATTITUDES



of impotence,  creating  a substitute world of ideas and  images, and  initiating  one another  into one another's  private mythologies.
There  is nothing  wrong with this. What  worries me is the difference  between
the  self-consolation   that  keeps  on  looking  outwards-towards the  region  of probable  defeat  and  unlikely victory, and  the self-consolation  that  attends  only to itself. Because we have so little of the former  and  so much  of the latter,  and so much  of the latter  which pretends it is the former, a C. P. Snow has been able to set himself up as intellectual lawgiver asking for a simplified and unstylish businessman's  literature,  and  university teachers of the humanities  have gradually developed  the  odd  habit  of assuming that  literature  was created  for the express purpose  of  assisting  them  to create  something  of  their  own:   something  which can  be used for training  young people to be good citizens. In  other words, to be blunt,  I  am  objecting  to the  woolly thinking  that  lets a Snow  assume the  role of the all-round  chap speaking sanely on behalf of decent society, and the human­ ists' cowardice  when  confronted with technology. To  push things further, I think there is nonsense being talked about  what is socially suitable  and  nonsense being practised on the quiet by academics. The  truth  is that  literature comes into being not to be useful to society; it may become  useful because it entertains and consoles, but  we must not be priggish about that. The  intellectual is powerful only so long as he seeks his own  kind of power. He  doesn't  try  to fit  in. At  the same  time, because  he  does not  fit in, he must be as honest  as he  can:   he must  recognize when  he  is talking  merely to keep alive a  needed  attitude, when  he is talking just for the fun  of it, and  when he is really trying to get something  done. In  all these instances  he  must stick to his own  terms  and not  try  to win  victories  by pretending  to be a scientist of letters.
I  am  asking  for,  and  judging  by, two  main  assumptions.  The  non-scientific
intellectual   ought  to  look outwards  without   trying  to  disguise  himself  by, for example,   turning   literature   into  a  "respectable" technology  and,   when  he  is playing inward  games, ought  not to flirt with  the terminology of activities he has shrunk  from. In other words, the non-scientific intellectual  must not pose in order to accommodate himself either outwardly  or inwardly.  In  Canada, however,  he does  both.  In  the  growing  universities the  study  of literature   is tending  to  be increasingly  the bestowal of plasma-units and  adoption  of pedantic  jargon. There are  the  joiners and  the stallers. Both groups  turn  literature into formulae,  sever it from  life-from  modern  life especially although  not from  modern  cant,  and are  thus  damaging the minds and  sensibilities of the  young.  Literature, we too often forget, is not there to be systematized or embalmed; it is there to stimulate

20

CANADIAN ATTITUDES



us;  and  the  only  excuse  for  presuming to "teach" it is that  it may quicken sensi­
bilities.
I have  argued elsewhere that  North  America  is rapidly becoming the wonder­ limd  of  logology,  which  is the  pseudo-science  of turning any  lively  activity  into  curriculum. Too   many   dons  are  afraid   of  a  living  literature;  they  lament the unfortunate chance that makes poems come out of heads  that  are morbid, untidy  and  neurotic. A  planned and  efficient society  would  get  its literature written by machines;  the  poems   would   come  out  hygienically  wrapped  with  instructions printed on  the  back: "To be taken  once an  hour,  with  one  chapter of Northrop Frye". We   could   do  worse:   not   everyone  shares Mr. Frye's concern with categories, but  he does at  least care  about new literature and  brings  to his appre­ hension  of it  a lively, civilized  and  mordant spirit.  When we consider  the  neces­ sarily limited  extent to which  the academic can participate in a growing literature
-because,  it  seems,  there   have  to  be syllabuses  and  examinations -Mr.  Frye
emerges  a  rare  specimen. Not  every  university  teacher can  be expected to write poems  or  novels,  or  even  to  teach  modem literature, any  more  than  teachers of history  can  be expected to perform most of the assassinations or sign most of the treaties.  And  it is a fallacy  to think  that  the study  of, say, Johnson or Swift  is in any  sense less relevant to today  than  is the study  of, say, Orwell or Snow.  But  if we are  going  to study  things  at  all, in universities,  in any  kind  of organized way, in order  to set young  minds  and  sensibilities humming, then  a responsive  teacher will feel obliged  to make  the ancient modem.
That is the  ideal.  In  practice, however,  the study  of literature or of history  or of  politics   can   quickly   degenerate into   pattern-making, so  that   literary  study in particular turns  into  precis-making, trend-spotting, jargon-applying, and so on. Daily, into  my mail-box, there  come advertisements from  American publishers' Canadian  agents:  so-called   case-books,  telling  what   the  critics  have  said,  and explaining not  so  much   how  to enjoy  a  poem  as  how  to  "make like"  a  critic; primers on  how  to get  up  poetry  for examinations; vast volumes  of snippets mas­ querading as  "surveys". Now  there  is no  harm  in  information until  it  begins  to lie dead  in  the  attic  of a  young  mind.  There is no danger in criticism and  inter­ pretation until  the  young  mind  becomes confused: that  is, loses its own individual response  in  the  blather  consequent on  the  fact  that  the  literary  critic  is always haunted by  the  likelihood of his having  himself  created the  poem he  praises  or claims  to  understand and  of  having  failed  to  create  the  poem  he  condemns or


' "The Fear of Possibility", Chicago Review, Summer,  rg6o.


21

CANADIAN ATTITUDES



finds obscure. At one extreme we have the gullible young, anxious to pass; at the other  the  professional  casuists who either  dote  on  information for its own sake or put theories between the poem and their own inadequacy. We live in a world of increasing  professionalism in which the PhD  man  is respected as being quali­ fied,  whereas  the  amateur   who  responds  acutely  to  literature   is  a  suspicious, carping  misfit. Obviously  I  am simplifying  (I  have  to in order  to keep the dis­ cussion within  a  few  pages) ;  there  are  lively PhD  men  just  as  there  are  dull and incompetent  amateurs.
But  I  cannot  help  feeling that  the attempt  to tum  English  or literary  studies into  the  basic discipline  is doing damage.  For  curricular and  examination  pur­ poses the work of art as it stands is being made more systematic, more parrotable, more a collection of clear ideas than a complex of gesturing half-truths. Style and enjoyment  are  being  gently shunted  aside in  the  quest  for  disciplines approved  by society. It is refreshing  when  an  Irving  Layton  or  a  Harold  Town  gets  up and  says Damn  society and  the fuddie-duddies  and  the  dons and  the lit-critters and  the  committee-men  and  the  Junior  Chamber of  Wombats.  It is refreshing because  such  abuse  not  only  rebuffs a  recipe-minded  society  but  also reminds us that  paintings  and  poems come out  of the  heads  of  the  living. We find  the creative man speaking in his own right, in his own language  and with no syllabus in  mind.  There  is no  professional parasite  getting  in between  us and  the work, between  us and  the  artist.  Between Snow's  extreme demands for social realism and,  say,  the  Chicago  Aristotelians'  extreme  insistence  on  categories,  the  self­ respecting  artist  has little enough chance of being seen plain.  He, after all, is the misfit in  the  world  of  planned  living in  which  everyone  is a  professional  and everything  is explicable by experts. The  professionals -including such new pro­ fessionals as the  accountant, have  power;  and  even  the  professionals of intellect pretend  to power:  at least, they speak the language  of it. It is a sad pretension.


IN FACT,   Canada's academic   intellectuals  as  distinguished from  her  intellectuals  at  large have yet to discover their  powerlessness except  to betray  their  academic   trust.  We  have  only  to  read,  for  instance,  M.  Jean-C.
Falardeau's Plaunt  Memorial  Lectures delivered at Carleton  University in 1g6o." M. Falardeau intelligently and urbanely argues against the notion of an integrated Canada only waiting  to be equipped  with a national  flag, anthem  and  holiday;


•  Roots and Values in Can-adian Lives, Toronto University Press, 1961.


22

CANADIAN ATTITUDES



but  he goes on to identify  national  diversity with national  open-mindedness.  He rightly  points  out  that  "the  dominating  trend  on  our  continent  towards  auto­ mation  and  conformism  means that  our lives are being taken away from  us. We are becoming fossils in a land of plenty which is also a moral vacuum." What  he does not seem  to realize  is the comparative  ineffectuality  of  intellectual  protest. No matter  how  populous  the  universities may become, no  matter  how thorough their response to medieval and Renaissance traditions, Canadian pride in material benefits remains loud and gaudy.
It  is therefore  weird and  rather  depressing to find M. Falardeau, who is justly
sceptical about  "the  mere evangelical use" of such concepts as "democratic spirit", extolling the concept  of Magister ("a  seeker after truth  and a lover of wisdom") and  deploring  "the  forces which would make our  universities mere factories" in terms of "dialogue between masters and students"  and scholars who are "inner­ directed"  or "tradition-directed" persons. Such ideas are themselves too prescrip­ tive to  defeat  prescription. M.  Falardeau's mixture  of high-flown  idealism  and hopeful  recipe smack  of the mind-game,  and  his dream  of  bringing forth,  "with imagination   and   conviction,  the  creative  potentialities  of   classical  humanism,  rejuvenated  by the broad  perspectives of the social sciences" sounds as far-fetched as sinister. We all know what  the social sciences can do for humanism: suffocate it with prescriptive waffle.
"Classical  humanism" will continue  to exist in enclaves:  the French-speaking
universities especially and  the learned societies. The average but of course decent guy will always  rail  at  it-just  as, in a CBC  television series on  painting,  the lecturer  invited  along some of his university colleagues to represent the philistine, no-nonsense  point  of  view.  According  to  M.  Falardeau's dream,  the  lecturer, who  was  good  when  not  oversimplifying and  apologizing  for  things  common­ place since  rg ro, should  have  been unable  to do this. But then,  M. Falardeau, chairman   of Laval  University's  sociology department, is really  playing  a word­ game all of his own:  "They  would also," he says at one point, "bring  to the fore the factors which are more potent towards facilitating non-equivocal  understand­ ing."  Confronted with such wool, it is hard  to tell whether  the thinking is woolly or not. Canada, he says, is not a datum  but a construct;  perhaps so; but its only unity is the datum  of material  prosperity.
His conclusion is odd. He attributes  "Canada's growing international prestige" to "lack  of biases and  prejudices  in our dealings with others."  Canada, he  con­ tends,  is  prudent  but  insufficiently dynamic.  This  is true.  But  he should  have gone  on  to say that  the  average  Canadian is prudent  through indifference  and

23

CANADIAN ATTITUDES



dynamic because  acquisitive. The  first elations  of materialism have  not worn  off, but   M.  Falardeau  is  already   saying  "We   must  de-Westernize our  concept   of civilization":

How  much  would  we not  benefit from  re-discovering  the  sense of harmony  and the  noble prescriptions of such systems of ethics as those of Confucius,  Ashoka, or Buddha  which,  more  than  many  Western  ethnical  systems, have  insisted  on  the demands of human  dignity!

Try  selling  that  to  a commercial sponsor  or  to a Board  of Regents. Ethnics pre­ empt  ethics.  You  cannot wean  a child  from  his newly-begun lollipop  by offering  him  Confucius's carrot. It is true  that  three  Canadian  universities have Institutes of  Asian  Studies,  but  it  is hard  to see what  impact they  can  have  on  the  com­ munity at large or even on the academic mentality which  mistrusts  the Elizabethan specialist  who suddenly writes a book about  Balzac or Oscar Wilde. M. Falardeau sets great  store by paideia, comparative studies, the polymath, and so on;  but these ideals  have  been  cheapened into  loose  talk  about the  Two  Cultures. It is not subtle  synthesis  that  is recommended, but  a  jargonizing of the humanities.
M.  Falardeau's last  sentence  soars  grandly, and  away  from  humanism: "We
should  now give to ourselves, and  to others, the image  of a people  whose ambition is  not  so  much   to  reach  the  moon,  as  to  transcend our  psychological space  in order  to reach  the nations around us, closer at hand, but also better  worth  loving." Those  who  prescribe  for  these  loveable  people  should  lower  their  sights  a little: Canada will happen, is happening; an accurate image  is safer than  a desirable one. Meanwhile, those  who  shove  rebelliously  forward  according to  no  sociologist's recipe,  will  become  the  real  magistri,  alone  among a comfortable pseudo-nation which  is waiting  to  be told  how  best to be that  hypothetical thing: "itself". It is not, alas, even bothering to disagree  with such as M. Falardeau.


ICAN BRING   my various  threads together by referring to  Mr. Frye's  By Liberal  Things.3  Mr.  Frye  touches  on  most  of the  themes  I  have  sug­
gested: idea-savouring; the  humanists' capitulation to the  technologists; the  fact that  literature is not  fodder  for  dons  or civics or  (as  it  has  often  been  regarded in  England)  gentleman's relish. Above  all, if I  understand him  rightly,  he wants


3  Clarke, Irwin,  1959·

CANADIAN ATTITUDES



awareness: awareness of tradition, of community, of modern banality and  (in its proper  place)    of  the  delights   to  be  gained   from  exercising  the  mind   and  the imagination. He  names  culprits,  singling  out  for special  mention the  least  men­ tioned:  North American self-satisfaction and  "life-adjustment programmes"; and the  only  remedy   is  "a   readiness   to  examine   and  if  necessary reconstruct ... assumptions, an  exposing  of oneself  to new  experience in all its irrational force". The  awakened, alert  mind,  as he says, is a  dangerous organ; but  the  intelligent  young  ought  to be able  to, ought  to want to, live dangerously in  that  way.  Edu­  cation  of the  best  kind  is a leading-out,  a  teasing-out, and  is bound to  produce  some  degree  of  maladjustment. Most  of  all,  Mr.  Frye  argues,  nothing can  take the  place  of  the  humanities;  there's  nothing like  leather. "A  little  learning of science  often   breeds  the  notion",  he  says, "that there  are  equally   assured  facts in  every  area  of  knowledge ... But  in  the  humanities there  is no  final  appeal  except  to  humanity itself."  Science, on  the other  hand, avoids  controversy, dotes on certainties.
Here  is a  wisdom  we  can  supply  by stopping the  humanities from  becoming mere  crossword  puzzles. The  new  priggishness, which  wants  education to include more  science  as  well  as  be  more  scientifically  suited  to  society,  has  almost  won the day.  North Americans have listened  to Snow  with reverential ignorance based on  fear.  But  surely,  if they  and  their  children  have  to live in a world  dominated by science  and  its reckless exploitation by politicians,  then  surely  the  mental and spiritual adjustment they  have  to make  will be better  founded on  critical intelli­ gence,  on  a  full  view of  human possibility, than  on extra  physics lessons. We do not  come  to  terms  with  human foolishness  the  better  for  knowing how  bombs explode; and   if  we  want to  rebuke and   vilify   the  politicians who  drive  the scientists,  as well as the  profiteers  who sponsor  TV  rubbish, then  a  lively appre­ hension  of mankind-"of  mature man  as distinct from  the childishness immersed  in  the  dissolving  present  or  the  senility  immersed  in  the  past", as Mr.  Frye says, is an  essential  training. Only  our  universities  can  provide it; and  the  pity is that  they  are  allowing   the  liveliest  objects  of study  to  be  tailored  by  scholiasts  and drears. And  the  young  student, discovering  that  he is human, finds  less and  less in  his studies  to  engage  his own  emotions,  temperament, dreams and  hopes.
We must  get more  imagination into  the teaching (so-called) of the  humanities; it  is not  method we  need,  or  matter: God  knows,  we  already   have  a surfeit  of both. The  trouble is that  professors of English have a strongly  developed economic interest  in  the  writing of literary textbooks.  It is high  time  to let  the  poets  and the  painters loose in the  universities,  even if-by the old  curricular standards-

CANADIAN ATTITUDES



all  the  students fail.  I think  it is much  more  important (and even  that  word  is more  earnest, more   pompous  than   I  mean  to  sound)  that   the  students should en joy  their   reading; should  experience intense  streams of  irrelevant emotions; should  be driven  half-mad by what  they cannot understand; should  become  bad citizens  because  they have  understood only too well. None  of this will come about as  long  as  the  neo-Alexandrians have  their  cold  hands on  literature. You  have only  to  go  where   the  Modern   Language Association   meets: there  you  will see phalanxes of  suited, short-haired literature  executives, trading  wrinkles   about course-phasing and  theme-grading and  all  that   highly  essential  committee-work which  keeps  the  literary  industry  growing. There they  are,  skating or  hoping  to skate   on   the   surface:  contriving  terms   and   fallacies   and   methodologies and dichotomies  and   footnotes.   Few  of  them   would   countenance  the  notion   that literature's vital  operation is to stain  the fingers like nicotine or work  mysteriously on  the  metabolism like radium. Literature cannot be guaranteed to make  us feel comfortable or  public-spirited; in some  cases, if it gets through, it will blast  and sicken,   undermine and   pervert.   And   yet  I  would   rather have  that   happen, at that   second-hand, and  know  that   it  happened  to  a  living  someone   who  could heal   himself  at  the  same  source  than   see  students, especially   at  the  freshman level, parroting dryasdusts' answers to dryasdusts' questions.
Finally   I  must  try  to explain  an  attitude I  call  recipe-mindedness. It reminds me of the  way in which  the Renaissance cult of the classics has for centuries been allowed  to stunt  and  impede  the study  of literature in  English.  The  difference is that  now  it is the cult of the scientific which  gets in the way. Tabulation of images at  ponderous length  ousts the general  comment based  on an attentive, uncounting reading. If it is not  Pope's syntax it is Byron's  rhyme-patterns. Computer-criticism looms.  The two  main  approaches to literature are sociological  and  scholarly, and few scholars  seem  to know why  anything is any  good.  The  student quails  at  this
efficient society in which everyone knows what  everything is for, and  he surrenders.
No-one  tells  him  about  the  Softly  Softly  Catchee Monkey  game  which  is going on.  Technology and  organizing  power  and  all  kinds  of other  human ingenuities are  complicating our  daily  lives and  increasing society's  pressure  on  us. Nobody is  a  private person  now. It is not  surprising that  for  some  time  creative   people have  been  discarding and  perverting such  esteemed   human inventions as logic, coherence,  regular  form,  clarity,   syntax   and   system.  As  the  organ   grinds  ever more  complicatedly on, the monkey  jumps off; but  he is shadowed by dons anxious to  rewrite  his  work  for  him  according to  these  inventions. I  am  not  damning the  discussion  and   comparison of  responses;   I  am  just  intrigued and  disturbed

CANADIAN ATTITUDES



by  the  boom  in  the  mind-game. All  very  well  to  try  putting society  right,  but there  are  some  things  we  have  to leave  to chance  and  informality. Men  can  no more  implement all their  prescriptions than  monkeys can  play  Beethoven.
There is no  little  vanity  in  man's  pretensions to controlling his world: he not
only  talks  importantly of  impracticable theories  but  by  so  talking creates  new problems for  those whose job  it  is to  sustain, at its  best,  thinking for  think­ ing's  sake.  Above   all,  the  young student  must be  told   that  literature  is  its own  best  representative, resists being  codified,  is no  branch of  the  Civil  Service, is  not  technology and   will  always betray  those  who  try  to  twist  it  into  being a descriptive science.  Its  power  is immense; but  private, not institutional; and  it is  only  those  intellectuals  who  are  themselves  out  of  touch  with  the  raw  and  teeming   life  of  the   continent who  have  mistaken   literature.  M.  Falardeau on "classical  humanism" is flirting  with  actuality, marrying theory. He  neglects  the country's lowest   Common  Denominators.  Mr.   Frye  sees  the  imagination's in­ discipline,  is willing  to let  things  get  out  of hand.  M. Falardeau is really  under­ valuing   the  humanities, exaggerating what  they  cannot do  by  minimizing what  they  can  do.  Mr.  Frye  is asking  us to let the  humanities remain the  humanities: the  eloquences of man  in  his private  wondering. More  than this they  cannot be, and  they will only be less when  we have ceased to respect  them  for their endearing vices. We cannot predict what  will  happen in Canada. But here is a new country, imitating a powerful and experienced neighbour already  deft in recipe-mindedness. The   temptation to  organize  even  our  most  private activities, and   especially  those  of the  young, is enormous: it becomes  easier to compile  reports, to explain  to politicians, to document for employers.  I just hope  that  the  humanists will not go  on  capitulating. I feel  that  the  study  of literature can  give  the  young  person private  resources  unlikely  to  make  him  a good  salesman, bureaucrat  or  lawyer; but  only  so long  as it  is allowed  to  happen to  him  rather than  be fed  into  him in   measured  tablets.  In   other   words  there  is  no  room  for  pseudo-science, for ostriches,  for "safe" syllabuses.  Or  rather, if there is, then  only  the quiet, clandes­ tine  mind-game remains for those who care: those who  know  that  they and  their  fellows  have  wasted   the  only  power  they  ever  had; and   that   is  the  power  of captivating beyond   and   within  the  academic timetable by  means  of  an  inward operation on the adolescent spirit.



FOLK SONGS
IN ONTARIO




Edith Fowke








w.N CANADIAN  FOLK   SONGS  a<e  mentioned,  most people think first of French Canada, and then of our Maritime provinces, particu­ larly  Nova  Scotia  and  Newfoundland. These  are  the  areas  where  collecting has been concentrated, and until recently little was known of the folk songs of Ontario. In  fact,  it was generally assumed that we had few folk songs and that  it was too late to find the ones that might have existed earlier now that Ontario has become so highly industrialized.  However, when I got a tape recorder in the fall of 1956, I decided  to do a little scouting, and soon uncovered enough  traditional material to indicate  that  the  only reason so few Ontario songs were known  was that  no particular effort  had  been  made  to find them.  During  the  last six years I  have recorded  nearly a thousand  traditional  songs in somewhat  sporadic trips to various parts of the province, and that number could easily be increased if I devoted more time to collecting.
From  the time when they first began to take an interest in folk songs, collectors have  been  lamenting  that  traditional  singers are  a  disappearing breed.  Back in
1855 when  the Society of Antiquaries  of Newcastle-upon-Tyne started  to collect Northumbrian ballads,  they noted that  so far  as the  words were concerned  they were half  a century  too late, and  in 1907 Cecil Sharp  wrote  that  "The  English ballad  is moribund; its account is well-nigh closed." Similarly, when Dr. Roy Mackenzie  started  his pioneer collecting in  Nova  Scotia  in  1909,  he bemoaned "the   mournful  truth  that  the  oral  propagation   of  ballads  has in  our  day  and generation  almost ceased."
In  the fifty-odd years since then we have learned  that  the folksinger is a much hardier  breed  than  anyone  gave him credit  for  being,  but  even so I  have been

FOLK  SONGS IN ONTARIO



amazed  to find how well the tradition  has been preserved in a province formerly regarded as barren.  It has been very satisfying to record today many ballads which Dr. Mackenzie first noted half a century ago, and which he then feared were disappearing.
When  I  started  collecting,  I  was lucky enough  to begin in  the  Peterborough
region, some ninety  miles north-east  of Toronto. Although  I have since sampled various other areas of the province, I have found no other region so rich in songs. In this province  the Irish settlers seem to have preserved their songs and  the habit of singing  them  much  better  than  people of Scottish or  English descent.  Peter­ borough  is a  particularly   fruitful  field because it is far  enough  from  the  main industrial  areas  to  have  developed  slowly, and  many  of the  people  living there today  are  descendants  of the  original  settlers Peter  Robinson  brought out  from Ireland  in I 825. Also, as the only sizable centre within fifty miles, it has become the home of many  farm  folk who have moved in from  the surrounding country. In  the little villages around  it: Lakefield, Ennismore, Douro,  Downer's  Corners, live many  people  whose forefathers  carved  farms  out  of the wilderness early in the nineteenth  century.
Another   reason  why  Peterborough   has  proved  a  particularly   rich  source  of
songs is that  during  the nineteenth  century it was a great  lumbering  centre,  and even  when  the  lumber   camps  moved  farther   north,  many  Peterborough men followed  them.  Until  recent  times it  was the  custom  for farmers  to work  their fields in the summer  and spend the winter in the woods, coming back each spring with their winter's wages and a fresh batch of songs.
Most of the folk songs that  can still be found in Ontario owe their survival  to
the  lumber  camps.  With  remarkably  few exceptions, the songs I  have  recorded have  come  either  from  men  who worked  in  the woods in  their  youth  or  from people who learned  the songs from fathers, uncles, or grandfathers who had gone shantying.  Indeed,  I soon learned  that  the best way to get traditional songs was to ask not for folk songs or old-time songs but for shanty songs.
In  the long winter  nights in the shanties the men took turns in singing all the songs  they  could  remember:  old  British ballads,  music-hall  ditties,  love songs, songs of the sea  and  of the lumber  camps, and  popular  songs of the day. Thus the  shantyboys  preserved  and  spread  folk songs of many  types, with  the  result that  songs which  might  originally  have been known only in one family  became part of the repertoire  of traditional  singers across the province.
Individually   those  traditional singers are  quite  varied,  ranging  in  education from  illiterates  to  university  graduates,  in  age from  seven to  ninety-seven,  and

29

FOLK SONGS IN ONTARIO



in  status  from   unemployed laborers to  a  controller  of  the  city of Toronto. Generally,  however, most of them have a rural background, having spent at least part  of their  lives on a farm;  and  the largest number  are now in their seventies and  eighties. Folksinging can no longer be considered  a living tradition,  for most of the  singers are  recalling songs they have  not  sung  for  twenty, forty,  or sixty years. Nevertheless, a surprising number can reproduce  lengthy ballads without hesitation.  Every  collector is tantalized  by fragments  of songs once known  and now forgotten,  but on the whole the Ontario singers manage  to provide complete and well-rounded  versions.
The  finest traditional singer I have come across was an old gentleman  named
0. J. Abbott  who died in  rg62 in his ninetieth  year. He sang some hundred  and twenty songs for me, including some unusual Irish ballads and  Canadian lumber­
camp songs. Born in England,  he came to Canada as a boy, and for about  fifteen years lived and worked on farms in the Ottawa valley. It was an Irish community, and  he learned  most of his songs from the farmers  and  their sons, and  from the men  he  met  in  the  lumber  camps  where  he worked  for several  winters.  As he said,  "All  I had  to do was hear a song once and  I could sing it." After  rgoo he worked in Hull where he had little opportunity  to learn new songs. When he was recording,   he  would  repeatedly  remark,  "Why,   I  haven't sung  that  song  for sixty years."
Except  for  the  fact  that  he remembered  more songs than  most, Mr.  Abbott
is fairly typical of the Ontario traditional  singers. Most of them  learned  the songs in  their  youth  and  rarely sing them  today.  There are  a few  in  their  thirties  or forties who still remember  some of the songs they heard  their fathers  or mothers sing,  and  occasionally  a  farm  boy or girl  picks up  a  few songs from  an  older member  of the family, but on the whole the younger generation  are now learning their songs from radio and television.






T.ADITIONAL ONTARIO SONGS  can be divided into those that originated  in Britain and those that were composed in North  America. The songs that  collectors prize most highly are the Child  ballads:  those that  Francis James Child  collected and  classified in his monumental five-volume work:  The  English and Scottish Popular Ballads, which has become a folklorists' Bible. My collecting to date indicates that  Ontario singers have not preserved as many of these as have

FOLK SONGS IN ONTARIO



been  found  in  Newfoundland, Nova  Scotia,  and  the eastern states,  but  neverthe­ less  some   interesting  samples   have   turned  up.  Versions of  such   widespread favourites as "Lord Randall", "Barbara Allen", "Mary Hamilton", "Our Good­  man", "The  House Carpenter",  "The Wife  Wrapt  in   Wetherskin", "The Farmer's Curst   Wife",  and   "The Golden   Vanity" are  common  here  as  else­ where  in  North America. A  very  complete  version of  "Lady Isabel  and  the  Elf Knight" has  survived   under   the  somewhat  misleading  title  of  "The  Dapherd (Dappled) Gray", with  its tale of the elopement, the  drowning of the false lover, and  the final  conversation with the lady's  little cock. "Katharine Jaffray" (which  the singer  identified as "There Was a Lord  in Edinburgh") gives the story of the marriage interrupted by the true lover who carries his girl off in the best Lochinvar style.  An  unusual version  of  "The Gray  Cock"  has  eliminated the  supernatural element   found in  the  old-country versions  and  become  simply  an  account of a night  visit. The bloody tale  of "Little Musgrave and  Lord  Barnard" has survived  as "Lord Banner's Wife", complete  with  the cuckolding leading to double  murder and  suicide.  Rarer  is the  version  of "Hind Horn" which  retains  the  magic  ring that  grows  pale  when  the  wandering lord's  sweatheart gives him  up  and  agrees to marry  another, thus  warning him in time to return and  interrupt the  wedding dressed  as  an  old  beggarman. Also unusual is the  version  of "The Lass of Roch  Royal":   this  ballad   is  remembered in  America  chiefly  for  the  lyric  verses  that  begin:   "Who will shoe  your  pretty  little  foot?"  but  the  Ontario version  tells of Lord Gregory's mother turning away  his sweetheart, and  of Lord  Gregory  finding  her dead  body "in  Lochland lane". A somewhat light-hearted form of "The Gypsy Laddie" is common on  this continent, but  an Ontario version is the first reported in  North America that  preserves  the  tragic  ending  in  which  the  band  of gypsies is hanged "for  the  stealing of Lord  Castle's  lady  0". Another rare  item  is "The Dowie  Dens  of  Yarrow":  almost  unknown in  North   America, it  has  survived among the Scots of Glengarry county  as "The Dewy Dells of Yarrow".
While such Child  ballads have survived  in Ontario, they are vastly outnumbered
by  the  later  broadside ballads. This  is consistent  with  the  province's history,  for while  the  first settlers  in  the  eastern  part  of the continent came  out  from  Britain in  the  seventeenth century, most  of the  Ontario pioneers  came  out  in  the  nine­ teenth. By that  time  the  older  Child  ballads  were being  submerged by  the great  tide  flowing  from  the  broadside presses,  and  these,  naturally enough,  made   up the  major part  of the  repertoire of the emigrants who sailed  from  the British  Isles in last  century's "Great Migration". Also, as the Irish  tradition was predominant in  the  lumber camps, the  later  broadsides  or "come-all-ye's" tended  to get wider

FOLK SONGS IN ONTARIO



circulation  than the older English and Scottish ballads.
Almost half of the two hundred  and fifty titles Dr.  Malcolm  Laws catalogued in  his  bibliographical guide,  American  Balladry   from  British  Broadsides,  have turned   up  in  Ontario, and  in  addition  nearly  a hundred   others  not  previously reported  in  North  America. An impression of the  remarkably  varied  types may be given by mentioning  a few from each of the eight subject  headings  Laws uses to classify such ballads.
Under   "War   Ballads"  come  "The Bonny   Bunch   of  Roses  0" from   the
Napoleonic  Wars, "The  Heights of Alma" from the Crimean  War,  "The Croppy Boy", "Kelly  the Fenian  Boy", and  "Kevin  Barry"  from  the Irish  rebellions, the Jacobite  "Johnny Cope", and laments of the Irish who fought in England's wars, like "The Kerry Recruit", "Patrick  Sheehan", and "Old  Erin  Far Away".
For an inland  province, Ontario has preserved a surprising number  of "Ballads
of Sailors  and  the  Sea":  some of these were brought  here  by east-coast sailors who  came  to  work  in  the  northern  lumberwoods.  Particularly notable  are  the pirate  tales of "The Flying Cloud",  "Kelly  the Pirate", "Captain Colstein",  and "The Ocean  Bee".
"Ballads  of  Crime  and  Criminals" recall  England's Dick  Turpin in  "Bonny Black  Bess",  Ireland's  "Brennan   on  the  Moor",   and   Australia's   "Bold  Jack Donahue" and  "The   Wild Colonial  Boy". The  most unusual  murder  ballad  to turn  up  here recounts  the sad fate of "Dr.  Pritchard" who was hanged  in  Edin­ burgh in I 865 for poisoning his wife and mother-in-law.
"Ballads  of  Family  Opposition  to  Lovers"  usually  and  tragically,  like "The
Constant   Farmer's Son"  who  is killed by  his sweetheart's  brothers,  or  "Edwin in  the  Lowlands  Low"  who is murdered  by his girl's  parents.  Occasionally  the tide is turned  as in "The  Bold Soldier"  where  the girl's father  and  brothers  are beaten  in battle,  or "The  Banks of Dundee"  where the girl shoots her interfering uncle.
"Ballads  of Lovers' Disguises and Tricks" fall largely into two groups:  those in which  the  girl disguises herself and  goes to sea or to war  with  or in  pursuit  of her  lover, as in  "The Female  Warrior", "The Lady  Leroy",  "The Banks of the Nile",  or "Pretty  Polly Oliver"; and  those in which the lover returns  in disguise after  a  prolonged  absence to test his sweetheart's  faithfulness,  as in "The  Dark­ Eyed  Sailor",  "The Mantle  So Green",  "MacDonald's Return  to  Glencoe",  or "The Pretty Fair Maid in Her Father's  Garden".
"Ballads   of  Faithful   Lovers"  tell  of  noblemen  who  marry   maidens  of low degree,  as in "The Lass of Glenshee"  or "When W'll  Ye Gang  Awa',  James?"

FOLK SONGS IN  ONTARIO



of pastoral romance as in "Branded Lambs" or "The Brown  Girl", and  of tragedy as  in  "Molly Bawn" whose  lover  shot  her  because  he  took  her  for  a swan,  or "The Sheffield  Apprentice" whose mistress caused  him  to be arrested and  hanged because  he preferred her chambermaid to her.
"Ballads of  Unfaithful  Lovers"   include   many   ballads of  wayside  seduction
like  "The  Nightingale" or  "The Dawning of the  Day", tragic  tales  of girls for­ saken  and  dying  like  "Mary of the  Wild  Moor"  or  "The  Butcher Boy",  and  of girls murdered by their sweethearts like "The Wexford  Girl" or "The Cruel Ship's  Carpenter".
"Humorous and  Miscellaneous Ballads" include  all those  not  easily classified: the  tale  of "The Old  Woman of Slapsadam" who sought  to kill her  husband by making him  eat  eggs and  marrowbones, Irish  music-hall  ditties  like "Finnegan's Wake" and  "Doran's Ass",  the  tale  of the  famous  Irish  race  horse,  "Skewball", and  of the lost "Children in the Wood".
Not only  the  narrative ballads but  many  lyric songs came  to this province with
the  early  immigrants from  the  British  Isles.  Many  old-country love  songs  have been  preserved   here:   for  example, Mr.  0. J. Abbott sang  a fine  version  of the Irish  street  song,  "Limerick Is  Beautiful", or  "The Colleen  Bawn", which  con­
cludes with these verses:

Oh if I were made the emperor all Russia to command, Julius Caesar, or the Lord Lieutenant  of the land,
I'd give the crown down off my head, my people on their knees,
Likewise a fleet of sailing ships out on the briny seas,

I'd give the crown down off my head, my people on their knees, Likewise a fleet of sailing ships out on the briny seas,
A beggar I would go to bed and happy rise at dawn
If by my side all for a bride I'd find the Colleen Bawn.

More   surprising was  the  discovery  of  the  Irish  folk  song  from   which   Yeats fashioned his "Down By the  Sally Gardens". When  working  in the  lumberwoods during the  First  World  War, a now elderly  Lakefield farmer had  learned this love lament which  he called  "Down By Sally's Garden":

Come  you  rambling  boys of pleasure, give ear  to those few lines I
write,
Although  I'm  a rover and in roving I take great delight,
I set my mind on a handsome girl who at all times did me slight, But my mind was never easy till my darling  were in my sight.

33

FOLK SONGS IN ONTARIO



It was down  by Sally's garden one evening late  I took my way,
'Twas there  I spied  this pretty little  girl  and  those  words  to me sure she did say,
She advised me to take  love easy as the leaves grew on the tree,
But I was young and  foolish, with  my darling could  not agree.

The very  next  time  I met  my  love,  sure  I thought her  heart   was mine,
But as the weather changes,  my true  love she changed her mind.
Cursed gold is the root of evil, oh it shines with a glittering blue, Causes  many  the  lad  and  lass to  part, let their  hearts and  minds  be
ever so true.

Sure  I wish I was in Dublin town,  and  my true  love along  with  me, With  money to support us and  keep us in good company,
With  lots of liquor  plentiful, flowing bowls on every side.
Let  fortune never  daunt you,  my  love,  we're  both  young  and   the world is wide.

But  there's  one  thing   more  that   grieves  me  sore  is  to  be  called  a runaway,
And  to leave  the  spot  I was born  in, oh  Cupid cannot set me free,
And  to leave that  darling girl I love, oh, alas, what  will I do? Will  I become a rover, sleep with  the girl I never  knew?

The British influence is also evident in  a number of bawdy ballads that survive in   Ontario.  For   example, a  young   Peterborough  man  sang a  ditty  he  called "Derby Town" which had  changed but  little  in  the  two  and  a half  centuries since it was  printed in  D'Urfey's Pills to Purge Melancholy as "A  Tottenham Fralick". Another ballad which is at  least  as old  but  has  not  previously appeared in  print dates from the  time  before  the  industrial revolution when travelling weavers had a  reputation  more recently associated with  travelling salesmen:

Oh  as I roved out  one moonlight night,
The stars were shining  and  all things  bright.
I spied a pretty  maid  by the light  of the moon
And  under  her apron  she carried a loom,

REFRAIN:   To  me right  whack  fal the do a dido day Right whack fal the do a di do day, Toora loora loora lay,
To  me right  whack  fal the do a dido day.


34

FOLK SONGS IN  ONTARIO



She says, "Young  man, what trade do you bear?" Says I, "I'm a weaver I do declare.
I am a weaver brisk and free."
"Would  you weave upon my loom, kind sir?" said she.

There  was Nancy Right and Nancy Rill, For them I wove the Diamond  Twill. Nancy Blue and Nancy Brown,
For them I wove the Rose and the Crown.

So I laid her down upon the grass,
I braced her loom both tight and fast, And for to finish it with a joke,
I topped it off with double stroke.




IN ADDITION  to  the  large  body  of songs  brought to  Ontario from  the  British  Isles, a considerable number of native  American ballads  drifted north   from   the   United States.   Most  of  these  reached Ontario  by  way  of  the lumber  camps:  either   through American  shantyboys  who  came   to  work  in Ontario camps, or  Canadians who  crossed  the  border to  work  in  the  woods  of Michigan.
Strangely enough, many   cowboy  and  western  pioneer  songs  are  known  here. "The Texas   Rangers" is probably the  most  common  of these: I have  recorded it five times in different parts of the  province.  The  Canadian versions  differ little from  American texts except  for one which included  these lines:

When at the age of sixteen years I joined a royal band, We marched  to San Francisco and then the Rio Grande.

The   "royal band" is  a  fairly   evident   sign  of  British  influence-the Rangers would   have   been  surprised  to  know  they  had  enlisted   under our  Queen, and perhaps gratified to have  their  territory  extended to San  Francisco.
Other western  songs frequently found  in Ontario are  the ubiquitous "Cowboy's
Lament" about the  lad  who  died  in  the  streets  of  Laredo, and   the  tale  of the western  desperado, "Cole   Younger". These  are  widely  known, but  one  unusual song  that   circulated in  the  Ontario woods  has  not  been  reported  elsewhere: a cowboy   version   of  "The Broken   Ring" which  is  interesting  because  it  closely parallels the original story of "Hind Horn".


35

FOLK SONGS IN ONTARIO



The  California gold  rush  also  produced  several   echoes  in  Ontario. In   one ballad  about  "A  Dying Californian", the singer  laments that he is dying far  from his home  and  sends  messages to his family  and  friends.  Another, "My California Boys", said  to have  been written  by an Ontario woman in the early  r85o's, takes the  form  of a letter  from  a Canadian parent to two boys who  joined  in  the gold rush.  It can  hardly be said  to  possess poetic  merit,  but  it  does convey  the  strict moral  tone of rural Ontario:

Although you are far away from here, I always hope and pray That you do walk in innocence and mind the Sabbath Day. Never gamble, drink nor swear, which happiness destroys,
And don't you fear, should death  appear,  my California  Boys.

The  ancestors of  several  common   cowboy  songs  are  also  to  be  found   here: for  example, "Michigan-I-0",  the  forerunner of  "The Buffalo  Skinners";  the Irish  version  of "The Girl  I  Left  Behind", and  "Early, Early  in the  Spring", on which  "The Trail to  Mexico" was  based.  I have  also taped  a local  song  to the tune  of "I'm Going  to  Leave  Old  Texas  Now", a song  called  "Jogging Along" to  the  tune  of "Jerry Go and  Ile That Car", and  a little  river-driver's song  that obviously  has the same ancestry  as "Whisky, Rye Whisky":

I'll eat when I'm hungry and drink when I'm  dry,
If the river don't drown me, I'll live till I die,
If the river don't drown me while over it I roam, For I am a river driver and far away from home.

Of  course  the  largest  group of native  North American ballads found  here  are those  that   have  to  do  with  lumbering. While  the  shantyboys sang  songs  of  all kinds, their  favourites were those that  told of life in the woods or of the adventures of other  shantyboys. Many  of these were common to lumber camps  on both  sides of the  border: whether they originated in Maine or New Brunswick, Michigan or Ontario, they were sung and  passed on in the Ontario camps.
The lumberjack songs fall into  three  main  groups. The  first describes  life and work in the woods, often taking  the form of an account of a winter  in a particular camp, as in "Turner's Camp" or "Hogan's Lake":

'Twas  up on the Black River at a place called Hogan's  Lake Those able-bodied fellows went square timber for to make. The echo of their axes rung from shore to shore,
The lofty pine they fell so fast, like cannons  they did roar.

FOLK SONGS IN ONTARIO



The  second  group tells of tragic  accidents  in the woods or on the river: like ' The
Jam   on  Gerry's Rocks", "The Hanging Limb", or  "Johnny Doyle":

Bad luck was with Johnny that morning, His foot it got caught in the jam,
And you know how those waters go howling
From the flood of the reservoir dam.

The  third  group tells of the  lively times  the  shantyboys had  in  the  spring  when they  headed  for  the  bright   lights  of  the  cities  with  their  winter's pay  in  their
pockets:
The  winter is all over and the hard work is all done, We'll all go down to Saginaw and have a little fun.
Some will go on Stanley's coach and others take the train,
But if you get there before me, you can whoop 'er up, Liza Jane.

Taken together, they  create a  vivid  picture  of the  early  days  of lumbering and of the conditions that  promoted the spread  of folk songs:

If you were in the shanty when they came in at night,
To see them dance, to hear them sing, it would your heart delight. Some asked for patriotic songs, some for love songs did call; Fitzsimmons sang about the girl that wore the waterfall.

A smaller   number of songs  came  from  the  sailors  on  the  Great Lakes.  These also include ballads from  both  sides of the  border, the  most  popular being  two lengthy   ditties   describing "The  Cruise  of  the  Bigler"  and   "The Cruise  of  the E. C.  Roberts". The  first is a humorous account of a flat-bottomed scow hauling timber  from  Buffalo  to Milwaukee, a boat so slow that  she "could  have  passed the whole darn fleet if they'd  hove to and  wait"; and  the second  tells of the hardships suffered  by a crew  engaged in hauling red iron  ore from  Escanaba to Cleveland. Apart from  these,  most  of the  Great  Lakes' songs are  dismal  tales of ships lost in storms: "The Loss of the  Persia" is well known  in  both  Canada and  the States, while  other  Canadian ballads chronicle  the  loss of the  Asia, the  Maggie  Hunter, the  Belle Sheridan, and  the  Antelope. Most  of them  are  so pedestrian and  lugu­ brious  that  they create an  unintentionally humorous effect;  occasionally, however,  the anonymous chroniclers produce an effective image:

Oh it's all around  the Presqu'isle buoys the lake gulls flit and skim, They all join in the chorus of the Persian's funeral hymn.
They skim along the water's edge and then aloft they soar
In memory of the Persian's crew drowned on Lake Huron's shore.

37

FOLK SONGS IN ONTARIO



Another group of Ontario  songs reflects outstanding events in Canada's history. The  Battle of the  Plains of Abraham  inspired  two ballads  that  have survived in oral  tradition   down  to  the  present:  one  of these,  usually  identified  as "Brave Wolfe",  was widely known in the  New England  states and  the  Canadian  Mari­ times;  the  other,  "General   Wolfe",  has  been  recorded  from  oral  tradition   in Britain  but  was unreported  in North America  until an old lady of  eighty sang it for  me some five years ago.  Originally  published  as a  broadside  ballad,  it has preserved  through  two centuries a fairly accurate  picture  of the famous  battle.
The American  Revolution is recalled in "Revolutionary Tea", a ballad brought
to Canada by the United  Empire  Loyalists, which describes the Revolution  as a squabble  between a mother and daughter.  The siege of Quebec  in I775 probably inspired a little play-party game that begins:

We're marching down to old Quebec
And the fifes and the drums are a-beating, For the British boys have gained the day And the Yankees are retreating.

Incidentally, the same ditty is sung in the States  with the roles reversed.
The  Battle  of Detroit  at the beginning of the  War  of  I8I2   produced  a lively song  beginning  "Come  All  You  Bold Canadians", and  in  "The   Battle  of  the Windmill" set to the tune of "The  Girl I Left Behind Me" the Prescott Volunteers boast of their victory over Mackenzie's supporters  who crossed the St. Lawrence to take  possession of a huge stone windmill near  Cornwall  in  I838. The  Fenian raids of I 866 produced  several songs: one little ditty passed on by an Irish sailor on  the  Great  Lakes recalls the humiliating  defeat  of the Queen's Own  Rifles in their clash with the Fenians at Lime Ridge, and in an "Anti-Fenian Song" set to the  Civil  War  tune  of "Tramp, Tramp, Tramp, the  Boys Are  Marching", the Ontario boys boasted  that  "Beneath  the  Union  Jack  we will drive the  Fenians back and be happy in our own Canadian home."
Other  events  of less historical  importance   have  also been  preserved in  song. For example, a typical gallows ballad spread across Ontario shortly after Reginald Birchall  was hanged  in Woodstock  jail in  I 8go for killing an English lad named
Frederick  Benwell. Its opening,  "My  name is J. R. Birchall, that  name I'll  never
deny",  indicates  its debt  to a similar American  ballad,  "Charles Guiteau", des­ cribing  the  assassination  of  President  Garfield  in I 88 I, which  in  its  turn  had been patterned  on an earlier ballad entitled "My  Name Is John  T. Williams".
A less famous murder  case, in which Michael Lee killed his sweetheart,  Maggie

FOLK SONGS IN  ONTARIO



Howie,  in  Napanee in  I 882,  also inspired  a ballad  that  included such  deathless lines as:

She wrung her hands in anguish and wept most bitterly, Saying, 'Michael,  do have mercy and do not murder  me.' But I was deaf to all her cries, no mercy could I show,
And in my hands I took the axe and struck that fatal  blow.

More  light-hearted are  the accounts of men who have spent  some time as guests of  the  government in  various  Ontario institutions. Toronto's Don  jail is saluted in a ditty  beginning:

On the banks of the Don there's a dear little spot,
A boarding house proper where you get your meals hot. You get fine bread and water, and you won't pay a cent, Your taxes are paid for, your board and your rent,

and  the same  theme  is expanded in an ode to "Johnson's Hotel" in Peterborough, the  jail  that  stands  "on  the  banks  of the Ottonabee". Another ditty  describes  the fate  of  a  group of  Americans who  came  up  to Ontario, ran  afoul  of  the  law, and spent some time in "Sault St. Mary's Jail".


bE STRONG IRISH  FLAVOUR of many  Ontario songs is often emphasized by an  accent so marked  that  you would  swear  the singer  had  landed
from  Cork  last  week,  even  when  his great  grandparents came  here  well  over  a century ago. Such  Irishisms  as "arrums" for "arms" and  "merned" for "mourned" are  almost  standard usage  in Ontario ballads,  and  most of the  old shanty singers finish  off their  songs  by speaking the  last word  or phrase; a characteristic of the traditional Irish  come-all-ye style.
The outstanding example of the  Irish  influence  is a  typical  come-all-ye  com­ memorating a riot  that  took  place  in  Montreal in  I 877. Its  flavour  is that of the innumerable nationalist ballads composed  about  the various  battles  and  rebellions  of  Ireland's stormy   history,  complete   to  the  perennial complaint  about "what King  Billy and  Cromwell did"; the event that  inspired  it happened on the Twelfth of  July   back  in   I877  when   antagonism  between  Catholics and  Protestants in Montreal was at fever heat:

Come all you gallant  Irishmen  who love your church  and creed, I hope you'll pay attention  to the few lines that you read,

39

FOLK SONGS IN ONTARIO



Concerning  your church and countrymen, your brothers one and all, It's how we licked the Yellowbacks in the city of Montreal.

It was on the twelfth of last July the Orangemen did draw nigh, And to insult the Catholics they waved their colors high;
To insult the Catholics it was their one design,
And  they played the tunes King  Billy played on the day he crossed the Boyne.

They marched from Vyve and Circle down to Victoria Square, It's  there that they halted for the Union  boys were there.
Then  Fawcett drew a revolver and he let go with a ball,
And swore he'd kill every Papist dog in the city of Montreal.

So Hackett followed after him and fired just once again, And he received a fatal ball which entered  in his brain. He cast his eyes around  him as downward  he did fall,
And he bid adieu to that Orange  crew in the city of Montreal.

So come all you true-bred Catholics who love your church and creed, I hope you'll pay attention  to what King Billy and Cromwell did. They tore down Catholic churches  from Lewis to Donegal,
But  they can't  come across with  no games like that  in  the  city of
Montreal.


The young   Peterborough man   who  sang  that   for  me  had  learned it  from  his father, and  he knew nothing of the events that  inspired  it.
While  that has  the  style of the  Irish  rebel  ballads, it  was obviously  composed in  Canada. Other Ontario songs show an even  closer  relationship to older  British songs.  For  example, "The Roving  Journeyman" has  been  transformed into  "Ye Maidens of Ontario", and  the old  Irish  song  called  "The Bonny  Laboring Boy" has  been  adapted to the Ontario scene as "The Jolly  Shanty Boy" or "The Rail­
road  Boy":

If I had all the riches that's  in my father's store,
Oh freely I would share it with the boy that I adore.
We'll fill our glasses to the brim, let the toast go merrily round,
And  we'll drink  to the  health  of the  railroad  boy, from  Ottawa to
Owen Sound.

It is easy to see how such songs were adapted from  older  models,  but occasion­
ally  I come  across  one  which  is less easily identified. For  example, a Glengarry

FOLK SONGS IN  ONTARIO



woman sang a  little  ode  to  "The Jolly  Raftsman 0" which has  all  the  charm  of the older  British love songs  but  seems to be a fresh creation:

I am sixteen,  I do confess, I'm  sure  I am no older, 0.
I place  my mind,  it never shall move, It's  on a jolly raftsman 0.

REFRAIN:   To  hew and  score it is his plan, And  handle a broad-axe neatly 0. It's lay the line and  mark  the pine And do it most completely 0.

Oh  she is daily scolding me
To  marry  some freeholder 0.
I place  my mind,  it never shall move, It's on a jolly raftsman 0.

My love is marching through the pine
As brave  as Alexander 0,
And  none can  I find to please my mind
As well as the  jolly raftsman 0.

Less  poetic but   more widely  known was  the  lament of  "The Poor  Little Girls of Ontario" who  were  left  behind when  their  fellows  headed westward:

I'll  sing you a song of the lone pest,
It goes by the name  of the great  north-west. I cannot have a beau at all,
They  all skip out  there  in the fall.

CHORUS:   One  by one  they all clear out,
Thinking to better  themselves no doubt, Caring little  how far they go
From  the  poor little girls of Ontario.

This little   ditty  circulated  in  Ontario  between I 8go   and  I 9 I o,  taking slightly different  forms depending  upon  the   regions that   were   currently attracting  the boys.  In the  I 8go's it  contained verses  mentioning Thunder  Bay  and   Keewatin; later it referred to "Manitobay", Saskatchewan, and  the  Cariboo.
A  few  more recent songs   have   also  passed   into  oral tradition,  notably some
from the  great depression of the  'thirties. Typical is a ditty that was sung by  men


41

FOLK SONGS IN  ONTARIO



working on  a  highway being  built  as a  relief  project which contained this some­
what bitter topical reference:

It's  hailing,  it's raining, but during the day
The Lord  works with Bennett  to keep clouds  away. Now if I had  Bennett  where Bennett's got me,
The very first morning he'd  be weak at the  knees.



NOTE
A survey  like  this  can  indicate only in  fairly  general terms  the  various  types of folk  songs  still  to  be  found   in  Ontario, and,  of  course,  can  give  no  idea  of  the tunes  to  which  they  were sung. Those  who would  like to hear  some of the Ontario son_§s sung  by traditional singers  will find  samples  on  the  following  records:
"Folk  Songs of Ontario": Folkways FM  4005;  "Irish and  British  Songs from  the
Ottawa  Valley" sung  by  0. J. Abbot:  Folkways   FM  4051;  "Lumbering  Songs
from   the  Ontario Shanties": Folkways  FM  4052;   "Songs of  the  Great Lakes": Folkways   FM   4053; "Ontario  Ballads   and   Folksongs":  Prestige   International
25014; "Songs  of Tom Brandon, Peterborough, Ontario": Folk  Legacy  FSC  g.








A TURN TO THE STAGE
Reaney's Dramatic Verse: Part II


Alvin Lee






ANYONE PRESENT  at  the  openillg  of  M<. Reaney's fust comedy,  The  Killdeer,  will not  easily forget  the  excitement it engendered in the Coach   House   Theatre where   it  was  being  staged   by  the  University Alumnae players,  under the  direction of Pamela Terry. Through a dazzling array  of poetic language, excellent  acting  parts,  and  bizarre psychological  unravellings one soon realized  that  The  Red  Heart,  that  intensely  private  book of problems stated  but not  resolved,  had  come  to  the  stage.  The  destructive Sundogs,  with  their  laying waste of nature, had  combined with  the English  orphan-and also with  Jezebel, with   the   Whore  of  Babylon,   and   with   Mallory's  Morgan  Ia  Fay-to  create Madam  Fay,   a  cosmetic  saleswoman. There  was  also  the  emerging boy  poet, afraid to leave  behind his toys and  childhood games,  because  of the horror  of the adult   world,   and   wishing,  "If only  we  could  choose  our  fathers and  mothers". There were enough dominating parental figures to keep small  boys running down leafless  lanes  of  fear  forever. But  other  elements   had  combined with  The  Red Heart, and  resolutions had  been worked  out.
There was  a suspicion  among  some of the  audience that  even  in  the  midst  of
its verbal  brilliance The  Killdeer, especially  in its plot  and  in the  widely  varying moods evoked  from  the audience, showed  too many signs of obvious  manipulation by the  playwright. One  critic  instructed the  writer  that  this was a good  example of what  a lyric poet does when he dares put a work on the stage without having sufficiently  learned  the  craft   of  the  playwright. Mr.   Mavor   Moore,   writing in the The  Toronto Daily Star, had this verdict:

For  when  the  history of the  Canadian theatre  comes to be written,  I should  not be at  all  surprised  to find  The   Killdeer   listed as the  first Canadian play of  real consequence,  and  the  first  demonstration   of genius  among  us. . . . . The  great


43

A TURN TO THE  STAGE



thing  is that  the  words  Mr.  Reaney  has written  for  Miss Terry  and  her  actors soar, spin, whirl  and  flash like nothing  ever  heard  on  our  stage  before.  And  he rips  us open  as people with  a sort of jolly whimsy which  may forever  mark  the end of the myth of the stolid, sober, inarticulate Canadian.


The  first act  of The  Killdeer sets the  theme,  the  necessity  of the  young  freeing themselves   of  slavery  to  their   parents, if  they  are  to  mature, and   the  extreme reluctance of the  parent  to let this  happen. The  protagonist is Harry Gardner, a very  unpromising looking  young  man  with  acne,  dominated by his fussy, pious, bossy mother. Her  refrain  is "I feel I don't know  my boy's  heart any  longer", to which   he  replies,  "When I'm   asleep/Why don't  you  take off  the  top  of  my head/And put  your  hand  in?/What could  I show  you/Mother, except  yourself?" He  believes that  if he could only get married, he'd  be all right,  and  the girl who is obviously   the   one  for  him,   the  egg-girl   Rebecca  from   near   the  Huckleberry Marsh, does  appear shortly.  But  certain   complex   matters make  this  union  un­ likely,  at  least  for  the  present,   and   Act  I ends  with  both   Harry and  Rebecca going  to  marry  someone  else. Act  II shows  the  fatal  consequences, and  Act  III restores  sanity  to what  has  by then  been  revealed  as a very sick world.
The  situation in the Gardner cottage  is far from  ideal,  but  Harry is well aware of  his  problem   and   is showing   clear  signs  of  rebellion. He  resents  bitterly   his mother's reading his  letters  and  diaries  and  bank  book,  and   her  examining  his dirty  linen.  He  has gone  to a doctor  about  his acne  without telling  her,  and  as a result  has  learned  he'll  have  to refuse  his mother's cooking.  He  hasn't let her  see him  naked  since  he  was sixteen.  He  has even  gone  to  the  prostitute, Mrs.  Sow, but  couldn't knock  on the  door,  because  he kept  thinking of his mother with  her white  apron. Above  all, Harry loathes  Mrs. Gardner's parlour, the perfect  image of her mind:

Oh Gosh! This room! This front parlour  of yours! I think I'll go mad if I don't get one day
Of my life when I don't come home to this. Why don't  I run away? Because I'm  afraid Afraid of the look on a face I'd  never see.
Dear old mother's  face! This room, This room! These brown velvet curtains  trimmed  with
One thousand balls of fur! Fifteen kewpie dolls! Five little glossy china dogs on a Welsh dresser! Six glossy Irish beleek cats and seven glass
Green pigs and eight blue glass top hats and

44

A TURN TO THE STAGE



Five crystal balls filled with snow falling down
On R.C.M.P. Constables. Two little boys on chamber Pots:  Billy Can and Tommy Can't. That  stove­ Cast iron writhing and tortured  curlicues!


Harry's situation is bad,  but  it is ideal  compared with  Rebecca's. It is Madam Fay,  in  the  first scene  of the  play,  who briefs Mrs. Gardner and  the  audience on Rebecca's background and  on  her  own  at  the  same  time.  This  is so lurid  that Mrs.  Gardner, who has never  used cosmetics in her life, buys several,  just to keep the  painted lady  in  the  cottage and  talking.  The  visitor  reveals  that  she  has  a son,  Eli,  who  is nineteen and  hates  her;  she has left  his upbringing to the  hired man,   Clifford, who,  we  learn   later,   has  exercised  a  sinister  hold  over  the  boy ever  since  Eli's  childhood. Years  ago  Madam Fay,  married to  Eli's  father and having   tried  "to  virgin  up  a  bit  before  her  marriage", ran  away  to  Buffalo  for a  weekend   with   her  sister's   husband,  Lorimer. As  a  result  her  husband  shot Lorimer's family,  all except  a girl  (we learn  later  that  this is Rebecca) who since then  has  run  the  farm alone.  The  murderer of Rebecca's family  is in the  mental hospital  at  London, taking  his bed  apart and  putting it together again, a suitable enough fate  for  the  man  married to the  Whore  of Babylon. Madam Fay  travels the  country roads  in a pink  Baby Austin  with purple  plush  insides, selling Beauty, with  the story of her past for bait  when sales are poor.
When   Rebecca  arrives,   later   in  Act  I, to  deliver   Mrs.  Gardner's eggs,  she announces that   she  is to  be  married the  next  day  to  Eli  Fay,  this  having  been arranged by Clifford. By this  time  Harry, who is a clerk in  the  local  Royal  Bank of Canada, has  been  needed   to fill an  empty  chair  at  the  banker's dinner party. While  there  he got rather drunk, never  before having  been "tempted by alcohol", as  his  mother puts  it,  and  in  the  rather  confused  events  which  follow  he is pro­ posed  to  by  the  banker's  daughter, Vemelle. On  returning home   he  hears  of Rebecca's plans,  realizes that he has lost her, having  learned only that  her favour­ ite  bird  is the  killdeer.   Under his  mother's prodding he  returns to  tell  Vemelle that  he will marry her.
Now  all  this  sounds   fictional   in  the  extreme, and  probably melodramatic  as well, and  it would  be dull  theatre fare  if it were not set forth  in some of the most exuberant, image-filled language an  audience could  ask for.  The characters, stereotyped in  abstract, have  all  the  life  that  vital  use of  words  can  give  them. To   a  high   degree   they  are   metaphorically  conceived. As  Harry, for  example,
changes and   develops,   there   are  several  "I am  you"  equations: first  he  is his


45

A TURN TO  THE STAGE



mother, then  Vernelle,  and  finally  Rebecca. Similarly, Eli  moves  from  Clifford to Harry, and  eventually starts to break free of both.
In  A  Suit  of  Nettles  the  characters are  birds  with  human natures, as in  the
traditional bestiary  or  as in  the  beast  fable.  In  The  Killdeer  the  characters are human with  bird  or  beast  characteristics. Clifford, an  orphan like Madame Fay, is described as the  cowbird  which  lays its egg in another's nest. His  victim  Eli is a bunny or lamb, and so on. There are dozens  of such  images.  Mrs. Gardner, and her friend  Mrs. Budge  who has come to revel in the Fay story with  her neighbour, are  old  hens,  crows,  and  witches  successively.  Before  Rebecca's arrival they  try, with   the  help  of  elderblossom   wine,  to  piece  together the  whole  macabre  tale read  years  ago  in  the  newspaper. They  dart about the  stage-shrieking, cawing crows circling  over bits of carrion:

Mrs. Budge:   Is it a still-born calf down there by the ditch?
No, my dear, we had that last Sunday, nor is it­ Would to heaven it were, to end this thirsty Curiosity-but it isn't. And still
The delicious unsavory rotting stink
Drives me on with my old black wings.

When   Rebecca goes away,  she leaves behind  her  two  brown  paper silhouettes of  Eli  and   Clifford, the  groom-to-be and  the  best  man; she  has  taken  these  to town  as  measurements for  the  wedding suits.  Almost  struck  silent  by  Rebecca's disclosure  that she  is marrying the  son  of  the  man   who  killed  her  mother and two  brothers, the  son  of  the  woman   who  committed adultery with  her  father, Mrs.  Gardner and   Mrs. Budge  drain  their  glasses of  wine,  seize the  papermen, cry out  that  their  partners are stark naked,  and  dance.
With  Act  II the  tone and  structure of The  Killdeer  change drastically. As the
curtain rises, to  the  sound  of a killdeer  cry,  Rebecca is being  sentenced to  hang for  the  murder and   mutilation of  Clifford. Several   years  have  passed  and   the exuberant farce  of  Act  I  is far  in  the  distance. The play  moves into  something close to dark  conceit  or allegory. Rebecca emerges  as a sacrificial  victim  (Madam Fay  calls  her  "a female  Jesus"), having  confessed  to  a  crime  she  thought  was Eli's.  Harry, now  a graduate of Osgoode Hall and  married to Vernelle, a  hard­ bitten   Mercedes Macambridge type,  has  returned to his home  village  to practise  law.  He  is  quickly   involved  in  an  attempt to  rescue  Rebecca  from  the  conse­ quences of her  actions.  To  do so he manages to persuade the Jailer's wife, a Mrs.  Soper, to  let  him  into  Rebecca's cell. There, in  the  erotic  climax  of  the  play,  a child  is conceived, and  as Harry has planned, a stay  of execution is granted until

A TURN TO THE STAGE



after  the birth of the baby, by which time a new trial has been arranged.
Act III is given over mainly to this trial, at which a sudden  revelation of facts hitherto  unknown  by almost  everyone exonerates  Rebecca.  The  play ends with Eli making  the first steps towards  adulthood  after many years of infantile regres­ sion. The  two  necessary  divorces will be arranged,  so that  Rebecca  and  Harry can  be married, and  since it is they who have enabled  Eli reluctantly to give up his toys, they are to be his foster parents.
Once  again  it is the  poetry  which carries through  the structure  to its conven­ tionally  arbitrary ending.  The  play is held  together  by a  carefully  worked  out pattern  of interlocking  images. As with The  Red  Heart,  A  Suit  of  Nettles, and Night-Blooming Cereus, the central  unifying symbol is in the title. Rebecca is the killdeer, the  bird  which  cries out over towns just before a storm, the bird which will attract  an  enemy  to itself to lead it away from  the young  ones in the nest. Eli is several times described  as a bird who has not  yet  learned  to fly. Through Harry's  years of marriage to the vulture Vernelle, among the vultures of Osgoode Hall, he carries in his wallet a killdeer feather. As a child  Madam  Fay once killed the killdeer of her foster sister, Rebecca's mother, in an  attempt  to evoke hatred at least, since she felt unloved;  hence Madam  Fay's attempt  at revenge, by steal­ ing her sister's husband. Eli too, as a boy, found a dead killdeer in the pasture and was knocked  down,  kicked, and  cursed by his mother  when he showed it to her. As Harry  slowly pieces together  all this information,  he is led to conclude  that  a dead  killdeer, showed  suddenly  to  Madam  Fay in court,  may  break  her  to the point  of telling what  she knows of  Clifford's death.  And this is how it turns out, although  what  Harry  and  the court learn is not what they expect.
The  killdeer  bird  has its symbolic opposite. In a semi-allegorical scene in Act II Harry  fights for the life of the woman "sentenced  on a Friday, to be hanged in September". Rebecca  has seen her marriage to Eli as "love's solution to the puzzle of hatred", but like Branwell in A Suit of Nettles, Harry  is convinced only slowly that  hate does not win. To get to Rebecca, who will teach him this truth,  he must defeat a Mr.  Manatee, the hangman  and the descendent of all the sterile destroy­ ing  figures  in  Mr.  Reaney's  earlier  works.  Mr.  Manatee craves  the  luxury  of annihilating life and  performs  abortions on the soul by hanging  his victims. His name  manatee  denotes  marine  animal, indicating  that  in the poet's iconography  Mr.  Manatee  is the traditional image of the destroying sea-monster from bestiary tradition.  He is also the brother  of Death,  and has a farm  in a land of darkness:
Mr. Manatee:    My farm was in the County of Night and grew nothing
But fields of nightshade and bladder campion,

47

A TURN TO THE  STAGE



Gardens of burdocks.  Mandrakes in the haymows.  I fed my cattle  on such fare  as made  their  udders Run black blood and  their  wombs  bear free martens. I raised weasels in my henhou:es and  I
Set traps  for barley but  bred  rats  who
Ate the little pigs as they lay sucking the sow.

The  hangman  rejoices that the little bird, Rebecca,  will swing into his noose with­ out  effort,  "Like  a  pet  bird  with  a  broken  wing  that  knows/You're  going  to help it."
Here  the  theme  of sterility, part  of the larger  theme  of growth  and  maturity,
emerges  most strongly.  Against  Mr.  Manatee, Harry   resolves to pit  his phallic powers, believing  that  only a new life can serve as an  adequate human  weapon against  the  death  principle.  This  is the  core of  meaning  in  The  Killdeer.  The tangle of perverted sexual patterns-oedipal attachments, adultery, murder, homosexuality, mutilation, and others-all come together in the figure of Mr. Manatee. In  the context of the fertility theme these perversions are all death, annihilation, or the  refusal to do battle  against  the evil which haunts  the world like a destroying monster.
The  Sun  and  the  Moon  and  The  Easter Egg  have  several  by now  familiar
characters. The  Effie-Rebecca figure returns,  with  her  vision of a  better  world, and  is especially important  in  redeeming  the  youthful  male  protagonist  in The Easter Egg. There  is a sensitive <esthetic youth in each  play, reluctant  or unable until the end  to give up his childish fantasies and  embrace  the ambiguities of the adult  world. And  Madam  Fay is back, changed  but  recognizable,  as the woman deprived  in  her  childhood  of the necessary love to grow  up  and  turned  into  a sadist preying on the weak.
As with  The  Killdeer, nine-tenths  of the meaning  of The  Sun  and the Moon
and  The  Easter Egg lies in the poetic imagery. Any plot summary,  then, is most unfair  and  I shall not mishandle these plays in that  way, since they have not yet reached  a  live audience  as fully produced  works.3 The  fundamental conflict of The  Sun  and the Moon  is between Christ and Antichrist,  these being the deliber­ ately  planted  connotations  of the  protagonist,  the  Reverend  Kingbird,  and  his opponent, a  Mrs.  Shade.  The  action  extends  from  Friday  to  Sunday  and  even includes  a grisly but  hilarious parody  of the Resurrection, rather  like something out  of Huckleberry  Finn. This  is staged  by a  Mrs. Shade  to convince  a gullible congregation  of her  divine powers. On  the most obvious level of meaning  Mrs. Shade  is just a disreputable  itinerant  come from Toronto, where she is an abor-

A TURN TO THE STAGE



tionist,  to  Millbank, Ontario. On  the  metaphorical level she is a power  of  dark­ ness, whose  nightmarish proportions have  to be dissipated by the end  of  the  play so that  the  reality  of a life beneath the sun  can  be revealed  to a much chastened community. By  this  point   Mrs.  Shade's very  existence  is in  doubt  and she  dis­ appears, with  a  true  Reaney flourish,  on  a  raft  across  a swollen  river.  She  has been  a shadowy spectre from  Reverend Kingbird's past,  and  like all shadows she has disappeared when  the  light  of truth began  to shine  directly above  her.
The  Easter Egg purports to be, at  least in part,  a reworking of the  Cinderella
story, from  the  viewpoint of a stepmother, Bethel,  who has a rather special inter­
pretation:

Bethel:    Oh  I'd  like to rewrite Cinderella.
THE  TRUE STORY  OF CINDERELLA BY ME! Once upon a time, Kenny, there was a
Very decent lady with two pretty daughters. She met this widower who had a little girl, Ella was her name I believe. Ella had a rash Which only a daily bath in ashes would cure. The  decent lady made her take this ash bath, But did Ella thank her? Oh God no!
She let on she was terribly misused.
So, Kenny, the King gives a terrific ball. Everyone was invited, but the decent lady said No. No! Ella can't go because of this rash.
We don't  want the court to catch this rash. Ella carried  on something frightful and
Of course managed  to get to the ball. Wearing  her stepmother's  shoes. She wore
A beautiful  veil too, danced with the prince And he caught  the rash! So his father says, "Whoever  this shoe fits she shall be hanged!" Well, the shoe belonged to the poor stepmother.
They strung  up her daughters  for good measure too and Cinderella  went off to the forest and became an awfully Clever spotted old witch.

The basic structure of The  Easter Egg is the same as that  of The  Sun and The Moon, a conflict  between  enlightenment, symbolized  by the sun, and  tyranny and ignorance,  symbolized by  the  shadows  in  which  Bethel  would  keep  her  victim Kenneth. The latter's escape  from  being  "an  attic  child" is associated  with  entry into  a  green  pastoral world  of innocence where  God  is revealed. At  the  end,  as

49

A TURN TO THE  STAGE



at  the  end  of Night-Blooming  Cereus, the  clock which  ticks towards  inevitable death  in all Mr. Reaney's writings, is at least momentarily defeated  by Kenneth's new awareness of himself and the world. When  he leaves forever the house of his captivity,  to become a man  instead  of a shadow,  he stops the clock, puts it face down, intending  that it shall never go again.
The  tendency of comedy is to include, to take into the newer and happier situa­ tion developing at its close as many as possible of the dissidents in the action. Mr. Reaney's  comedies are  no exception  to this rule of literature. The  Killdeer  ends with  a community  in possession of all the facts necessary to live intelligently  and happily,  in contrast  to what might have been, had  these facts not emerged.  Even Madam Fay gets, many  years later, the psychological release she has longed for; when  Rebecca  sees what  it is that  went wrong  in Madame  Fay's childhood,  she realizes instinctively what is necessary; she takes the woman's hands in hers and whirls  her  about  in one of the happy  childhood  games  the  trouble-maker  never played, because her mind was not filled

with a child's remembered and pleasant skies
But with blood, pus, horror, death, stepmothers, and lies.

On  one  level she has seemed like a self-motivated  principle  of evil; on another she is the dramatist's way of keeping a good play going. In her own undeveloped mind  she is simply playing an elaborate  joke on the whole world.  At the end  of the  play she is still spinning  like a top, darting  in and  out  of windows, but  now she is as harmless as a top, because she has been revealed for what she is, a frus­ trated  child.
Mr. Reaney's comedies demand  of their audience,  at least temporarily,  a capa­ city to believe that  the weapons of human  consciousness-religion, art, thought,  and  love-can  defeat  all  destructive  powers. His  plays are  not  for  cynics, nor for those too sophisticated  to let themselves play games if necessary to exorcise the black  enchantments laid  on  them  in  childhood.  The  measure  in  which  we feel these resolutions silly, or too far-fetched,  is the measure  of our own  Malvolio-like nature.  If the  art  of the comedy has done  its work-and  Mr.  Reaney's  plays have  this  art  in  abundant measure -our  emotions  of  sympathy  and  ridicule have  been  raised and  cast out, so that  we should  be  able  to say with  Miranda, who knew only one of these emotions,

0 wonder! How many goodly creatures are there here!

A TURN TO  THE STAGE



How  beauteous mankind is! 0 brave new world, That has such  people in't!



FOOTNOTES
' With  the  exception of The  Easter Egg these works are  being  published this fall  by MacMillan of  Canada. The  Easter Egg is to be the  first  production of The  Uni­ versity  Alumnae players  in  their  third  Coach House  Theatre in Toronto.
2    Pamela Terry, director of The  Killdeer, has  pointed  out  that  it was "the extremely workable aural readability of  A Suit  of Nettles"  that  alerted   her  to  Mr.  Reaney's theatrical potential.
3  Mr.   Michael Langham has  read  The  Sun  and The  Moon,  finding it  "wayward, cruel,  and  beautiful". His  hope  that  it be given an early  production so far  has seen no results.













chranicle




LETTER FROM  TORONTO


Robert McCormack


T.RATHER NERvous anti-Americanism which is a featme of
the Federal  election campaign  in progress as I write must surely present Toronto
in a new and  contradictory  role to the rest of the country.  Not that  it is entirely unbelievable  that  Bay Street  may indeed  be closely tied to those American  "big interests"  we have  been  hearing  so much  about,  or even-as  British travellers have been telling us for some years-that Toronto  is in general  tone "the  most American'' of Canadian cities  (as  distinct,  presumably,  from  Calgary  which  is merely the most Texan). But can this be Tory Toronto, bastion of Empire,  home of the Family Compact,  the UELs,  the lODE, the Loyal True  Blue and Orange Order  and "Anglo-Saxon Street"?
Well, yes, as a matter  of fact it can. Toronto has always been more American
than  its  traditional reputation  suggests. Even  in  the  I 8 I 2   period  York and  its hinterland was settled  not  only by British colonists and  Loyalists but  by a  con­ siderable  number  of Americans who had  simply drifted  up from  New  England,  New York and Pennsylvania looking for land. A few of them brought their repub­ lican principles and  all of them brought  family ties stretching south of the border. The  British authorities  regarded  them  with  deep suspicion  and  eventually  felt it advisable  to hang one or two. But the American  strain persisted, contributing, as historians  have  recently been pointing  out,  to the somewhat  feeble radicalism  of I837 and after.
Of  course  the  American  Toronto   was very much  an  underground city until well into  this century.  When  Iwas in elementary  school in the early  Iggo's  the official and accepted line was still very much "One Flag, One Fleet, One Throne." We saluted  the Union Jack  (not the Red Ensign)  and sang "God  Save the King"

LETTER FROM ONTARIO



(our   National Anthem)  every  morning, with  "Land of  Hope  and  Glory" as a special  treat  on  assembly  days.  But  there  was always something a bit forced  and factitious about  it.  Just   whose  "bounds" were  going  to  be set  "wider still  and wider", and  at whose expense?
It is hard  to know  precisely  how  much  the situation has changed. The  official line  is still  there   but  I get  the  impression  from  my own  children that  it  is now much  less emphasized. "Land of Hope  and  Glory"  seems to have faded  naturally away.  And  I doubt if there  are many  citizens left who feel, as my mother did, that one  should   really  stand  at  attention during  the   broadcast of  the  monarch's Christmas Message.  It would  still  be  a  rash  politician who  dismissed  loyalty  to Queen and  Commonwealth as merely ritualistic, and  the slightest  breath of  criti­ cism  from  the  south   sends  people  instantly back  to  prepared  positions.  But  in terms  of daily  life there  is little  question  that  it is now  colonial  Toronto  which  is largely submerged.
I apologize   for  these  random reflections,  but  they  do  have  some  bearing on the literary  scene. They  may  help explain, for one thing,  the apparently irresistible urge  felt  by  critics  to  divide  our  writers  neatly  into  opposing groups-"cosmo­ politan" versus  "native," "British  colonial" versus "American colonial," or even "Redcoat" versus  "Leatherstocking." Applied   in  a  general way  such  categories can  be  useful.  They  draw  attention, for example, to a development which  might easily  become  dangerous for  young  writers.  This  is a tendency for  the  categories themselves   to  become   institutionalized. By  and   large,   our   universities   tend   to remain oriented toward  Britain   while  the  student   Bohemia   that   inhabits them tends  to take  its direction from  the  United  States.  I have  never  made  the test but it  is  my  impression that  a  survey  of local  English  faculties would  discover  two readers of  Anthony Powell  and  Phillip  Larkin   for  every  one  reader of Herbert Gold  or  Robert Lowell.  In   the  coffee-houses,  on  the  other   hand, one  hears  a great   deal  about  Charles Olson   and   Allen  Ginsberg   but  nothing at  all  about
D.  J. Enright or  Thorn Gunn. To  some extent  this is inevitable, and  there  is no
harm in it as long as the groups remain  complementary.
But if this way of thinking about  writing  can occasionally  be useful, it is surpris­ ing,  given  the  social  situation, how  often  it  is not.  The closer  one  looks at  the work  of any  particular writer  the less relevant  the critic's dichotomies seem. Take this  year's  winners of  the  Governor-General's Awards  in  fiction  and  poetry.  At first glance, they  seem  to present  a perfect  paradigm of  southern Ontario schizo­ phrenia:  Kildare Dobbs   versus  James   Reaney.  But  Mr.   Dobbs   makes  an  un­  convincing Redcoat. He  is, for  heaven's sake, an  Irishman. True enough, he has

53

LETTER FROM ONTARIO



by his own account consorted with bishops and even been a colonial administrator in Africa. True  also, he writes a prose which no one would mistake for a native product.  The  stylistic elegance, the  prevailing  urbanity  of Running to  Paradise are  as foreign  to the old Toronto  as they would be to the "Venice,  Ontario" it so perceptively caricatures.  But that  is the point,  of course. They  are not foreign to the new city which clearly has a place for them  as it has for everything  else. As for  Mr.  Reaney,  Twelve   Letters to  a Small  Town and  The  Killdeer  reveal him  as  indisputably   native  but  no  Leatherstocking. The   world  he  creates­ "Venice,  Ontario" seen from the inside-is local enough  but  the  whole history of English prosody is behind  the presentation.  Possibly he is more like an Ameri­ can  poet  than  like an  English one, but  he is more like himself  than  like either. And if Dobbs and Reaney give us trouble, where are we going to place a poet like Margaret Avison?
No, the category game cannot  really be played here, and perhaps it is time we became  a  bit  suspicious of the  whole  attempt   to  define  ourselves in  borrowed terms.  Even  to describe the  city in  terms of its "British" past  and  "American" present is probably  a distortion. The  truth  is that  it has simply become a  metro­ polis in  the  age of industrial  mass society, a development which  spreads  a kind of pseudo-American  glaze over everything from  Kharkov  to  Kitimat  whether  or not Americans  have anything to do with it. The  real quality of life in such places is something  its writers  will eventually  define. As long  as  they  are  true  to their experience  and  their  craft  they will succeed, as they have  already  done in part,  in  making  a  random  collection of streets and  buildings  and  amorphous crowds available to the imagination. And in the process they will define themselves as well.




















54



review articles





A GOLDEN  YEAR


Robert Weaver



MORLEY CALLAGHAN. That  Summer  in Paris. Macmillan. $s.oo.


ON DIFFERENT OCCASIONS Morley  Callaghan has  described   Paris  in the  twenties  as a village  or a small  town. His  most  recent   book,  That  Summer in Paris,  is  a  fond   remembrance of  life  in that    village,    and    of   friendships   with
Ernest  Hemingway, Scott  Fitzgerald, and
other   writers.   Of   course   Paris   in   1929 was  a  unique  village,   where   you  could sit  with   your  glass  of  wine  in  the  sun and  wait  for  most  of the  new  generation of American, English  and  French writers to stop  by your  table  for  a conversation. But   it   was  still   a   small,   familiar  and abrasive   society.
Mr.   Callaghan's  memoir  begins  with him as a young man in Toronto playing baseball   (he  was  a  pitcher), studying  to become    a   lawyer     (he    graduated   but didn't practice), and  in  his Irish  fashion arguing his way  into  a summer job with the  Toronto Star. Apparently he  was  a good   reporter,  but   he   must   sometimes have  been  an  odd  one.  "In the  hotels," he writes, "I sat  talking far  too long with opera  singers or visiting senators." And already  his  head   was  buzzing   with   the stories  he wanted to write.
 At  that  time  the Star  was a newspaper far  less respectable  than   it  has  become. It was good,  rough   training ground for some young talents, among them Ernest Hemingway. Its city editor  was Harry Hindmarsh; Callaghan describes   him  as "the  grand   antagonist", but  to  Heming­ way  he  was  a  bitter  antagonist  indeed. The   two   young   men   became   friendly, and  one afternoon  Callaghan sat reading the  proofs  of  the  first  edition of  In  Our  Time, while  Hemingway read  one  of the Canadian's  short  stories.  (It is  the  kind of  thing  that  has  happened many   times before and since  with  young  writers,  but the pleasure and ease with which Morley Callaghan  recalls   the   incident create  a sense  of  wonderful  discovery.) .
Soon afterwards Hemingway left for Paris, and Morley  Callaghan became an established    young   writer    as   his   stories were published by the  Paris  "little maga­ zines" and  his books by Scribners in  New York.   He   married,  and   with   his  wife Loretta  made  a   literary   pilgrimage  to New   York,   where   they   met   Sherwood Anderson (the  father of  the  new genera­ tion), a  playful  Sinclair  Lewis,  and   the

55

REVIEW ARTICLES



legendary editor Maxwell Perkins  (whose "truly  aristocratic ethic" Callaghan  ad­ mired).
All   this   is  merely   a  prelude  to   the
visit   the   Callaghans  made   to   Paris   in
1929, and   with  this  visit  That  Summer in   Paris  exposes  itself  to  other  compli­ cations  of   judgment.  A  great  deal   has been  written about the  American, Eng­  lish a,nd Irish expatriates who were living in  the  city  at  that   time.  Morley  Callag­ han  spent  only a  few  months  there,  and  then   decided  to   return  not   merely   to North   America  but    to   the   provincial North    American   city   of   Toronto.  In effect,  he  cut  himself  off from  many  of his  contemporaries for  thirty  years. The temptation now  either to inflate  his own role or to condescend to Hemingway, Fitzgerald,  and    the   others   must   have been  considerable. But  That Summer in Paris  is  a   reminiscence  notable   for  its quiet   tone,  its  modesty,  its  essential sweetness.   It will   astonish    those   who thought that   Mr.  Callaghan was  merely the Irish  terrier of Canadian radio  and television.
Towards the  beginning of That  Sum­ mer   in   Paris  Morley   Callaghan   recalls that   when   he  was  a  young  reporter he lectured a  pleasant, middle-aged English author on  what  writing  ought   to  be.  "I (told)  him   firmly   that   writing   had   to do  with   the   right   relationship  between  the  words  and  the  thing  or  person  being described:  the  words  should  be as trans­  parent  as  glass,  and  every  time  a  writer  used  a  brilliant  phrase   to  prove  himself witty  or  clever  he  merely  took  the  mind of  the  reader away  from  the  object  and directed it  to  himself; he  became  simply a performer." It isn't  a remarkable state­ ment: it might  have  been made by Sher­  wood  Anderson  or  William  Carlos   Wil-
 Iiams, or years later, and in England, by George  Orwell. But  it  is perhaps Callag­ han's   thirty  years    of   fidelity   to   that  principle  that    keeps   That   Summer  in Paris  from   becoming  a   book   in  which the    author   enlarges    his    ego    at    the expense  of  his  generation.
In  Paris  the  Callaghans tried  to adapt themselves   to  the   mores   of  the  village. Sylvia  Beach,  a  dragon in  her  bookshop, protected Hemingway and  James Joyce against  the  world; so the  Callaghans had to    write    a   letter   to    Hemingway   to arrange a  meeting, and   Morley  Callag­ han  is  Irish   enough to  write  with  some aspersity   about  Miss  Beach.  Scott   Fitz­ gerald   tried   drunkenly  to   stand   on  his head   to  make   a   (seemingly  legitimate) point    against   Callaghan.  James  Joyce entertained  his  guests   with   a  recording by  Aimee  Semple  McPherson. Heming­ way   and   Callaghan  boxed,   and   finally they   had   the   match,  for   which    Fitz­ gerald  acted   as  time-keeper, that   is  the book's  climax   and   became   the  occasion for   bitterness  and  misunderstanding among all  concerned.
That  Summer in  Paris  is an  explora­ tion,  sometimes explicitly, more often  by inference,  of   the   loyalties,   friendships, and   petty   but   wounding   quarrels  that  were    the    ways   of   the   generation   of writers   who  made  modern  literature. It was  a  joyous  time,  and  there  was  never to be so much   joy  again. Morley  Callag­ han's  memoir   ends   with   a   tribute  to Hemingway  (whom he  had  not  seen  for many   years  before   his  death)  that   is as warm  and as eager  as though it had  been written  more  than thirty years  ago  when the  young  writers were  discovering each other in a few moments stolen from  the Toronto Star.
The  memoir also   ends   with   Morley

REVIEW ARTICLES



Callaghan in  I929.  That year  was  near the   end   of  the   first  of  his  three   lives. For   a  new   life  began   about   I932  with the publication of the novel Such is My Beloved, and  still another life with  the postwar   explosion   of  his  talents   begin­ ning  with  the  publication of The  Loved and  the  Lost.  That  Summer in  Paris is
 a  partial autobiography, and  it  seems  to me  that   Morley  Callaghan  owes  us  an­ other  memoir  about   the  bright  days  and the  dark   days  of  his  stubborn,  solitary  and   faithful literary   career   in  the  years since  Paris  was  a  hopeful,  noisy  village in  that  summer of 1929.





LES JUGEMENTS   DE MARCOTTE

Gilles Archambault



GILLES  MARCOTTE.  Une  Littirature qui se fait. Collection  "Constantes". Editions  HMH.



ON  NE PEUT DOUTER que Gilles  Marcotte  compte parmi les  criti­ ques  litteraires les  plus  en  vue  actuelle­ ment   au   Canada  fran<;:ais.  Depuis  une dizaine   d'annees,  il  a   fait   paraitre  au Devoir, tout  d'abord, a La Presse, ensuite,  des chroniques hebdomadaires qui lui ont assure   une  reputation  assez  solide.  11 a
·eve  un  des  rares  au  Quebec a  faire  pro­ fession   continue  dans   un   domaine   ou s'aventurcnt  souvent des  combattants de fortune.
M.  Marcotte a la distinction de  porter
sur les ceuvres qu'il  analyse  un regard serieux,  penetrant. 11 pratique son metier avec toute  la conscience que l'on  pourrait souhaiter, et  les  jugements a  l'emporte­ piece,  dictes  par   des  caprices  aussi  pas­ sagers qu'inquietants, ne sont pas son fort.  Un  livre  vient  de  paraitre qui  nous  per­ met  de  verifier  sa  conception de  la criti­  que.  Disons  tout  de  suite  que   l'ouvrage nous  est  pr,esente  sous un  titre  trompeur. U ne  Litterature   qui   se   fait,  voila   qui
 pourrait nous faire  penser  a une serie d'etudes sur la litrerature canadienne contemporaine.  Nous   restons   sur   notre faim.  Car  ce  livre  est  en  majeure partie
constitue   d'essais  consacres .a  des  poetes
aussi   peu   "actuels" que  Saint-Denys­ Garneau, Alfred Desrochers, Emile  Nelli­ gan,   voire   Alfred    Garneau  et   Octave Cremazie.  Les  ecrivains les  plus  recents  etant  Roland  Giguere,  Anne Hebert, Alain    Grandbois  et   And11e  Langevin. Comme il fallait  s'y attendre, un  tiers du volume   porte    sur   les  ecrits   de   Saint­ Denys-Garneau.  L'on   sait  qu'avec Jean  Le  Moyne  et  Robert  Elie,  M.  Marcotte s'est   donne   pour   mission   de   propager
l'ceuvre  de !'auteur des Solitudes et Jeux
dans  l'espace.
Des  293  pages  que   contient  ce  livre, que   l'on   serait   en   droit   de   considerer comme   un   panorama  de   la   litterature
d'aujourd'-hui, 50 a peine sont consacrees
au  roman. Toutle reste porte surla poesie.
11 nous  semble   que   !'auteur  aurait  du

57

REVIEW ARTICLES



:r;eserver son   timide   essai  sur  le  roman pour  une  publication a venir  et  grouper
ses  ,etudes  sous  la  seule  banniere de  la poesie. Remarquons qu'il  se justifie en avanc;ant bien temerairement que le roman  canadien  "n'a  pas   son   Saint­ Denys-Garneau, ou son Alain Grandbois."  Ce  qui   pour   lui  signifie  que  "le   roman  canadien-franfais  ne  compte   pas encore d'ceuvres  finies."
11 serait  deplaoe  de  parler  dans  le cas
de  M.  Marcotte d'une methode critique vraiment autonome. 11 n'y  pretend  d'ail­ leurs  pas.  Notre  homme  a ete  fortement influenoe  par   la   litterature   dite  de I'engagement qui a connu  ses beaux  jours aux  alentours de 1945· Dans cette optique,
il  s'ingenue a decouvrir des  resonnances
humaines, a chercher dans  les textes  une
correspondance  qui   se  rende   plus   loin
que   la   valeur   strictement  litteraire.  11 voit  l'homme avant }',ecrivain, aux  prises avec  son interpretation du  monde  plutot qu'avec ses problemes d'ordre esthetique.
11 aime a expliquer la signification  intime
des ecrits  par  des considerations sociologi­ ques   sur   le  milieu  canadien-franc;ais,  a ramener leur   sens  a des  themes  qui   lui
sont  chers  et  qui  ont  nom:  exil, solitude, quete  du   salut,   etc.  Cette   methode  est fort  courageuse, fort  genereuse  aussi. Car elle  suppose  de  celui  qui  la  pratique une concentration   hors    de    la   portee    du premier  polygraphe  venu.   Elle   a  aussi
des    insuffisances.    Appliquee   a  Saint­
Denys-Garneau ou  a Anne  Hebert, elle a
des  merites  certains, mais  dans  le cas  de
cas  d',ecrivains moins doues pour le miserabilisme contemporain, elle risque d'etre fort  injuste.
M.  Marcotte s'applique fort  rarement
a  deceler   les  valeurs   esthetiques  de   la
litterature. On  dirait que  pour  lui le mot
plaisir  n'existe pas.  Pour  peu  on  croirait
 qu'il   cherche excuse  a se delecter d'une phrase   qui   ne  serait   que   belle,  comme
si la  forme  d'une ceuvre  n',etait  pas  a la
fin  ce  qui  importe le  plus.  11 veut  con­
stamment  verifier   la  valeur   de  temoig­
nage   des   ceuvres   qu'il  etudie,  la   pro­
fondeur  de   leurs   interrogations  meta­
physiques.   Reduit  a ces  normes,   la  plus
riche des litreratures serait  vite appauvrie.
La  litterature canadienne-franc;aise n'offre pas  beaucoup de  prise  a ce genre d'interpretation, aussi M. Marcotte doit-il
parfois   donner  un  coup   de  pouce  a ses jugements pour  trouver des interrogations
profondes,  des   angoisses   metaphysiques
oil  elles  n'existent  a  la  verite   que   fort
timidement. Homme  fort   serieux,   pour
qui   la  litterature est  un   acte   de  foi­ c'est  lui qui  le dit  dans  le court  avertisse­  ment  de  son  livre-il  a  une  propension non   dissimulee    au   lang:age   philosophi­ que.    11 emploie  avec   un   p11edilection constante les expressions "message", "prise de  conscience",  "sublimation", "quete", "salute". Cette  dialectique,  pour   parler  comme l'autre,  suppose  un  eclairage special,   un   certain  choix   d'auteurs.  11
faudra resister,  croyons-nous, a la  tenta­
tion   de  voir  dans   ces  jugements sur  la
poesie ou  le roman canadiens une  valeur trop  strictement objective. Nous  sommes
plutot en   plein   subjectif, mais   a la  re­
morque d'un  critique qui  n'avance  rien
qu'il   ne   prouve  ou   tente   de   prouver, qu'on  n'aime  ou   pas   la  fac;on  un   peu rigide,   un   peu   sectaire  qu'il   emprunte pour  le faire.
Mais  occupons-nous plutot de  cette "Breve  Histoire    du    roman    canadien­ franfais"   que  l'on  trouve aux  premieres pages du livre. J'aurais pour rna part  pre­  ferer  un  titre  moins ambitieux. 11 ne s'agit  tout   au  plus  que  d'un survol.   M.  Mar­ cotte  passe   fort   rapidement  sur   les

REVIEW ARTICLES



A HISTORY OF
CANADA

From Its Origins to the  Royal
Regime, 1663
by  GUSTAVE LANCTOT
L en  D.,  D.  de  L'U, LL.D.


Maps, Bibliography, Notes, Index


Dr. Lanctot, formerly Archivist
of the  National Archives of Canada and at  present Professor Emeritus of History and Methodology at  the University of Ottawa, gives an authoritative account of the  period from the  arrival of the  Mongoloid Asiatics ( 2o,ooo B.C.) to the integration of the  French colony into the  Royal domain in  I 663. First published in French, A History
of Canada has  been  awarded the
Quebec Prize for  I g6 I, as well as the
Montcalm Prize  for  Ig62 granted by the  Authors and Journalists Association in  Paris. Translated  by Josephine Hambleton.


At all book  and  department stores,
$6.75


CLARKE IRWIN
TORONTO-  VANCOUVER
 annees  du  debut, et  nous  le comprenons aisement,    la   matiere  n'etant  pas   bien seduisante. 11 faut evidemment une bonne dose  de courage pour  lire  d'aussi   pietres amateurs que  Marmette ou Gerin-Lajoie. Les  jugements  forcement hatifs  que  livre notre  critique sont  a  peu  de  choses  pres conformes   a  ceux  que  l'on  porte   depuis une trentaine  d'annees. Peut-etre cede-t-il
un  peu  trop  aisement a la  tentation de
voir en Laure Conan un  auteur  angoisse de cette sorte d'angoisse qui  ne deviendra matiere    liueraire  que   plusieurs  annees plus  tard.   Mais  l'optique est  en  general
assez  juste.  Quant a moi,  j'applaudirais
sans  reserve  a ce  panorama s'il  ne  com­ portait des  verdicts   un  peu  surprenants sur  Savard et  Lemelin.  Autant !'affecta­
tion   du   premier  que   le  populisme  de
!'autre me paraissant detestables et peu conformes a l'idee que je  me  fais d'reuvres   importantes.  Mais   cela,  j'ima­ gine,  est  question de  gout,  comme  on  le dit  en  sodeue.
M. Marcotte explique la pauvrete du genre romanesque au Canada par  la mefiance   exeroee   par   les  auteurs   eux­ memes   au    siecle   dernier   vis-a-vis   du
!'amour, de  l'adultere, qui  forment  pres­
que invariablement le theme  des romans. Cette  explication ne  me  semble  que  par­ tiellement   valable,  et  je ne  me  risquerais pas   a  la   pousser   bien   a  fond.   Cette  mefiance  face  au  roman  n'avait pas  que des causes  d'ordre  moral.  Je  crois  qu'un Gerin-Lajoie  ecrivant "]ean  Rivard, le defricheur"  aurait trouve   negligeable de
se contenter d'ecrire de la fiction,  de faire reuvre d'art; il voulait  livrer  a ses compa­ triotes  un  enseignement.  Attitude  qu'on
ne   peut    manquer   de    rapprocher  de celle de Balzac se dHendant d',ecrire des romans,   trouvant  plus   honorable d'etre
!'auteur d'etudes de moeurs. Dans !'esprit


59

REVIEW ARTICLES



de Balzac,  un roman  n'etait qu'un amuse­ ment,    et   il  pretendait  etre   plus  qu'un createur de  fiction,  comme  l'avaient ete, par  exemple, Crebillon fils ou Duclos.
11 ne  faut   pas  non  plus  trop  se hater de conclure que  la poesie de cette epoque ait   ere   tellement  superieure au   roman.
Que    CI1emazie  soit   bien   preferable  a
Napoleon  Bourassa, cela   ne  fait  pas
l'ombre d'un doute, mais il faut  dire que dans   les  deux  cas  nous  sommes  en  pre­ sence  d'reuvres  td:s  mineures.   M.  Mar­ cotte  lui-meme lorsqu'il analyse ces poetes du  siecle  dernier manque de  conviction. On  sent  !'application, le serieux  de l'his­ torien  de  la  litterature qui  veut  tirer  des conclusions generales qui satisfassent  tout  le monde. Ces  auteurs qu'il  serait  recon­
fortant de  trouver  respectables sont  a la
verite  prodigieusement ennuyeux. Notons toutefois que  les pages d'Une  Litterature












\
'








6o
 qui se fait qui leur  sont consacrees  auront au  moins  l'avantage de permettre aux lec­ teurs  de  se faire  une  opinion, de  verifier en  tout  cas  celle  qu'ils  n'ont  pas  remise en  doute  depuis  leurs ,etudes secondaires.
Cela,   n'en    doutons  pas,   les  portera  a
lancer   plus  loin  d'eux l'insignifiant  cata­
logue  de Camille Roy.
J'ai parle  au  debut de cet  article peut­ etre  irreverencieusement de  Saint-Denys­ Garneau. Je  le regrette un  peu.  Car  c'est indiscutablement  un    de   nos   meilleurs poetes.   La   reaction   cependant est  celle
de  beaucoup  de  Canadiens a qui  on  a
trop  tente  de vendre le talent de ce poete
qui  a  eu  la  chance de  mourir tres  jeune et a une  periode  ou on  avait  besoin  d'un
heros  litteraire. On  ressent  malgre  soi au simple  enonce de  ce  nom  un  agacement
qui  ressemble  a celui  que  produit sur  soi
n'importe   quelle    valeur     litteraire   sur
laquelle on  a  trop  rencheri, trop  insiste: je   pense   au   Rimbaud  de   Claude!,  au p,eguy I1einvente par  les catholiques, etc. Rien   pourtant ne  peut   nuire   aussi  sO.re­
ment   .a  la  survie  d'une reuvre  que  d'en
exagerer  la   signification,  la   portee. M.  Marcotte consacre les meilleurs pag  s
de  son livre a Saint-Denys-Garneau. 11 a
vraiment   saisi   l'essentiel    de   la   vision
poetique  de  !'auteur  et   l'interpi1etation qu'il donne des poemes  est valable.  Mais lorsqu'il veut  trouver dans les pages du Journal  des  r,esonnances,   des  interroga­ tions  essentielles,  il ne  nous convainc pas que   les   documents   rassembles   sous   ce titre   ne  soient   pas  au  font   bien  banals,  denies  de  toute  originalite de  pensee.
Malgre ces  reserves, nous sommes d'avis  que  le projet de  I1eunir en  volume les  critiques de  M.   Marcotte est  excel­ lent.   Trop  longtemps, les  etudes  sur  la litterature  canadienne-franc;aise   ont   ete
vouees    a   l'oubli,  eparpillees  dans    les

REVIEW ARTICLES



revues  et  les  journaux.  En  les  publiant, on   donne   une   chance  inestimable aux etudiants  de   notre    litterature.  Et   aux
critiques   aussi   a  qui    on    accorde   la
possibilite   de  construire  une  ceuvre.  La
pauvrete  de   la  critique  litteraire  chez-
 nous  peut   s'expliquer partiellement par le caractere de  strict  immediat qui  en  a ete  trop  longtemps la  marque. Plus  que tout   autre   probablement,  M.   Marcotte meritait   cette    distinction   de   voir   ses
analyses echapper a l'oubli.




POETRY AND LEGEND
 

J. R. Colombo


MALCOLM  LOWRY,   Selected Poems.  Edited by Earle  Birney, with   the  Assistance of
Margerie Lowry. City  LightBooks.  $1.50.


MALCOLM  LOWRY'S  POETRY is published  by  Lawrence Ferlinghetti, the most  successful  promoter of  contempor­ ary poetry  in  the English-speaking world. Ferlinghetti's   "Pocket  Poets   Series"   is widely   read,  informal,  inexpensive and  usually  devoted  to  controversial person­  alities   (Allen  Ginsberg, author  of  Howl and  Other Poems,  being  the  most contro­ versial). Appropriately, Ferlinghetti has published Malcolm Lowry.
Lowry,  who  died  in  England in  I957, was as unacademic in his life and  writing as are Ginsberg, Gregory  Corso, Jack Kerouac, Kenneth Rexroth and  William Carlos  Williams, all of whom  Ferlinghetti publishes.  Lowry's  writing is currently undergoing   a   posthumous  evaluation: one could  call it a re-evaluation except  it was never evaluated before.  Under the Volcano is now available in hard- and cloth-covered editions; his first novel Ultramarine has  been  issued  for  the first time  in  the  United States; and  Hear  Us
0  Lord from   Heaven Thy  Dwelling
Place,  has  attracted a  wide  and  favour­
able  press.
More   Lowry   works  are  promised-a novel   and   a  novelette, not   to  mention
 the  collected  poems,  The Lighthouse  In­ vites  the  Storm. In  addition, the  poems in the Selected  Poems  have  been  appear­ ing  during the  last  few  years  (often  with editorial  notes   by  Earle   Birney)   in   at least   twenty-seven   magazines in   the  United  States,  Canada and   the  United Kingdom.  A   press  agent   couldn't  have done  better.
In short,  there  is a favourable Lowry "climate," and  this, rather than  a close examination of  the  poetry,  probably  per­ suaded  Ferlinghetti   to   publish    the  Selected  Poems.  In  many  ways a genuine literary   interest  in  Lowry's  poetry  is  as hollow   as  the   Ig62   Governor-General's Award  for  Fiction,  which   was  given  for Hear   Us   0 Lord.   The  novel   got   the award,  yes,  but   not   the   $1,ooo   prize, which   the  Canada  Council  reserves  for living  authors.
The  Selected  Poems will enhance the Lowry    legend    without  advancing  the cause  of his poetry.  This edition  features two   photographs   of   the    author:   one shows  him  grinning over  a  book  and   a bottle   of  Bois;  the  other, in  swunmmg shorts, shows him  hugging his chest triumphantly.  Earle  Birney's   Introduc-

6I

REVIEW ARTICLES



tion   points out that  Lowry was  a "doomed" man  and  that  nothing  "could save  him  from   his  destructive element"
-except his art,  presumably.
Lowry's  view  of life was as pessimistic as Housman's, but  there  is nothing sweet or serious to it. Lowry was inclined  to sympathize with  himself  and  then  laugh it off, giving his poetry a half-hearted seriousness.  He  was  usually  too drawn to man  as a silly spectacle to take the  plight of  man   seriously,  in   the  poetry  in  any case.  Occasionally he  would  catch  him­ self in  a  line:   "And pray  that  his  prove no titanic case,"  but  he would either end the  poem  there  or lose himself  again.  His lack  of taste  and  tact  is  unfortunate, be­ cause   Lowry   was   sensitive   and   intelli­  gent:
Tenderness Was here, in  this  very  room,  in  this Place, its form  seen,  cries  heard, by you.

He  strikes  this  note in  "Delirium in Vera
Cruz" but  not  in  many  other  poems. The  Selected    Poems   is  a  medley   of
moods,    genuine  poetry,    ragged    verse,
doggerel,    stances,   statements-every­ thing  from  the showy  to the shoddy.  Full of  echoes,  Lowry   is  made   to   resemble the   Ahab  he  writes   about   "whose   rhe­ toric's  however not  his own."  But  Lowry has  his  own  individuality. He  is one  of the   few modern poets who can write convincingly about   animals,   birds   and fish, and  he  handles images  of ships  and sea  with  a  freshness  not  with  the  savour of  the   usual  salt.
His  poetic  measures  are   straight­ forward  and    traditional,   but   his   lines always   sound    as   if   they   were   in   the middle  of  their   second  draft, which   in fact  they  might  have been. In  fact,  much of  the   pleasure in  reading  these  poems comes   from   one's  willingness   to  appre-
 ciate   fragments:  verse  experiments and poetic  exercises.  His  longer  poems  he seemed   to  rush   through, and   where   his poems are of any length they are seldom integrated.  In   turn,   Lowry  can   be  seen joining    wit   with   intelligence  and    wit with  mood.  "For the  Love of Dying":
If death can  fly, just  for  the  love  of flying, What  might  not   life   do,   for   the   love   of
dying?
"He Liked  the  Dead":

The  grass   was   not   green  nor   even   grass to  him;
nor  was  sun,  sun; rose,  rose;  smoke,  smoke;
limb,  limb.
As with  all  "doomed" poets,  we end  up with   a  choice   of  half - a - dozen   hastily scribbled epitaphs and  self-parodies, like "The Pilgrim":
Teach me  to  navigate the  fjords of  chance
Winding through my  abyssal  ignorance.

But   there   is  seldom   a  complete  poem which  rings  true.  A  number,  however­ poems   like  "Without  the  Nighted  Wy­ vern,"  "A   Poem   of   God's  Mercy" and  "For  Under  the   Volcano"-are  indi­ vidual and  satisfying,   often   for  entirely different  reasons.
If Lowry  had  taken  his  poetry  as seriously as his editors, he might  have developed  into   a  popular poet.  He   had all  the  ingredients:  the  iambic   line,  un­ expected  rhyme,   the  obsession  with  self and   personal death.  He  has  a  touch  of the   Villon   to   him   ("Men   With   Goats Thrashing"),  a  quick   bit  of  Zen   ("The Comedian")   and    an    appreciation   of nature ("Nocturne").  He could  write  a Tennyson-like musing  ("No Still  Path") and    a   Whitman-esque   fantasy    ("The Volcano"). In  addition, he possessed that single   indispensible  ingredient,  the   ro­ mantic outlook. This is shown  in the Bliss Carman  and   school-book   simplicity   of

REVIEW ARTICLES



"The  Flowering Past," as  well  as in  the excruciatingly romantic ending of "The Days  Like  Smitten Cymbals":

When I returned I boasted of  typhoons
Conrad would not  have  recognized.
But  to have  possessed  a unique anguish
has  been  some  solace  through the  years.

Earle  Birney  remarks in  the  Introduc­ tion    that    Lowry's   poetry   is   "without disguise"    and    "innocent   of    defenses." With   a  man   of  Lowry's   unpredictable nature, this  is a  doubtful  virtue  at  best. A  bit  more   attention  to  statement  and form   might   have   sharpened  the   senti­ mentalizing and  barbed the  language.
 Apparently the seventy-one poems in Selected  Poems  total  one-quarter of the publishable poetry  left by Lowry.  If these are   his  best,  the   reader   might   shudder to  think   what   the   others   are   like.  But in The Oxford Book  of Canadian Verse,
A.  J. M.  Smith made   use  of  four  fine
Lowry  poems,  only  one  of  which  Earle Birney included in the Selected  Poems. Perhaps when  the  full collection The Lighthouse  Invites   the   Storm  appears, the  reader  will  be in  a  position  to  assess just  how  "controversial" this  first  selec­ tion  was,  and   how  much   the  "legend" of  the  man   was  exploited.




WHITEMUD REVISITED
 


Robert Harlow


WALLACE STEGNER,  Wolf  Willow. Macmillan. $6.g5.


MR. WALLACE STEGNER, now head   of  the  Creative Writing Centre at Stanford University, lived  from  his sixth to his twelfth  year  in a place  called Whitemud, Saskatchewan.  His  family lived   in   the   village   during  the   winter and  in  the  summer  engaged in  what  he calls,   aptly,   "wheat-mining"  on   a   320 acre homestead that straddled the Saskatchewan-Montana  border, perhaps forty  miles southwest of the  town. He left with  his family  in  the  spring  of  1920 and didn't   see   Whitemud   again    until    he visited  it  four   decades later.  His  return to his old  home  settlement was an experi­ ence   that    yanked    at   the   roots   of   his memory    and    chopped   through  to   the heartwood  of   his   emotional  and   intel­  lectual  being. The result  is a unique  book whose   whole   cloth   is  made  up   of  the
 warp  of memory  and  the woof of history, colored  by the  sociologist's  approach and fashioned   with  the  craft   of  a  very  good writer  indeed.
Wolf  Willow concerns itself  first of all with  "...  that  block of country between the  Milk  River  and  the  main  line  of the Canadian Pacific,  and   between   approxi­ mately   the  Saskatchewan-Alberta  line and  Wood  Mountain...." Second,  it  is a   memory    of   Mr.    Stegner's  growing years, his Tom Sawyer  years, in  the town of Whitemud. Third, it is a study  of "the place   where   the   plains,   as  an   ecology, as a native  Indian culture, and  as a pro­ cess  of  white   settlement,  came   to  their  climax   and   their   end." Fourth, it  is  a special  look at  Canadian history  with  the  above  three  concerns in  mind.  And  fifth, it   aims   at   searching  out   some   of   the

REVIEW ARTICLES



thousands of  reasons  for  Whitemud as a last  frontier, as  an  escape,  as  a  state  of mind,   as  a  victim  and  as  a  miracle.  To gain  his objectives, Mr.  Stegner uses any and  every  resource he has discovered  out of his long years as a writer, teacher, researcher.
For  those  of us who  have  lived  in one of  the  hundreds of  Whitemuds scattered throughout the  west  and  the  near-north, this  book  will  have   a  special   meaning. I know   I read   it  with  a  real  sense  of relief.   What I  thought I  had   remem­ bered,  Mr.  Stegner went  back  and  found  to   be   true.   He   confirms   my   suspicion that, while  history  was  made  in  White­ mud,   the  place  existed,   and  still  exists, with  no sense of it at all. In Whitemud­ all  of  them -between  the  turn of  the century  and    the   Second   World    War,  there  was a mindlessness  akin  to the calm at   the   eye   of   a   hurricane,  while   the physical  struggle  simply  to exist shut  out twenty-five centuries of civilized achieve­ ment.  The word  that occurs to me which describes  Whitemud the  best is  Exposed.  Are  not  all  small  frontier  towns  too  hot, too cold,  too dusty  and dry, and  too near a  flooding   river?   The  men   who  live  in Whitemud -are  they  not  exposed  too? Nobody  is born  in  Whitemud; he comes there,   for  whatever   reason,  and   I have often  wondered if  each  man  didn't look at  his  neighbour and  hold  him  a little  in contempt for  having made  such  a foolish decision.  In  my own  personal  Whitemud, we  had   a  doctor   who  scaled  logs  in  a local mill, a sergeant-major from  the Household Guards who was my father's chief  clerk,  a  scion  of  one  of  England's first families who delivered milk, and an extremely literate Irishman who dug  our ditches   by   choice.   What   were   any   of them   doing   there?  What,  indeed,  were
 the  professional men  doing  there -the doctor, the  lawyer,  the  teachers, the accountants? And  so on down  the  line  to the cheerful, often  alcoholic  drifter who happily played  bedrock to the single  thin stratum of society  above  him.
Things were  not  different in  Mr. Steg­ ner's   Whitemud. He  remembers  it  well; that  it was wild,  cruel,  elemental, terrify­ ing,   unfettered,  warping,  grasping,  un­ lettered,  unbearably   cold,  hot,  dry, flyblown,    wet.   As   a   society   it   was   a cultural desert, laughably optimistic (this  perhaps  above  all  else:   Whitemud lives on  dreams of   financial glory),  insuffer­ ably prudish, tell-taleably licentious, soul­ shrivelling,  and, oddly   enough,  a  good place  for   a  boy  to  grow   up  in  and   to have  come from  because-well,  because  life   is   sometimes  one   or   the   other   or all   of   these   things,   and   certainly  is  as unsheltered as Whitemud, and  perhaps learning early  to  run  the  gauntlet is not a  bad  thing.
Yet,  to  go  back  to  Whitemud is  pain­ ful,   and    for   a   writer    it   is   extremely dangerous.  Nostalgia is  a  fact.  He  can­ not  escape  it. Walk  down  the main  street  and  see where  the  poolhall  was -above which,  in a single,  barren, stuffy room  he first   went   to  school.  Walk   by  the  river and    see  the   dam   that  burst   in   191 7, remember  the    swimming   and    fishing holes.  This   kind  of  activity   can   lead  to sentimentality of   the  worst  order. Then seek  out  the  few  old-timers left  who can remember  with  him   his  stay  in  White­ mud   and  listen  to  the  stories   they  tell. Melodrama. The floods,  the  storms,  the dust   drifting,  the  hopes  and   fears   of  a whole town, the winter of 1go6-o7 that destroyed, in  one  long  incredible  killing, the cattle economy  of the area  and  forced it  toward  the  constant disaster  of  trying

REVIEW ARTICLES



to  farm the  thin   land   and   make  wheat the   raison   d'etre   for   Whitemud's   con­ tinued existence. What  does  a  man  who wants   to   write   a  book  about  the  place and  its  people  do  to  ward  off  this  triple  threat? Like  a hardy  neo-Confucian who faces   rape,   he  remembers  to  relax   and  enjoy  it.  In  Wolf  Willow  you  will  find nostalgia, some sentimentality, and  melo­ drama,  but  they  serve  a  purpose.
The   book   is  divided   into   four   parts and an epilogue. In  the first section we remember with  Mr.  Stegner as he tours Whitemud  after   forty   years  away  from it,  and  almost  at  once  the  reader   begins to  realize  that   Wolf  Willow is not  going to be simply  an  historian's aide-memoire. Clots  of  total   recall   begin   to  coagulate under the influence of the  dust-dry air of reality.  Here  now is Whitemud, softer, greener, neater, but  really  only  an  echo
 that   has  refused   to  stop; and   somehow, too,  we sense  at  once  the  tragedy of the place: that  it was born,  lived briefly, died and  became  fossilized beneath the  weight of  the  prairie  sun  without ever  knowing why.  "Our  education .  .  .  did  not  per­ form   its  proper  function  of   giving   us distance   and   understanding  by  focusing  on   our   life   from    outside.   Instead,  it focused   on   outside   from   inside   .  .  ." Thus,   "The  one   aspect   of   Whitemud's history, and  only one, and  a fragmentary one,  we knew:   the  town  dump." Only  a story-teller   with  a  trained  eye  could  see the  implications.  "The town  dump was our  poetry  and  our history," he  says ... "For   a  community may  well  be  judged by  what  it   throws   away-what it  has to  throw  away  and  what  it chooses  to­ as   by   any   other    evidence.  For   whole civilizations  we sometimes  have  no  more






MILTON, MANNERISM AND   BAROQUE

BY  ROY  DANIELLS


Professor  Daniells  contends  that  Milton,  far from  being an  insular  and remotely  Puritan figure, is really at the centre  of the seventeenth-century canon of art forms, transposing and reshaping the techniques of European Mannerism and  Baroque  into English  literary
equivalents. 248  pages, illustrated;  $6.oo.




UNIVERSITY  OF	TORONTO PRESS

REVIEW ARTICLES



of  the  poetry  and  little  more  of  the  his­ tory  than   this.  It is  all  we  had  for  the civilization we grew  up  in."
In the following three sections and the epilogue, Mr.  Stegner tells of the  "why" of the  birth, life and  death  of Whitemud. He  begins  with  the  early  explorers   who did  no  more  than  pass the  place  by, and later   who  did   not   come  within   several hundred miles of Whitemud-Kelsey, Verendrye-until we find  that  "as  late as  186o  . .  .  the  Cypress  Hills  and   the little   river  they  mothered  were  still  lost in an  unmapped West as wide as ocean, being   saved,   perhaps,  after   all   the   re­ hearsals on other  frontiers for the staging of  one  last  drama of  white  settlement." From   the  Indians, to  the  Metis,  to  the Company of  Adventurers,  to the  coming  of the  R.N.W.M.P. and finally  to White­  mud,   "the   capital of  an  unremembered past,"     we   follow    the   mainstream   of Canadian  history, seeing always  with  the eyes of  the  boy  who  has become  a man,  a  story-teller   and  a  disciplined   thinker. It  is   probably  more   meaningful  history





66
 about    our   frontier  west   than   you  can read  in  any  other   book.
Once  we  know   why   Whitemud   was born,  we must  know  why it died.  It died in  the  winter  of  Igo6-o7, when  the cattle industry was wiped  out.  Mr.  Stegner tells the  story  through the  eyes of fiction.  For a  hundred  pages   we  leave  off   remem­ brance and  history  and  watch  while  the spirit   and   the   edge   of  a   frontier  are  blunted by the  hard facts  of  the  climate  of the  region.  It is a good story;  it stands  well  within   the   bounds  of   the  author's plan   for  the  book.  It is  meant to  loom larger   than   its  telling,  and   it  does.  We know   from   it   why  men  of  tremendous strength  and  purpose  gave  up  and  left, and  we  know,  too,  a  little  of  why  some stayed    and    turned   on   the    land    and plowed  it  to  dust  and  lived  on  to  watch  it  blow  away.
The final  section   brings  us again, full circle,  to the  Whitemud that  Mr.  Stegner knew   and   left  as  a  boy.  Here, the  his­ torian    turns    sociologist   as   he   quietly brings  us up to date  on Whitemud, whose keynote  is  now  struck   in  a  phrase  from Sinclair  Lewis'   Main  Street:  "...  the humdrum  inevitable tragedy   of  struggle against inertia." This  is the  final  "why" of  Whitemud. "It  emphasized  the  pre­ dictability  and  repetitiousness of  the  frontier curve  from  hope  to  habit,  from optimism to  a  country rut  ..."
Wallace Stegner could  have  settled  for writing  another Main Street  or  a  Wines­ berg Ohio. Perhaps he could have reaped  a  kind   of  Patterns  of  Culture from   his notes.   I  doubt if  he  thought of  writing  a straight historical  account. But, in fact,  there   are  elements  of  all  three   of  these approaches,  and   the   result   is  certainly history    as   it   may   very   effectively   be written.







IRONIC PILGRIMAGE

ROY    DANIELLS.   The   Chequered  Shade.  Mc­ Clelland  &  Stewart.

RoY  DANIELLS'  POETRY is  not  only  diffi­ cult; it  is  also  poetry   that   suffers  from certain  archaic  qualities  of   style   and  form-the  use  of  the  sonnet, of   tradi­ tional  soporific rhythms,  and   anti­ quarian imagery. Yet  oddly  enough The  Chequered  Shade  is  a  restful,  readable book.  Unlike much  of  current Canadian and   American  poetry,  which   is tortured with   unresolved  emotions and   shattered by   realities    not    yet    transmuted   into poetry    (perhaps  they  never   can   be) - Roy  Daniells' work is civilized, restrained, and   brought   to  artistic form. It  makes comforting   poetry   to  read,   like  the  re­ becks'   sound   and   the   "dancing  in   the chequered  shade"  of   Milton's  "L'Alle­ gro", from  which   the  title  is  taken.
The book is divided into  three  sections,
each   printed   on   quality  tinted  paper, covering three  different kinds  of  subject matter. The first  section  contains travel poetry,   written  in  Europe.  Most  of  the sonnets   here   are   named   after   places - "Florence", "Livorno", the  "Low  Coun­ tries",  "London"-and they  record  per­ sonal  experience.
The  second    section   is   philosophical and   religious   in  nature. The sonnets  in this   part    are    named   after    numbered Psalms,  or  books  of  the  Bible,  by  verse and  chapter, or  after  representative  reli-
 gious men.
Section  three  brings  us  home  to  Can­ ada   and   deals  at   times  quite  explicitly with  this country; but  like the other  sec­ tions, it  is thoughtful and  philosophical.
In  effect, the book gives the impression
of   a   single   long   poem,    a   voyage   to Europe, reflections  on the  religious mean­ ings  implicit  in  life, and  thoughts  about practical  living   and   the   work   of   re­ creating civilization  on  Canadian  soil.
It is a  wise  and   deeply  sincere  book. It is also not  incapable of self-revelation and  of genuine emotion, as in  the sonnet beginning:

Cypresses  and  the  worn  sandstone hide
My foolish  tears....

But  to  get  at  the  heart   of  this  poetry I  would  like  to  look  at  the  nature of  its irony,  the  deliberate  method  of  mixing triviality  with elevation that  runs  through the  book  from  beginning to  end.  It is a method   most  readers find   very  difficult to follow, so it  is worth  some  discussion.
In  the  sixth  sonnet  of  the  middle sec­ tion,  entitled   Psalm  23, we  have  a  kind of   contemporary  interpretation   of   the famous   prayer   "The Lord   is  my  Shep­ herd."   In    the   original,   you   may   re­ member  the  line "Thou  preparest a table  for me in the  presence of  mine  enemies." This  is how  the  psalm  is translated into  a modern  poem  by Roy Daniells:

My  enemies were  certain I was  starving, It must  have given  them  a fearful shock Through the  binoculars to see me  carving A roast  of beef  up  on  the  barren rock.
And   when    I  moved    upon  them    down   a
byway,
Bathed and  anointed, sweet  with  oil of rose, They blanched for  they  had   left  me  on  the
highway
Covered with   blood  and  with  a broken nose. The  landlord,  in   the    arbour  where    I'm
seated,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Has  brimmed the  bowl   with wine, the bubbles wink.
It's time  my  gasping enemies  were  treated, Do  tell  them to  come  in  and  have  a  drink. And  any  day  they  like  they  may  appear; Thanks to  the  landlord, I'll  be  living   here.

Clearly    "a   roast   of  beef"   stands   in violent  contrast to  the  words  of  the  ori­ ginal  Psalm,  "thou  preparest a  table  for me".    But    the    method   is   familiar  in English   poetry.  In the  seventeenth cen­ tury,  "conceits" of  this  kind,  realistic  or apparently  irreverent images,  were  com­ bined  with subjects  of a genuine religious kind.   In  our   own   time,  the  revival   of John   Donne's  poetry,   and    the   shock­ techniques ofT. S. Eliot,  have  made the method  even  more   familiar -in  fact central to some  modern poetry.  Daniells' use  of  it  is in  fact  conservative; it  puts him  very  much  in  the  company  of poets like  Edwin   Muir, John  Crowe  Ransom, and   Robert  Graves.
The irony  in this kind of poetry, today, turns on the conflict between romantic sensibility   and   modern  realism.   In  the case of Roy  Daniells we find a good  deal of  unacknowledged  romanticism of  atti-





68
 tude   and   a  good  deal  of  reticent  belief lurking behind  the comic mode of the language and   the  imagery.
For   instance  in   the   Psalm    23,   the
comic  elements of "roast of beef" and "telescope"  and    "a  broken    nose"    are really  protective armour concealing the serious  theme  of  the  poem.  The poet  is no   less  serious   about  his  confidence  in God  in  the  face  of his enemies  than  was the   Psalmist.   But   in   our   age   of  little faith  he dramatizes himself  as a lucky gangster  who   has   the   landlord  on   his side.
The  danger of  this  kind  of  irony,  of
serious  meaning concealed in  a language of   triviality,  is  that    the   core   of  inner emotions must  be very strong.  Otherwise the  poem  lapses  into  Neo-Classical light verse.  Eliot  had  great  intensity; but  even he   was  for   a  long   time   misunderstood and  accused  of lacking  emotion. We  can see the lapse into  Neo-Classicism in some of the  poetry  of Auden, of Karl Shapiro, and  of others  following in  Eliot's line.
Roy   Daniells  doesn't  often   slip   into the  Neo-Classical mode, because his seriousness  is indeed great. The poems spring    from    deep    emotion    and    real thought.  But   occasionally   he  does  slip, as in  poem  "Photographic Exhibition" in Section 3:

Please, I  implore you!   no  more  nudes  on dunes;
And   no  more smiles  where four  front teeth
are  missing
Senile or  infantile; no lips  for  kissing
Painted  and    poised   and   posed;  no   stones with  runes;
No   brass bands booming out inaudible
tunes;
No  Pisan  fountains innocently pissing
No    study  shelves    with    unread  works    by
Gissing  ...

This is clever; but  it shows at once  the danger.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Many Canadian poets in the last two decades  have made their pilgrimage to Europe and  have  written poetry  about  it. (I've counted some  half  a  dozen  on  my fingers.)  All of them have brought back significant reflections, critical thoughts about  our  European traditions and  about our  Canadian  problems.
This   is  one  of  these  books.  It is  one of   the   better  Canadian  books   I  have read  this year,  and  one  of the  most searching  and   thoughtful  about   things that   really  matter.
LOUIS  DUDEK


OBSERVING AND ENTERTAINING

KILDARE DOBBS.  Running to  Paradise.
Oxford. $3.50.

IN HIS  PREFACE,  Kildare Dobbs  describes this  book  as "a sequence of  lies or  remi­ niscences   set   in   various  places   on   the earth's surface," and  goes  on  to  say that  though  names  and    places   have   been changed "to  avoid  what  might  otherwise  be   unpleasant  affronts   to   privacy,   the stories  are   about   myselves  and   may  be presumed  true   to  fact." In   one  respect I think  this  is inaccurate. The stories are never    about   himself:   they   are   about  what  has  happened  to  him,  an  attempt to  define  the  qualities of  his  experience. The   self,  the  connecting  tissue  between  the  Dobbs  who  grew  up  in  Ireland, who went   to  sea,  who   worked   as  a  teacher and   a   District  Officer   in   Tanganyika, and  who came  to Canada, remains  obsti­ nately  hidden.
Criticism is disarmed by the author's declaration  that   the   book  is  not  meant to  be  a  true   autobiography, but   rather
 a  collection   of  pieces  originally written for  broadcasting or  magazines. An  auto­ biography, he says, would  give rise to  the question: "Who is this fellow?  Or  worse  still,   who   does   he   think   he   is?   Good  questions,  both  of  them.  It  just  happens that  I'm  not  ready  to answer  them  yet."  The   trouble is,  a  book   (as  against   a collection)  makes  its own  demands, and  this  one,  perceptive and  charming  and  conveying  everywhere the  warmth of  its author's  personality, none  the  less  poses exactly   the   question:    who   is  Kildare Dobbs?  The form  of  the  book,  with  the pieces collected  in  groupings correspond­ ing  to  the  phases  of  his  life  ("Imperial
Bureaucrat", "Landed Immigrant", etc.) suggests  a  progress   through  life  that   is more  than  geographical or chronological, a   progress   which,   in   the   closing  essay, "Running to Paradise", is hinted  as being forever  elusive  of  definition: "a  destina­ tion   as  yet  unimagined". But  if   this  is indeed  the  thread that  binds  these  remi­ niscences together, we need  to sense more  of  the  man  to  whom  they  happened.
In  lieu of the  book that  Kildare Dobbs must  now  write,  we have  these  emblems of  various   stages  along   the  way:   anec­ dotes, but more  than  anecdotes. They  are  deceptively   easy.  The   best  of   them   are  conversational,  elliptical,   arriving  sud­  denly  at an  unexpected  end,  having  con­ veyed  not  a  "point"  but  the  essence  of an   experience. They   are   full   of   anti­ climax,  suggesting  that  the  writer  is  not so much  concerned  with  what  happened, as  what   it  was  like.  His  perceptions of other   people  are  acute,  humorous, and  tolerant.   Tolerance,  even   generosity,  is the   most   characteristic  note.   An   early piece,   "Prelude",  comes   off   less  well, seeming too much  written and  conscious, and   "A  Christmas Story", a  description

6g

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



of a storm  at  sea, is an  attempt to catch the  idiom   of  the  experience,  colloquial and  declarative, and  clashes with the sensibility  lurking   underneath.
Which   leaves  me  very  little  space  to talk  of  some  of  the  memorable portraits here-especially of Africans,  seen directly and  without  condescension, and  the superb   feeling  of  the  African   bush;  and the    dour,   God-fearing  Ontario   town where   the   writer    taught  school   for   a year,  those good  town,sfolk festering  in endless   suspicion   of  each   other.   These are   among   the   very   good   things   in  a book full  of observation. It is also a book of  entertainments, but  of  a  sort  to  sug­ gest  that   the  writer   has  much  more  to say.
GEORGE ROBERTSON



A CLOSE SHAVE

BRIAN  MOORE.  An  Answer   from  Limbo.
Little,  Brown.  $6.oo.

MORE  THAN  MOST LITERARY TRADITIONS, that   of  Canada  has   been  distinguished by  its  migrants. They come  winging  in from  the  British  Isles, settle  for a decade or  so of  brilliant writing  in  Montreal or
Toronto or  Vancouver, and   then   move
on  again,  to live in  England like Patrick Anderson   or   die   there    like   Malcolm Lowry,  or to roost in the literary  rookeries of   New   York    and    Europe,  as   Brian Moore   has  done   these  past  three  years. Whether  Moore   will  return  to  Canada only  he  knows. Certainly his most  recent novel  has abandoned the Canadian scene of The Luck  of Ginger  Coffey, and  from reading it one would  hardly  imagine that Moore had  ever  lived  anywhere but  Ire­ land  and  New York, so little trace appears
 of  that   decade north of  the  frontier.
Moore, who in The Lonely Passion of Judith  Hearne   produced  a  novel  of   al­ most  Joycean penetration about  lodging­  house   existence   in   Belfast,   and   in  The Luck    of  Ginger    Coffey   presented  with compassionate  laughter   the   peregrina­ tions  of  an   Irish   bounder  turned  New Canadian, has  now,  in  An  Answer   from Limbo, turned  to  that  most  unpromising of  all  soils  for  novelists,  the  New  York world   of   writers  and   their   parasites,  a soil   tilled   by   a   thousand  scribblers, browsed  over  by  a  thousand literary botanists, until   one  would  have  thought it  as exhausted as  the  earth of an  aban­ doned  stump farm. Another  novel  about a  writer   writing a  book  in  the  purlieus of   Greenwich  Village!  It  arouses   the  same  kind  of  shudder as  the  thought of another  novel   about  the   Great   Ameri­  can  Campus.
It is the  final  proof  of Moore's vigour as  a   stylist   and   of   the   obstinacy  with which  he  maintains his  idiosyncracies of outlook,   that   he  produces a  presentable novel  out  of  this  arid  material. I  confess that  I do not  like An  Answer  from Limbo as I  liked  Judith Hearne  or Ginger  Cof­ fey, partly   because  I  find  less and  less in new  novels  about novelists;  this  kind  of literary Narcissism,  which  served  its pur­ pose  admirably  in  the   hands  of   Proust  and  Joyce  and  Thomas Mann,  seems  by now  to  be  pretty   well  played  out.  But  it is,  after   all,  the  test  of  a  good  man   of letters  that   he  should   be  able  to  take  an unpleasant  or   overworked   subject    and  make  something  out   of  it,  as  Gide   did out   of   the   worn-out  myths  of  Oedipus and   Theseus,  by  the   elusive   power   of style  combined with   those  shifts  of  per­ spective   through  which   an   alert   mind can    sometimes  give   us   new   looks   at

BOOKS IN REVIEW



familiar  faces.  An   Answer    from  Limbo
almost  does  this.
The   plot   of  his  novel   has  a  kind  of severe  banality which  makes  one imagine Moore    whipping  himself    through  the work, rather  like  Flaubert gasping through Madame  Bovary, in  spurts  of dutiful energy interspersed by vast stretches of  yawning ennui  produced by the impossible story he has wished upon himself.  But  An  Answer   from  Limbo  is, thank   goodness,   a  great   deal  more  than a   tedious    plot   about  a   kind   of   Irish Lucky   Jim   selfishly  writing  a  novel   at the   expense   of   the   wife  and   kids  and the   aged   parent  brought  from   Ireland as a glorified  baby-sitter; it  is more  even than  a panorama of the  parties  and  pre­ tenders who  exasperate one  in  the  New York   of  fiction   as  much   as  they  do  in
 the New York of reality.  The  sheer words of   the   novel    are    put    together   with Moore's   peculiar combination  of  appar­ ent  simplicity   with  the  devious,  looping  rhythm  which    is   a   product   of    Irish speech.  And  even  the  plot  is partly  saved because  much  of it is really set in Moore's own   personal   landscape  rather  than   in New   York.   Such   characteristic  Moore  themes  as the  hate-love between   Ireland and   the  New  World, and   the  tendency  of  obsessional   fantasies  to   become   un­ pleasant   realities,   are   used   again   with success.  The most  convincing and   sym­ pathetic character is not Brendan Tierney with  his tedious  book, but  his old mother, trying  and  failing  to  live  down  her  Irish past   in  the   New  York   where   she  had thought  that    by   joining    her   son   she would   recover   it.  The  funniest and   at





EVERYMAN'S 	LIBRARY

PLAYS AND  STORIES
BY  J. M. BARRIE
Edited with  an  Introduction by Roger  Lancelyn Green
This representative selection  from  Sir James  Barrie  consists of The  Admirable Crichton, Dear Brutus, Shall We   join the  Ladies?, Courage, Auld  Licht  Idylls  and  Miss  Julie  Logan.
No selection  of Barrie  is currently available on the market.
No.  184:   $2.65

CLARISSA
BY  SAMUEL  RICHARDSON
New  Introduction (1961) by Professor John  Butt
Although Clarissa  is  probably   the  longest  novel  in  English,  it  is also one of the most satisfying for its finished presentation.
4 vols. Nos. 882-5. Each  vol. $2.65

J. M.  DENT &  SONS  (CANADA)  LIMITED

I 00 SCARSDALE ROAD, TORONTO
 I 132  ROBSON STREET, VANCOUVER

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the  same  time  the  most  horrifying scenes are  those  in  which  Brendan's wife, Jane, having    long   harboured   daydreams  of being   violated    by  potent,   hairy   Latins, finally  becomes  the  appalled mistress  of a  sexual   acrobat  named   Vito   Italiano. Mrs.   Tierney, Jane,  and   Vito   Italiano, one  of  the  most  superb  cads  I  have  en­ countered  in   modern   fiction,   combine  with    Moore's  prose   style  to   save   An Answer  from Limbo  from  sinking  under  the  millstone of  Brendan  Tierney's liter­ ary  career.
But  it  has  been  a  close  shave,  and   I
would prefer to regard  An Answer from Limbo   as  an   interim  exercise,  showing its  author  succeeding in  a  difficult  task, but  not  the  real thing  of  which  a  writer as good  as  Moore  is capable.
GEORGE WOODCOCK


MEMORY TRANSFIGURED

HUGH   HOOD.  Flying   A   Red   Kite.   Ryerson.
$4·95·

HUGH   HOOD, now  in  his  early   thirties, has  been  supported  by  the  academy  in the   difficult   years  of  learning  his  craft of   writing.  But   it's   evident    from   the stories   in   his  first  book,  Flying  A  Red Kite,  that   he  has  knocked  about a good deal  in  the world  outside  the  universities. For  some  time  before  the  publication of this  book  the  stories  of which  it  consists were   appearing  in   magazines   like  The Tamarack  Review,   Prism,  Queen's Quarterly.  One    of   them,    "After  the Sirens",  not   the   best  of  the  stories  but certainly a  rigorously  imagined   and  pro­ fessionally    executed   vision   of    nuclear war, made it in the  big league of  Esquire.
 It  is   a   tribute  to   the   genuineness  of Hood's  talent  that  his   work   appealed just as much  to ordinary educated people as  to  fellow  academics and  to more  self­ consciously  literary readers. One  of them, with   a  Toronto  setting,   even   provoked an   enthusiastic column  in  the   Toronto Daily Star. The patient accumulation of sensuous    detail    induces  recognition  of place   as  well  as  of   people.   Toronto  is here    ("Recollections  of  the   Works  De­ partment"),  Montreal is  here   ("Flying a  Red   Kite"), and   in  the  magnificent "Three  Halves   of  a  House",  set  on  the Canadian shore  of the St. Lawrence near  Gananoque, there's a  continental feeling,  a sense of the  whole of  Canada. It is this aspect   of  the   stories   that   patriotic  re­ viewers  are apt to seize on, rightly  feeling  that   our  own  lives  are  that   much   more  real  for  being  brought into  a  context of art  and  imagination, that  our  country is the more unquestionably present  for hav­  ing   been  seen  by  a  real   writer   and   set down   forever  in   print. But   Hood   isn't  writing   advertising  copy  for   the  Cana­ dian  Way.  His  stories  are  about  life and  death  and  eternity:"... and  dark  in the twilight  on   the   darkening  water   I  am going  to starboard under the stars on  the current  down   the   river   down   east  past the  Plains  of Abraham, farther, to where the   river   yawns  its  mouth  eleven  miles wide,  invisibly  wide,  bearing me away  at last  to  the  darkness, the  sleety impossible impassable Gulf." Doesn't it  recall  in  its charged  suggestiveness    (that  "Plains of Abraham",  e.g.,   which   brings   to  mind not  only  the  war  of  French and  English but   the   place   of  our   father  Abraham) that    other  river   of   life,   Anna   Livia? "And her  muddied name," wrote  Joyce, "was    Missisliffi,"    evoking    yet   another stream-Mark Twain's. In  echoing  Fin-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



negan's Wake, it seems  to  me  that  Hood knows  very  well  what   he  is  about. He uses the literary past as he uses his own, consciously  and  cunningly.
He   writes  as  confidently  in  the  third person as in the first and with as much inwardness about   women  as  about men. In  form,   his  stories  follow  the  shape  of a  meditation rather  than  a  plot,  and  he has  taken  pains,  as he  hints  in one  story, to  master   the  English   sentence. In   this he  resembles   American writers like  Up­ dike   rather   than    any   Canadian   pre­ decessor.
Only  one  story,  "0 Happy  Melodist",
leaves  me  unconvinced. The heroine, an assistant   fiction   editor  of  a   New  York magazine called  Signorina,  seems  to  me not placed. Only  a greater worldly sophis­ tication than   the  kind  she's  supposed   to embody  could  see her  clearly -or else a great  simplicity.  Here  there seems a false sophistication in  the  narrator. To  put  it another  way,  it's   meant  to   be  a  New York  story  but  the  feel  of  it  is  Toron­ tonian   and  Maclean-Hunterish. Alexan­  dra  looks  sceptically  at  the  gifts  brought her  by  an  academic admirer:  "She  was
 looking  at  the  label  on  a  bottle  of Margaux;  there   was   a   vineyard  scene in three off-register colours,  very badly executed, on  the  paper." In context, this is supposed   to  make  us  think   the  worse of the admirer. But  in fact  it only makes us impatient with Alexandra: never mind  the  label-what  about the  wine? But  the  story  in  question is the  only one in  which  there  are  false  notes.
Flying  A  Red   Kite   is  a  subtle   and
generous  book.
KILDARE DOBBS


THE STORMS OF CHANGE

RUDY WIEBE.   Peace  Shall   Destroy Many.
McClelland &  Stewart.  $4.95.

Peace Shall Destroy Many  is thoughtfully conceived,   well   written,  and    at   times deeply moving; though in  the  final analysis  it  is not  a  genuinely great   book (great  books are  rarely  written), it has elements  of greatness embedded in it.
Rudy   Wiebe,   the   author, is  a   Men­ nonite,  trained in  theology  at  the  Breth­  ren  Bible  College   in  Winnipeg.  He  has the   power   of  observation; and   he  has also   the   ability   to   understand   human emotions,  to grasp  and  interpret  conflict­ ing   forces   that   dwell   deep   within   the minds   of  outwardly  calm   and   reticent  people.
The  time  span  of  the  story  is short -
from  spring  to winter  in 1944· The space setting   is  narrow-a Mennonite  com­ munity   named  Wapiti, in  the  northern reaches  of  Saskatchewan. The  principal characters are   relatively few:  the  quiet Parson  Lepp  and his equally quiet daugh­ ter,  Annamarie; the  crude  and   sensual

73

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Herb Unger, a  poor  farmer  and  a worse Mennonite;  Louis   Moosomin,   a   deca­ dent,    sickly   half-breed;   Razia   Tanta­ mount, the  new school teacher-an out­  sider,  clever,   lovely,  seductive,  who  "stretched as sensuously  as an alley-cat"; Deacon   Block,   prosperous,    astute,   and bigoted,   but    blindly  devoted  to   his indecisive  son  Peter; Peter's  sister  Eliza­ beth,    a   crushed   and    aging    spinster; Joseph   Dueck, teacher and  philosopher, who  acts  as  mentor to  the  young  giant,  Thomas Wiens,  around  whom  the  action  unfolds.
The  action, in   its   broadest   form,   is rooted   in   the   problems   confronting an isolated   religious  community resolved  to maintain  a  traditional pattern of   exist­ ence.  But  as all societies are composed  of people,  the  real  sources  of  the  story  are found   in   the   tortured  inner   recesses  of individuals. The  Mennonites in the  novel profess  to  follow  the  basic  tenets  of  the faith   as  taught  by  Menno  Simons,  their sixteenth-century  spiritual  leader.   In their   dependence on  the  Bible  they  are fundamentalists.  They   preach   belief  in universal love and  peace towards all men. And,  with   a  few  exceptions,   they  reject military   service.   In    Wapiti,    they   also cling   to  German, the  language   of  their distant  forebears, as  their  means of communication-High  German  "when speaking    of   religious   matters",  and   a Low   German  dialect   "in   the  mundane matters of everyday  living".  At  the  time of   their   migration  from   Russia   in   the
192o's  they  sought   out  an  isolated  area where   they   live  apart from   the  world, and   by  buying   out   the  farmers around them -the discouraged English and  the poverty-stricken  Indians-they  try  to build  ever  higher  barriers  to protect their cherished heritage.

74
 Dut   English   has   already   crept   in  as the  language of  education  and   has  be­ come  the  language of  the  young.  Radios bring   the   news  of  the  warring,  outside  world.   And   thoughtful,   reflective   men like  Joseph  and  Thorn  begin  to question the  traditions of  their  elders.
As the  novel opens,  cracks  in the struc­ ture   are   already    making   their   appear­ ance.  In  the  months that  spread  through the   four   seasons   the   cracks  split  wide, and  the fabric crumbles. Its sand  founda­ tions   could   not   resist   the   storms   that  lashed   them-the  impact  of  war,   the growing  scepticism   of   the   young,   and the inherent   weaknesses found  even among    the   group's  leaders,   weaknesses spawned  of   self-love,   greed,   hate,   and bigotry.
As  I  have  already indicated, most  of the   action   is  centred  on   young   Thorn Wiens. Named after the Biblical Thomas "whose   eyes  were   open   but   could   not see," he is at first confused and  uncertain, especially   when   he   tries   to  clarify   his own   attitude   towards  military  service. His  inadequacy is all  too  apparent when he withers  under  the questioning of the young,  but  rebellious  Annamarie. If "the majority,  the   non-believers,  die  so  that the    minority,   the    believers,    may   live [who]  then  is the  martyr for  the  faith?
.  .  .  Can   a  Christian cast  off   responsi­ bility  by  mere  refusal-by  mere  avoid­  ance?"
In  the days that  follow, disillusionment
mounts steadily  and   the  torments in  his mind  increase. He sees the greed  of prosperous  farmers  who   become    even more prosperous as the result of war. He becomes  conscious  of  the  intolerance of the  elders   of  the  flock  who  despise  and reject the local natives while they take inordinate  pride    in   belonging   to   the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



smallest   Mennonite  community  to  sup­ port  a missionary in  India. Above all, he gains   an   understanding  of  the  cruelty,  bigotry,  and  self-interest that  exist  below the  smooth   surface  of  the  domineering Deacon  Block,  the  dynamic  leader   who had   guided  the   group  in  its  migration from  Russia  to Canada.
Block  is the  most  fully  developed character in the novel. He is prideful, arrogant, astute. He  firmly  believes  that he  has  the  welfare   of  his  family  and  of his community close  to  his heart. Yct  he is  capable of  physical   and   mental  bru­ tality..  He  had,  in his anger, killed a man before   he  had   left  Russia. He  had  for­ bidden   his  daughter  to  marry a  fellow Mennonite because   the  man   was  a  bas­ tard.  In so doing  he eventually drives the pathetic Elizabeth, who  like the daughter of Jephtha bewails  her  virginity,  into  an
 illicit  love  affair   witn  his  drunken farm hand, Louis,  the  result  of which  is Eliza­ beth's    death  in   premature   childbirth. And  he  loses, spiritually,  his  son  whom he  had  done  all  in  his  mighty  power  to protect   from   the  evils  of  the  world.  In the   end,    he,    like   the   community,   is broken   and   desolate -a  symbol  of  the results   that    spring   from    the   ways   of thinking    and   living   he   had   striven   to perpetuate.
In   the  final   pages  Thorn's open  eyes have  become  seeing  eyes. He  is ready  to leave  the  community, not  to  forsake  his belief in Christ and  in  the  values  of true peace  and   genuine  love,  but   willing   to enter    the    greater   community  of   the nation, and   hopeful that   at  last  he  will be  able   to  move  in  "harmony  with  all the  world."
The  physical  settings  for the action  are




T.  E.  LAWRENCE  TO  HIS  BIOGRAPHERS
ROBERT GRAVES and  B. H. LIDDELL HART
Robert Graves and  Basil  Liddell Hart wrote  the  only  two  authorized  biographies of   T.  E.   Lawrence  during  his   lifetime.  His   letters  to   these   two   men   show entirely  different  facets of  his  character, but   together  they   build   up  a  strong impression of Lawrence's particular talents, his remarkable achievements, his enigmatic personality.                                                                                     $10.50
LITERATURE AND   LOCALITY
JOHN FREEMAN
This comprehensive any  systemic guide to  the  literary topography of  the  whole of  Britain and   Ireland will  enable the  literary pilgrim to  follow  up  the  associa­ tions  of  about 350  writers. The text  is arranged by regions, and  includes a  list of  museums,  houses,   and   other  buildings connected  with   the  literature of  the British  Isles.   Twenty-three  pages   of  maps   are   included,  and   the   Index  lists both  authors and place names.	$ro.5o

HOW  TO  PAINT   AND   DRAW
B. W. J AXTHEIMER
Why   not  learn to  paint and   draw this  summer with   this  extremely useful   and attractive  book   which, starting  from   first   principles, illustrates  and   explains every   step   towards  proficiency in  drawing  and   painting,  proving in  fact   that the  ability to  draw and   paint can   be learned just  as  reading and  writing can?
450   illustrations.	$8.75
Ask  at  your  favourite  bookstore  for these  books   from
BRITISH  BOOK   SERVICE (CANADA)  LIMITED
1068 BROADVIEW AVENUE, TORONTO 6 ONTARIO



75

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



superbly   handled.  Mr.   Wiebe's  descrip­ tions  of  farm   life  are  skilful  and  telling, as  is  his  handling of  the  ever  changing seasons.   But   the   backgrounds  are   not merely  bits of  splendid decoration. They  serve   to   reveal   the   characters  of   the principal  protagonists; and are often used symbolically  to emphasize the changing moods  of  the  novel.  The  opening move­ ment,    superficially  innocent   and   with only   slight   dissonances   jarring   against pastoral   harmony,   takes   place   in   the spring; but  the  end  is  played  out  against the   cruel   beauty  of   winter, when   in  a cold,    lamplit  barn,    angry,    passionate  men    fight    for    the    possession   of   the hysterical Razia, as the old Deacon,  bow­ ing  "his  scarred  head  to his hands  . . . . bereft  and  broken", sinks  beneath waves of  uncontrollable anguish.
It would  be  folly  to  pretend that   the
novel   does   not   have   serious   flaws.   It does.   The   dialogue, for   example,  too often   lapses  into   long  passages  on  con­ scription, the   place  of   conscientious objectors, or   the   validity   of  points   of theology,   that   pass  beyond   the   borders of  plausibility. Some  characters, too,  are very  lightly  sketched, and  some,  among  them  Razia, are  not  entirely  convincing.
Yet  the   virtues   of  this  work  far  out­ weigh  its flaws. The central theme  holds the  interest; the  landscape settings,  with
 their    many    rural   actiVItles,   are    seen through the eyes of a poet;  old Block is monumental; and   the  chapters  devoted to  the  death and  burial  of Elizabeth are unforgettable.                     S.E.READ


PURITANS AND DISBELIEVERS

ALDEN NOWLAN.  The  Things Which Are. Con­
tact   Press.  $2.00.

PETER   MILLER.   A   Shifting  Pattern.  Contact
Press. $2.00.

MR. DAVID WATMOUGH,   recently  discuss­ ing  the   Canadian novel  on  the  C.B.C.,  made  the   comment  that   the  Canadian novelist    seemed    insufficiently   engaged with   the   intransigent  Calvinist  ethos  of this  country. Where  the Canadian novel­  ist may  have  been  remiss, I believe Cana­ dian  poets  have  been  less neglectful. The poetry   of  Mr.   Irving  Layton could   be described  as   one  long   diatribe  against Canadian Calvinism, and  even the g.race­ ful  mythology of  Miss  Jay   Macpherson is clouded by a sense of sin at  the  root  of the  universe.  It is in  the  poetry  of Alden Nowlan, however, that  we see the strong­ est  and  most  deeply  felt  response  to  this tradition.
Alden  Nowlan describes with demonic intensity   one    aspect    of   the    Puritan­ Calvinist  dilemma,  that   of   both  loving and   hating  what   one   is,  one's   intrinsic human  nature. Here is a  poetry  fiercely aware    of   the   pain    of   human  passion without much   hope  or  trust  in  the  pos­ sibility   of   joy  equally   inherent  in   this experience.
Mr.  Nowlan's new book, The  Things Which  Are  reveals   a  vision  haunted  by the   brute facts   of  horror   and   violence,

BOOKS IN REVIEW



dominated  by   a   sense   of   evil   lurking under   a   thin   facade  of  apathy  rather than   respectability.  Nowlan   is  never  far from  the    awesome  doctrine  of   the "damned" and   the  "elect" -"the  same nightmares/instruct  the   evil,  as  inform the  good".  His   "explanation", which  is as  much   about  the   nature  of  spiritual reality  as it  is about the  genesis  of poetic inspiration, comments-"the reports   of people/who've seen  the Cherubim/differ, but  all agree/they're terrible beasts:  part ox,  part  eagle,  part lion."  This  is a wry, awed  appraisal of fallen  human nature.
I would  like to point  out  that  Puritan­ ism  is  not  necessarily   prudery,  although some  Puritans may   be  prudes.  The   two terms    are   often    colloquially   confused.  The Puritan attitude, like Mr.  Nowlan's, is acutely  aware  of  the  relentless  duality  of  flesh  and  spirit:  thus  "Party At  Ban­ non  Brooks"-"my  circular arm/strok­ ing  the  soft  fat/of her  belly  not  because I  love  her/but because  I am  afraid."
In   brief  anecdotal  poems   the  horror­ haunted Northern mind  is  caught and  a world  macabre as well as weirdly  humor­ ous is presented. Nowlan's sense of horror  is so acute  that  it can  only  find  ultimate expression    in    the    supernaturally   ma­ cabre.  This   is  apparent   in    "Black Thread"   where,  "my   sister   sewed   her hand,/the  soft  flesh  of  her   palm,/black thread  under the  skin."
There  is  fewer   of  this  kind  of  poem than  in  previous volumes,  and  there  is a strong  new    note  of   compassion. In "Drunk Falling", the drunk is given a "terrible  dignity", "Saul  dying,/Achilles to Lycaon". Nevertheless, the dominant image of the book is an obsessively vivid evocation of  the  rotting fester  of  mortal­ ity  lurking   hideously beneath   the   brief bloom  of  the  flesh.  This is  focused  in  a
 cruel,   repellant  image    of   "blood    and pus",  the  epitome of the doomed  human condition, where  a cat  is seen  with  "one eye  bright,   the  other/a hideous  crust  of blood  and   pus",   and   horseflies  are  "at such in moist yellow sores". A kind of apotheosis  of this is achieved  in "Novelty Booth" when a glass flower picked apart reveals   a   thimble-like  cup   full   of   pus and  blood.
The  Things Which  Are  does  include a  number  of  purely   lyrical   poems   that have  delicacy  and  tenderness of  observa­ tion:   poems  where  fruit  is, "white as the flesh/ of   the    thrice-risen   Lord"   and dahlias grieve  like flowers in  a fairy  tale, where  "like  a  long-married  man/the sun will rest his  hand  upon/this flesh habitu­ ally,"   but   where   that   same  flesh  is  "as  vulnerable  as snow".
What    Alden   Nowlan    has   to   say  is always compelling; how he says it is often not.  His  poetry  suffers  on  occasion  from an   overdose    of   the   dreary   colloquial voice,  a  legacy  no  doubt  of  Ezra  Pound via   Raymond   Souster.    Nor    does   the vigour  of Nowlan's imagination  compen­ sate  entirely  for  the  frequent  flatness  of diction,   the    lack   of    inventiveness   or experimentation in  his  form.   But  in  the end  these seem mere technical limitations in  a  poet   who  is  everywhere  redeemed by  the   intensity   of   his  vision,   uncom­ promisingly   apprehended  and    passiOn­ ately  stated.
Whereas  Mr.   Alden   Nowlan   grapples with    the   human   condition  under    the severe aegis of the Protestant-Calvinist ethos,  Mr.  Peter  Miller  in  his  third  col­ lection  of verse, A Shifting Pattern, gives us  the  pained   and  weary  despair  of  dis­ belief.  "To look  forward  to  nothing, to eschew  the  impossible  joy" is the opening line  of his  title  poem  and  the  final  word

77

BOOKS IN REVIEW



of  the  same  poem  is "nothing".
Alden Nowlan and Peter Miller both respond   to  landscape, the  exterior  land­ scape  of  the  eye  as  well  as  the  interior landscape  of   the   human  heart.   Alden Nowlan's  terrain   is   wholly   Canadian, rural    New   Brunswick,   Miller's  widely cosmopolitan.  Where  Alden  Nowlan evokes a  narrow, rigid, sometimes  grimly Gothic climate, Peter  Miller  leads  us into the  quiet  pastoral  reaches  of the  Ontario countryside and diverts  us with  the exoti­ cisms  of  Mexico  and  India, not  to men­ tion   the  civilized   felicities  of  Italy   and Greece.
Mr.  Miller  the man  emerges  as a civil­
ized,  cultivated, intelligent one whose themes  are  apparently equally  civilized, subtle  and  complex. Mr.  Miller,  the poet, unfortunately  emerges   too   often   as   a rather  pallid   rhetorician. This  is  not  to say   that   Mr.   Miller   does  not   produce some   telling    and    effective   poems;    he does, but although these are good in themselves they are none of  them startling.
Possibly  Mr.  Miller  suffers from  over­ facility.   All  his  poems  exhibit  consider­  able  surface  dexterity in  which  exactness of   observation   and   description   almost make  the  poem  but  not quite.  The  poems are  impeded, not  to  say defeated finally, by   triteness   of   feeling.   The   poems   in "Part  II- Abroad",  with   a  few  excep­ tions,   read  like    limp,  self-conscious travelogues. There is little  incisiveness  of language and  even  less individuality of insight.  Some  poems  are  at  best  tasteful and  eclectic,  at  worst  uninspired and diffuse. Lines like "as you watch your fountains foaming white/under the lamps that raise bright fingers" from "Fountains of  Trevi" and  "with friends I have  here sipped  night/wet our  tongues
 with  starlit   laughter" are  sadly  less than startling, yet this same poet can write in "Othello in  Tuscany" -"it  is  the   line, it is the  line,/my soul, and  it is the form/ show    cause    and    design/in   all    that's mode." It  is  indeed  the   line   and   one could  only  wish  Mr.  Miller  took  it  more to  heart.
One  cannot, nevertheless, dismiss Peter Miller   quite   so  easily   or  so  cavalierly. There are moving  poems among the travelogues. There  is  "Notes  from  Ux­ mal"  which   deftly   balances   a  complex of  responses.  This is  a  sharp  and   poig­ nant poem.  Against  the  ruins of Yucatan, ultimate  questions of  human  values  are posed.  The sense  of  man,  mortal, single and  solitary,  moving  in  a  stream  of con­ tinuity   against time  and  death is strong. Solitariness  is   redeemed   by   the   many facets  of love into  affirmation, "this drop  of love that  I have spilt/under the  bridge  with  the  milky  span/of  light-". There is   also    "Matins"   where,    "From   the domed ceiling., distant and  austere/as be­ fits  a  lord   whose   line  is  Byzantine,/to­ wards   the   monks   intoning  their   disci­ pline/the Saviour leans  to  lend  a  critic's ear."
Mr.   Miller's  muse  appears at  its  best in  such  observations and  in  its quiet  re­ flective  guises.  It is a  muse,  "where  men and  shadows  make  of time/a quiet  clock whose  wheels  elude/the myth  of   move­ ment." It is  also  a  muse  that  can  look resolutely  and  darkly at  the human situa­  tion  and  report in  a  terse,  powerful final poem,

But  a wooden skin,  a plaster mask, has fronted our  head of bone.
And  a second face,  is little to ask, that we may  die  alone.

This  is  too  real  a  sensibility  to  waste  on poetic   travelogue.          MARYA FIAMENGO

BOOKS IN REVIEW



TIGER TAMED

w.   H.   GRAHAM. The  Tiger of  Canada West.
Clarke,   Irwin.  $6.oo.

DR.   WILLIAM "TIGER"   DUNLOP (I 792- I 848), a  celebrated  eccentric  among the  pioneers  of Ontario, is an  excellent subject  for popular treatment. "In  the course  of  my  reading, I discovered  Wil­ liam  Dunlop," Mr.  Graham says  on the jacket    of   his   book.   The   discovery,   of course,   was   a   personal   experience,  for Dunlop has  long  been  known  to  readers  who  have   treasured In  the   Days  of the Canada   Company, I825-1B5o,  published in   I 896   by   Robina   and   Kathleen  M. Lizars.  The  deplorable lack  of a  reprint of this  book  has  made it feasible  for  Mr.  Graham  to   tell   the   Dunlop  story  in  a freely  modernized version,  which  is more orderly, coherent  and  scholarly   than  the original.
As his title suggests, Mr. Graham is concerned almost  entirely  with  the Cana­ dian   phase   of  Dunlop's  career,  in   the period   from   I 826  to  I 848.  The  sources for   this  phase,   which   Mr.  Graham  has chosen,  include   the    Lizars   sisters' Humours of '37  ( I897), as well as In  the
 Days  of   the  Canada  Company. Mr. Graham has  also  had  access  to  the  rare, and  relatively  unknown, Dunlop Papers, edited  and  privately   printed in  England
by  Mr.   J. G.  Dunlop;  there   are   three
such   volumes,    The   Autobiography  of
John   Dunlop, The  Dunlops of  Dunlop, and  Letters  and Journals  !663-1889. In addition to these, Mr. Graham searched Canada Company records  in  public archives,  and  files of Toronto and  Mont­ real   newspapers. The  result   is   a   rare  mixture of fact  and  legend,  as  indeed   it should  be, for  history  supports  the  liter­  ary  image  of  Dunlop.
As  a  consequence  of   his   reasonable
desire to reduce  the Lizars'  account to historical  regularity, Mr.  Graham found himself obliged to comment upon many related topics which the  sisters left delightfully confused. The  Lizars  were concerned with vignettes of people,  not explanations of events; they were  writing sympathetic, impressionistic biography, not   history.   Their  manuscripts, now  in the  Library  of the  University of Western Ontario, show  how  carefully they gathered their  material, and  how  loosely they   put   it   together.  Mr.   Graham,  by his own choice, had to make summary judgments and  explanations concerning John,  Galt,   the  Canada  Company after Galt's  departure, the earliest  settlers and conditions of Canada West,  and   politics of the  province  before  I85o.
It is a large  order  to satisfy modern experts  on   these  controversial   mat­ ters,   for   each   topic   deserves   specialist  study; and  Mr.  Graham's  moral theme,  the   disintegration  of   the  early   pioneer  with  the  passing  of  the  frontier, may  be too   rigorously   applied.  Mr.  Graham should  be commended for  taking  a stand, conscious of some prejudices and  fighting

79

BOOKS IN REVIEW



them,    although   there    will   always   be readers  who   prefer   the  gay   romancing of   the   Lizars   and   their   eloquence,  to which   Mr.   Graham  sometimes   happily surrenders. The legend  of the "Tiger" - a  title   Dunlop  gained   less  through  big game  hunting than  through literary  bap­ tism   into   the   Blackwood's  group-has lost  nothing and  should  gain  in  popular acceptance  because    of   Mr.    Graham's conscientious study. 	CARL F. KLINCK


A CONFUSION OF WITCHES

ELLIOTT  ROSE.  A  Razor   for a Goat:   Problems in the  History  of Witchcraft and  Diabolism. University of  Toronto Press.  $4·95·

The Times Literary  Supplement of May
25, 1962, reviewed  three  books on witch­ craft and   witches.   With   Mr.  Rose's  we have    at   least   four   on   the   subject   in recent  months-quite a flurry of interest  in  so  hoary  a  topic.
Mr.   Rose's  book  is  marked   by  rather unpleasant  mannerisms. His  priggishness must  be  illustrated to  be believed: "My qualifications [for  writing  this  book]  are that  I  am  a historian of sorts, not  wholly unfamiliar with  the  background; I  have had,   for   other   purposes,   to  give  some attention  to   the   appropriate  countries and  period; I can  read Latin, and  possess the    ordinary    layman's   knowledge   of anthropology and  kindred  subjects.... I am  if anything a Thomist." Throughout the  book  there  are  pretentious references to literature, religion, and  politics,  which cannot  help   but   annoy  anyone   familiar with  any  of the  given  subjects.  (See,  for instance, his  reference to Doukhobors on page   I 20) . There is also a  strained  bel-

8o
 letrism    which    will   undoubtedly   strike some  as  brilliant  and   witty,   but   which I  found sophomoric and above all soporific.
The book  is about medieval   and  Re­
formation  witchcraft, but  it  deals  much less with  the subject than  with a certain literature on  this  topic.  It is an  essay on historiography rather than  on  history.  In particular, Mr.  Rose is occupied with refuting two  hypotheses: one by Professor Margaret Murray, according to whom witchcraft  was  (or  is)   a  completely  in­ tact  survival  of a pre-Christian European religion;  the   other   hypothesis   is  attri­ buted   to  persons  Mr.  Rose  terms  "Anti­ Sadducees," according to  whom  witches  do  their  work at  the actual inspiration of an   actual  Devil.   Going   by  Mr.   Rose's  presentation of  these views, it would seem that   he  is  fighting  opinions  so  extreme that   most  of  us would  not  bother  giving  them  serious  consideration.
I  am   willing   to  grant  the  possibility, though by no  means the  likelihood, that I  would  have  taken  a kinder  view of this work   if  I  were   a  professional   historian instead  of   sociologist.   In  any   case,   a reader of this review would do well to postpone a  decision  on  whether to  read the book at least until he can check the reviewers   in   the   historical  journals.   In the   meantime,  I   would    like   to   state briefly  why  I  found  the  book  so  singu­ larly   unsatisfactory  from   a   sociological  point  of view.
The problem  of witchcraft would  seem to involve the social relationship between orthodox  and   heterodox  in   the   period under  question. Mr.   Rose  concedes   this by  touching  upon   some  of  the  heresies, but   he   does  so  most   inadequately. He generally claims an absence of original sources,   though  Norman  Cohn,  in   his

BOOKS IN REVIEW



I957  work  on  The  Pursuit of  the  Mil­ lenium, has  reported  in  some  detail   on the  kind  of  source   Mr.  Rose  assumes  is non-existent. (I  refer  here  in  particular to  the  heresy  of  the   Free  Spirit). The  questions which  Mr.  Rose  leaves  so frus­ tratingly  unanswered   concern  the   rela­ tionship   between  witchcraft and   heresy, the   social-class   influences  upon    witch­  craft, and,  in  general, the  social  conflicts related   to   the  conflicts   around  witches. For   one   who   expects   answers   to  ques­ tions  like  these,  the  book  is intellectually very  thin. 	WERNER COHN

MESSAGE  FROM OLYMPUS

IRVING  LAYTON.   Balls   for  a  One-Armed   jug­ gler.   McClelland  &   Stewart.  Cloth   $4.50; Paper $2.65.

QUESTION:  Is it  possible  to situate Layton  anywhere in  the  general  "tradi­ tion"  of Canadian poetry?
ANSWER:   I don't think  so, in  spite  of
the  fact  that   he's  here.  There has  never been    anyone    quite    like   Layton-for good  or  bad-in  Canadian poetry.  He's the  sport  and  anomaly of tradition.
Q.:   Layton has  been  called   an  inno­
vator    and   a   meticulous  craftsman.  Is this  true?
A.:   He   is  not   an   innovator- unless you consider that  his subject  matter and language  are   innovation.  Which    in   a sense I do. But given  the tradition of preaching Christ-like  sensualists and moralists    such   as   Nietzsche,    Lawrence and  Shaw -then Layton is a fine crafts­ man.  And  this is relevant in an odd  way. It allows  Layton  to  swing  expertly and acrobatically around the  fixed  trapeze  of his  own  and   other  men's  certainties.
 Q.:  To what  poets or group of present­
day  writers  has  he  most  affinity?
A.:   Leaving   out   the   dead   men   for whom  Layton   professes  admiration,  one has   to  point    to   the   Americans  whom Layton   affects  to  despise,  such  as  Gins­ berg,    Kerouac,   etc. -the    beats.    But Layton  has  a singing  magnificence in his earlier   work   which   I  find   absent   from theirs.
Q.:   There  is  a   preoccupation   with
physical   violence   and   cruelty  in  many Layton  poems.  What does  this  indicate? A. :  That he is a moralist. The  reader may generally  draw  a conclusion or point a  moral   with  Layton's poems  of  animal
death and  human  violence.
Q.:  How  good  is he?
A.:  The   best  in  the  country.
There is much   to  be said  for  the  idea that   Layton   is  his  own   mythology. He stalks through most of the  poems  in Balls for  a  One-Armed   Juggler  much   larger than  life-size, far more angry  than it's possible to sustain  in  the  living  flesh and bone  of  the   human  mind.  So  that   his poems   are  frozen   anger,   solidified   pas­ sion-set   rigidly   into   forms  which   do not   allow   this  anger   to  dissipate  away into   sleep  or   lessen   into   human  anti­ climax.
Of  course  there   are  modulations and degrees   of  printed emotion. There are also   rare   flashes   of   the   characteristic early  lyricicm,   which   now  seems  to  be fading  away in the poet's  impassioned middle age. Label   this excerpt pity:
-for I loved  you from  the  first who know  what  they  do  not  know,  seeing in your  death a tragic portent for  all of us who  crawl and  die
under the  wheeling disappearing stars
("Elegy for  Marilyn Monroe")
Humour  in   Layton  is   liable   to   be savage  as an  executioner laughing at  his

81

BOOKS IN REVIEW



victims.   The  philosophic moments   are hardly ever  calm,  but  generally  vital:
Yet vitality proves nothing except that something is alive
So is a pole-cat; so is a water-rat.
I  don't think   I've ever  met  a  human being   with   such   impressive   qualities  of being  right  all the  time as Irving Layton. And in this rtlgard man and poems are inseparable. In a  sense  that's admirable. I   admire  the   passion   and   bluster   and candour it gives to the poems. In  another sense  I  don't like anybody  to be so right all  the  time.  For  it  is not  a  very  human quality; it withdraws its possessor from participation in  the  storms  and  passions of  the  actual  world,  makes  him  a  mere angry   supreme court   spectator. It turns a man  into  a megalomaniac god.  I  think some readers share this dislike of the absolute,  and   certainly  the  tendency   of a  few  is  to  rebel  against  it.
However, that  is ungrateful. God pities the dead little fox in "Predator". God explains "Why I  Can't Sleep  Nights" in the   poem   of  that   title.  God   condemns and  castigates the  sinful individual in "Epigram  for  Roy  Daniells". And  God has  written  parables for  his worshippers
-"Butterfly on  a  Rock" and   "A  Tall Man   Executes a  Jig"   (of  which   Irving said  to  me  once,  "AI, in  ten  years  you'll be   able   to   understand  this   poem.   In
 twenty   you  might  be  able  to  write  one as good." I was moved  to a great humble­ ness  by  this  statement.)
But  I'm  not one of Layton's detractors.
Balls is an excellent book of poems. It deserves   to  be   read   by  all -especially those    to   whom    Layton  addresses    the poems    specifically.   And   I  notice    that even   those   who   dislike   Layton  always read   him -if   only  to  rush  indignantly to  their   typewriters.  For   perhaps I'm wrong  about this god-idea, and  the anger of some of Layton's critics  is the only indication  they  are  alive.
A. W. PURDY


RECENT REPRINTS

CANADA    ALREADY   HAS  its   first   distin­ guished series  of  paperbacks in  McClel­ land & Stewart's New  Canadian  Library. Now  two other  series are  appearing. The  first  titles  are  already  announced of  the Carleton   Library,   to   be   published   in collaboration   by   McClelland  &  Stewart and  Carleton  University, while  the initial  series  of eight  reprints has  just appeared to   launch   Canadian   University  Paper­ backs under the  imprint of the University of  Toronto Press.  Among  them  are  four titles   which   are   likely  to  be  of  interest to  readers of  Canadian  Literature. Two of these are basically literary-The Renaissance and English Humanism by Douglas Bush  ( $1.50)   and  the  first series of Our  Living  Tradition, ($1.75)   edited by  C.   T. Bissell  and   including  lectures on -among  other   important  figures­ Lampman, Grove,  Leacock  and Goldwin Smith.  The  other   two  are   historical­ The  Canadian  Identity by  W. L. Morton ($1.75)  and  The   Fur  Trade  in Canada by  Harold  A.  Innis   ($1.95).









A HAUNTING
ECHO


SrR:
Rereading Emily Dickinson recently  I was struck  by certain remembered echoes. How  like  this  is  to  the  poetry  of  Sarah Binks, the  Sweet  Songstress  of  Saskatche­ wan.  A comparison of  the  lives of  these two   poets   shows   interesting  points   in common.  Neither    married;   each    had similar  schooling,  with  some emphasis  on the   science   of   geology;  each   left   her home   briefly   in   pursuit  of  a  man.   In their   works  we  find  so  much   similarity  that   the  question  arises:   did  Sarah's art stem  from Emily's?
Similarities are  particularly evident  in the rhyme-schemes. Each  of these poets seems   to   be   free   of   the   trammels  of ordinary rhyme; each  uses what  Emily's early  editor, Mabel  Loomis  Todd, called "thought-rhymes". Examples are  sown thick  in  their   works.  Emily's

A print of a vermilion  foot,
A purple finger  on  the  slope.

or

And  he-he followed close  behind. I felt  his silver  heel
Upon my ankle -then  my shoes
Would overflow  with   pearl.

have  their  parallel in  Sarah's

The hand that wrote
Must grasp the  spoke,
 
and   the  bolder

Barley  in  the  heater, salt  pork  in  the  pantry
How   nice   that  you  never   feel  cold  in   this
country.

Geological   motifs  figure  frequently in the  work  of  each,   with  regional  differ­ ences,   as  might    be   expected,   and   the usual   effects   of    temperamental   differ­  ences. Sarah, the  farm  girl,  living  on  the prairies, Devonian  land  not  far  removed  from  our  dominant Precambrian Shield,  wrote of jasper, quartz, micaceous, schist, chert,  pterodactyls and  trilobites; Emily, more  delicate  and  urban, doted  on chry­ soprase,    emerald,   beryl,    onyx,    topaz, agate,   chrysolite,   amber  and   amethyst. Yet,  the  New  England  poetess  was  un­ able  to ignore  the  presence  of the  nearby Appalachians;  sometimes   she   could   be brutal and  elemental  too,  extending her imagery  to adamant, quartz-or marble:

Though drifted deep in  Parian
The village  lies today.

Carl   Van   Doren, in  his  introduction to  an   edition   of  Emily's   poetry,   wrote, "There are  few  subjects   which  she  does not  touch with intimate, surprising words."  This is obvious  in

A cheek  is always  redder
Just  where  the  hectic springs.

But  the  same  sort  of  thing   can  be  seen in  Sarah's work,  for  instance where  she calls  a  farm  goose

A loathsome brute to  toil  among.

Emily likes to use general terms m a particular  sense:

Here  a most  and  there a mist, Afterwards -day!

or

And  then  he drank a dew
From  a convenient  grass.

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



Sarah  practices this  too:

A onion, a lettuce, a handful of maize.

Each  used  the  poet's  privilege  of  find­ ing  new  uses  for  old  words,  or  coining  new   ones.   Emily,   with   adjectives,   was positive:
To fight  aloud is very  brave
But  gallanter, I know,
Who  charge within the  bosom
The cavalry of woe,
and  in  a  lighter  vein

The dust  replaced in  hoisted  roads
The birds   jocoser sung;

Sarah's adjectival inventions were darker in  mood:
Comes the  Poet­ Sylph-like,
Gaunt-like,
or

... in  stentorious sleep.

As to finding  new  nouns  or  new  uses for them,  Emily  was  weak:
With half  a smile  and  half a spurn
or

The thunder crumbled like  a stuff - Sarah was more  resourceful. Witness: With brazen wings  and  blatant snoof
 and

He  looks  not  the  rock  and  the  riplet

Each   dared  to  use  verbs   boldly.  Emily made   her  railway   train   "-  .. a  quarry pare" and   mystically   observed   that
Not  all  pianos in  the  woods
Had power  to mangle me.

On  the  other hand, Sarah tended  toward the onomatopoeic:
Today as I an  apple mulched
or,  more·musically,

I'll take  no cow  that fails  to sing
Or  throstle with  its horn.

Each  poet's  imagery  was intimately bound    up   with   her   own   environment. Emily,   the  town-dweller, noted
The trampled steel  that springs

(most   likely  a   rake,   left   teeth   upward on  an  Amherst lawn), while  Sarah, a daughter of  the  great  outdoors, wrote  in lonely   Willows
The  mainfore gallant sail  spilt   like  a  tent.

In  the  realm   of  the  psychological the girl  poets  show  kinship.  Sarah's Me  and My   Love   and  Me   is directly descended from Emily's piece on the dichotomous personality,
Me from  myself  to banish
Had I art ...
But  since  myself  assault me
... Me-or me?

There is  no  question  about   it;  there is a  relationship. Paul  Hiebert, Sarah's biographer, can  throw  no light  on the question.  There  the   matter  must   rest until   some  energetic scholar   comes  for­ ward   to  make   a  thorough  examination of  the   matter  that   I  have  adumbrated here.

C. C. J. BOND
Ottawa.
