lr.25 per  copy


CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·36


Spring, 1968


BOOKS	OF	THE 	YE](R

Articles

BY HUGH KENNER, DESMOND PACEY, WILLIAM H. NEW, D. J. DOOLEY, GEORGE  BOWERING

Chronicle

BY MARGUERITE PRIMEAU

Reviews
BY JULIAN SYMONS, GERARD TOUGAS, LIONEL KEARNS, GEORGE ROBERTSON, GEORGE  WOODCOCK, H.  J. ROSENGARTEN,
DOROTHY LIVESAY, PETER STEVENS, LEN GASPARINI, DOUGLAS  BARBOUR, R. E.  WATTERS, L. T. CORNELIUS, FRANCES FRAZER, NORMAN NEWTON,
TONY KILGALLIN, J• A. S. EVANS, FRED  COGSWELL,  J. J. TALMAN

Annual Supplement
CANADIAN LITERATURE CHECKLIST, 1967


A QUARTERLY  OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW









ABOUT BIOGRAPHIES










ONE MARK  OF  CANADIAN LITERATURE  has  always been  the in­ terest of writers in autobiography. Mrs. Brooke, in  A History of Emily Montague, though  she was writing  about  fictional  people, was not writing of a fictional world. She  was  giving,  quite  strenuously,   her  own  emotional and  intellectual response to the Canadian scene. Other  writers followed  her, some in  journals  revealing  the country  and  their  own  personalities.  Still  others  made  their  own  personal  stories into  novels, or  what  can  loosely be  termed  novels. There are  Mrs.  Moodie  and Mrs.  Traill, giving  their  version of Canada based on  personal  experience.  There is also Ethel  Wilson, giving impressions of  Vancouver in The  Innocent  Traveller.
The  autobiographical element  fluctuates with  the biographical; stories are often
more  than  stories,  they  are  frequently based  on  legends  or myths  of people  who had  actually  existed  in  full  human form.  Canadian writers,  interested  in  their country  and  its landscape, move frequently into  the lives of real people, or often base their  fictional  world  on people  who  have  actually  existed.  Not  that  this is a Canadian syndrome,  by any means,  but it does show that Canadian literature frequently goes to more  of reality  in its literature than  do other  literatures.  Nor­ man  Bethune  can  be seen in MacLennan's characterization of Jerome  Martell  in The  Watch  That  Ends the Night, and  often  MacLennan and other novelists have dealt  with  people not as well known. The interest  in a kind of  personal  biography  continues  to hold sway in much  Canadian fiction. But to tell the tale of a person's life, fictional  or  real,  is always  the  novelist's  function. It  appears, however,  that Canadian writers  more  often  than  not  are  using characters from  the real world.

3

EDITORIAL



They do not all do it. But because of a rather  misplaced Canadian consciousness, perhaps,  it  appears  that  Canadian writers seem to direct  themselves toward  the biographical.
Major  Canadian  writers, unlike American writers, work in an area where the
world of a literary creation is not distinct from the real Canadian world. Canadian writers have not sought to create a universe of freedom within the field of  litera­ ture itself. They do not triumph  over that conditioning in society, the custom and environmental  determinism that  limit the action and  vision of the major charac­ ters. There  is not  a memorable  character  to come out  of  Canadian fiction yet because the writers do not try  to expand the self-meaning of  those characters they describe. They  continue  to leave them in a world that  the  reader  always recog­ nizes. Some  day  their  vision will lift them  beyond  completely;  at  the moment only a few authors  point beyond, and reveal a capacity for the vision and depen­ dence on the imagined world and its primacy over the real that will lift Canadian literature  to greater  international status.

* 	* 	* 	*
An  interest  in  biography  is reflected in  the  great  number  of books of  pure biography, and autobiography,  that came out in Canada  in 1967. It was perhaps an  auspicious  year,  and  many  biographies  appeared.   Some  should  not  have appeared,  but  there were many  that  were needed, and  things Canadian  will be richer because of them. Three  books stand out in this year of biography. Dale C. Thomson's  book, Louis  St.  Laurent, has many fine qualities, though Thomson  is a bit too close to his subject both in time and  personal relationship for the good of the book, and  as a consequence the volume lacks the perspective it demands. Michael  Macklem's  God  Have   Jvfercy is a  particularly  well-written book on Fisher;  Macklem  has  exhausted  all  the  material  on  Fisher,  and  has  presented what  is frequently  pure Tudor  political-religious history. And  the other  book is Father  Neil McKenty's  book, Mitch Hepburn. It is a successful political profile, lively and well written, and it is very much a life-though not as much at times as one  would  perhaps  always want-of  Mitch  Hepburn. The  tone is not  de­ fensive, and it examines Hepburn's policies and foibles with fair detachment.  It is an  admirable  contribution  to a Canadian history field in  which there has been all  too  little  written:   biographies  of  provincial  premiers  who  have  given  the nation's  history some shape. The  book is a delight to read. For that  reason it has been awarded  the 1967 University of British Columbia  Medal for Popular Biog­ raphy. Canadian Literature  extends its congratulations  to Father  McKenty.

4



THE LAST EUROPEAN




Hugh Kenner







"I am the last American living the tragedy
of Europe."	EZRA   POUND,  1960

IWAS A  FRESHMAN at the Unive<Sity of Tomnto,  watching
black  squirrels  scamper  beneath its elms,  and  settling  into  73  St.  George  Street
for  my  first  extended   stay  away  from  home,  when  Wyndham Lewis  was  com­ pleting  his first year's stock-taking  of Toronto as a city of exile  ( "... Things have come  to an  awful  pass here:   if I don't  do something  to  break  out  of the  net,  I shall end  my days in a Toronto flophouse." ... ) ; I was listening  to C. N. Coch­  rane's  lectures  on  historiography and  G. S. Brett's  on  the  continuous life of the mind  and  Malcolm  Wallace's on  Shakespearean  compassion while the author of Time  and Western  Man  and  The  Lion and the Fox was enduring the social chill and  the central  heating  in a room "twenty-five feet by twelve"  at the Hotel Tudor a half-hour's stroll  away;  at  the same  distance from  one  another we completed  I my sophomore year in Toronto and  he his third ("We are freezing out here slowly, in  this  icebox  of  a  country.  This  hotel  burned  down  six weeks ago,  all but  the annexe.  I am  living in the ruins") ; but  by the time the  junior  Eng. Lang.  & Lit. curriculum had  commenced   to  revolve  past  my  fitful  attention Roman satirists, English  Augustans  and  French   Cartesians,  the  author of The  Apes of  God had moved  to  Windsor,  two hundred and  twenty  miles west-south-west.
The  point  of this synchronicity is that  it has no point.  I never  heard  the name of Lewis mentioned, and  can  only identify  in retrospect,  as a remote little space­ time  convolution, the  two  years I lived  not  a mile from  a Titan.
There was no conspiracy  to keep us undergraduates from finding out he existed. Though Toronto's, like all faculties,  contained men scrupulous in their sensitivity

5

THE LAST EUROPEAN



to the present (I know for a fact that one of them read Partisan Review) it seems clear that  they didn't  know about  him either. They scanned  print more  promis­ cuously than we did, and his name would have surfaced from time to time before their ken atop, say, contributions to Saturday Night, but merely as a name:  four blank  syllables, attached  to remarks  about-oh,  Canadian  painting,  a subject never deemed vital  (our  mentors were word men).




EN HE  CROSSED the  Atlantic  he left  behind  what  he lived on:  his reputation,  such as it was. Such as it was, it had gotten him portrait commissions, though  never as many as fell to Augustus John.  Chiefly he lived on advances for  books, also obtained  by pledging his reputation. Some were books he cared about, some he would not have elected to write but for necessity. Either kind  drew on meditations  nearly habitual  with him, concerned  with fame, illu­ sion, groundless belief, and the manipulatability of these. It is no wonder he wrote so much  about politics.
Painting  can  be  a  fantastically  lucrative  vocation,  though  it  never  was for
Lewis; and if a painter have Lewis's gifts, and Lewis's lack of income, he is likely to give thought  to what  it  is that  people who buy pictures, when  they do buy them,  think  they are paying for, reflections apt to reinforce any nascent interest his intellect  may take in  voids and  vacua.  For what  can  Pablo  Picasso possibly be  doing  that  is worth  a gangster's  ransom  to anybody? The  answer is, being Picasso:  being  the  man  whose name  some utterly  mysterious nexus joins to  a public idea,  an idea  his skill, his luck, his dealers engendered.  He is not  being paid as a workman for a day's work when he overpaints a canvas; nor for the usefulness of his product  in  decorating  a wall, which  a reproduction  would do quite as well. Nor, since the picture is a unique exemplum sold to one buyer once in  one transaction,  does some crude  determination  of the number  of people he interests determine  his remuneration,  as it does a writer's.  Nor, except for some such pivotal picture as a major artist will not achieve more than five or six times before he dies, is some unique  concentration  of human  insight coming into  the purchaser's keeping. No, whoever owns a Picasso owns (at great cost) just that­ a Picasso:  an example of his work, very like a hundred  other examples, work to each example of which, by agreement, great value is affixed. The  agreement will possibly one day collapse, as in the case of Millais, and the market deflate. Mean­ while the living painter, needing to eat, will hope for such an accretion of public

6

THE LAST EUROPEAN



imponderables  as will set on new examples of his work the price commanded  by a reputation.
Will hope;  will strive? Possibly. And if he is gifted, like Lewis, with word-skills also, he will set them to work too, in part to make himself still better known. Ros­ setti, an indifferent  painter, did this, and ·Whistler, an excellent one, both  profit­ ably. And in the mind of the British picture-connoisseur  (though  Lewis publicly derided  that  species, or  doubted  its existence)  Wyndham  Lewis has  a  public existence, compounded, like all public existences, of rumour and noise and gallery talk and press cuttings (a delimited void, in fact, laced with tracer bullets) : a less potent existence than  John's  or Picasso's or K.lee's, but sufficient  to foster the in­ dispensable feeling that  "a  Lewis" on one's wall might be something more than x square inches of pigment:  might be, in fact, a whiff of  heady "reality,"  worth an outlay. That  was partly what the books were  for, in greater or less degree ac­ cording to the book. It was also (hence  their lasting interest)  what  they tended to be about:   the nature  of public identity, the identity of a person, a movement, an  idea.  All these, Lewis thought,  were  corrupted  once they  went into  action, entailed  themselves with  the  contingent,  and  brought  in  groceries. But  men of the intellect need groceries.
And  in  North  America -in  New York at  first, and  for  three long  years in Toronto -none of that  fructive nothingness was at his disposal. He was simply a man who could paint pictures, if you liked the kind of pictures he painted, and could also write, with forceful and  it seemed barbarous  word-joinery, deploying moreover when  he wrote ideas not  reassuringly continuous  with the other  ideas that were going round in those years. So at about the age of sixty he was brought up against the full implications of a world where nobody knew who he was. "Wyndham Lewis" had ceased to exist.
The  urgent problem was to stay alive: to make and cultivate contacts, to secure commissions, to solicit publishers' advances:  in short to improvise "Wyndham Lewis" again, in a cold land  at war. He expended disheartening  efforts to little effect. Devoid of an identity, he was reduced to a nervous system. It is no wonder that everything Torontonian  got on his nerves:  the heat, the cold, the plumbing, the ventilation,  the liquor  regulations, the intellectuals.



HE BEGAN   HIS  NORTH AMERICAN EXPERIENCE by finishing a novel -The Vulgar Streak -about a man who discards his identity and makes a new one, supported  by a new trade, that of counterfeiter. He finished with that

7

THE LAST EUROPEAN



experience by recreating it from a decade's distance, back in London, in a novel
-Self Condemned- about  a  man  who  discards  his identity  (that  of British professor)  and  exists in  Momaco,  Canada,   as an  exacerbated  nervous  system merely, until  after some years he claims a new identity  (that  of American  pro­ fessor)  and  is free to carry  on  "insect-like activity" in  a "Cemetery  of  Shells." His Canadian years, his years as a nervous system, expose him to shock and psychic reduction  and  tragedy.  Canada, projected  from  the  author's  experience  there, is the book's synecdoche for limbo, a frigid province remote from a forgotten sun.
This novel about Canada-Canada as experienced by a stranded  Martian­ derives its insidious power from the recognition it elicits that we all to some extent share  that  condition. This  recognition emanates from  chilling  crystals embedded in the intimate  texture of the prose. When you are nobody, nowhere, arrived out of nowhere,  unknown,  then  anything  at  all that  touches  your attention  does so with  uncanny   aggressiveness. A  squirrel  for  instance  is  neither  an  entrancing fellow-creature,  as for a child, nor  a frisking detail in  the  continuum  of things, as for the urbanite,  nor a reveller on the largest mown lawns he has ever seen, as for the Varsity freshman, nor even a professional problem, as for the rodent con­ trol operator.  No, it is something suddenly perceived staring "with one large pop­ eye through  the window, his head,  like a  neolithic axe-head,  pressed against the glass, standing on his hind legs":  an alarming apparition  that does not recur.
These  moments of hallucinatory  encounter  we have all experienced  when we are most wholly cut off from all we normally are: in our dreams. Self Condemned
is like an  immense  bad  dream -the  psychedelic fan  would say a bad  trip­ implacable,  engulfing, unnervingly  paced, voices and  blurs and  acts of  madness and  over  and  over those moments of eerily heightened  awareness, so  randomly related to what is there to be aware of:  the vertigo of a man without an identity on which he can rely. A distinguished critic not long after its publication assured the readers of an American  journal that Toronto  was not in fact like that at all. He  wryly suggested that  they  consider  the  testimony of  one  who  merely lived there. Quite:  no place is like that if you live there.
But who,  Lewis would  ask  (had  asked repeatedly since 1910)  -who really lives anywhere?  No one does who lives, as Lewis did, in his mind, accumulating sharp  acts of elaborated  perception. The  mind  can always demand  an order  of sense to which the real is unequal.  Lewis exploited this situation, one might say, all his life:  it gave him reasons to be active:  "Most  of my books," he wrote in
1940, "are  merely a protest against Anglo-Saxon civilization, which puts so many obstacles in the way of the artist."  He had been some time discovering these ob-

8

THE  LAST EUROPEAN



stacles. "I started  life as what is called a 'revolutionary' ... : a man of the tabula rasa. I thought  everything could be wiped out in a day, and rebuilt nearer to the heart's  desire. I  designed an entirely new London  for instance."  You can make these rapid  changes in your mind, as fast as you can whisk your thoughts about. Outside  your mind  you cannot.  It  was not merely Anglo-Saxon civilization that was recalcitrant,  not merely the sluggish inhabitants  of London,  glancing  com­ fortably  at  the Albert  Memorial.  It  was reality, the created  actual:   that  against which the hand bumps, or the head.
He thought  not, however;  he tended to suppose every named  thing, every en­ countered  distraction,  as provisional as the  painter's  reputation. So his  fictions specialize in dismissals of reality:  in voids where people like the Communists of The   Revenge  for Love  are  designing  wholly new Londons  (a  capitalist  hung from  each lamp-post)   or painting  wholly new Van  Goghs  (since  his tricks, au­ thenticated  by bought experts, will sell);  or where Vincent  Penhale in The  Vul­ gar  Streak  is making  for himself a  new self, supported  by  new  money,  which though skilfully made in the basement is every bit as "real" as the output  of the Royal Mint.  And  the texture of his novels, right  from  T arr onward,  was made up  of  details  like that  hallucinatory  squirrel,  fixed on  the  page  with  arbitrary irrelevance.
This was a habit of mind appropriate  to painting, where one may elaborate a passage which the eye may choose to pause on or not, or which may lie in wait to gratify  the  ripe seeker after  local felicities. In  prose, which  exacts sequential attention,  it  frequently  ministered  to  clutter,  a  vice of style. The  painter  of a squirrel, his mind stocked with shapes, may well elaborate its skull's resemblance to a neolithic axe-head.  The  describer of a squirrel impedes attention  by such a remark; it takes us away from the squirrel. The describer however of a squirrel presented  by a  state  of semi-dream,  a squirrel  not  part  of nature's  continuum but thrust against the consciousness of a man deprived of any scale of familiarity, can by invoking the axe-head and the pop-eye touch on the nearly primitive ter­ rors of such an apparition.
And this was Lewis's feat in Self Condemned, to discover the use of his manner­ isms:  to manage  with their aid that  the provincial banal should  menace like an apparition,  and  that  a man should plausibly be driven mad  by it. He had often patrolled  the  borders  of madness before. His  previous  novels  had  repeatedly plunged  into  vertigo:  the duel in T arr, for instance, or  the killing of the civil guard  in The   Revenge  for Love.  Their  notation  for vertigo is a sudden slowing­ down  of  time, in  which  particulars  follow one  another  at  molasses speed and

9

THE LAST EUROPEAN



with stroboscopic vividness. People  are tricked  into such abysses by misfortune, or by a presumptuous disregard  for the rules of the communal game.  The  books are controlled  by a theory  about  the communal: that  it is a game,  beset with savage penalties,  and  a rather  silly game  because it is controlled  by silly people. The losers, like  Victor  Stamp in  The  Revenge for Love, have  not  mastered   the  game,  as Lewis never  quite  mastered  the painting game  (he  could  paint,  but  that  was only part  of the game,  and  not the most important part).
Self Condemned, however,  is not  about  a game.  It  is about  the  meaning of identity,   amid   the  great   convulsions  that   render   meaningless   millions  of  lives. And  it does not  contain  an  episode of vertigo;  it is from  end  to end  a prolonged vertigo,  a slow-motion   picture  of very little  happening, appraising the  power  of that  very  little  by its  very slowness to destroy  Rene  Harding implacably. When near  the end  he is shown  his wife on a morgue slab he sees her much  as the squir­ rel was seen:   "Top-most was the  bloodstained head  of Hester,  lying on  its side. The  poor  hair  was full  of mud,  which  flattened  it  upon  the skull. Her  eye pro­ truded: it was strange  it should  still have  the strength  to go on peering on in the darkness." This  is a  moment   of  appalling, disorienting shock;  the  nauseous  in­ tensity of its random detail  (a  corpse as still life)  is evidently right. But in being continuous with  the  texture  of so much  else in the book it  clarifies the nature of the  book's  less lurid   passages:   they  document the  continuous disorientation of the  political  prisoner,  the  man  displaced,  the survivor  (there have been millions)  of a community elsewhere in space  or mislaid in time:  a nightmare state of being no-one  nowhere.  Everyone  alive today  knows something about  this. The  break-up of  Europe,  the  subsequent  great   privations  and   migrations, transposed   whole peoples  into  a sort  of life-long  Momaco.



MoMACO,  THE   SLOW-MOTION CITY,  was   made  out   of Lewis's experience  of Toronto, as later  Third City in The Human Age was made out  of his experience  of post-war  London. Both are  places of exile constructed by the imagination out  of inhabited places, as though  the imagination were insisting that  exile,  since  the  war,  has  entered  into  the  very  stuff  of  human  experience. And  this is what  we are explicitly  told early in Self Condemned, when during  the last pre-war  summer  Rene  visits his friend  Parkinson:

Both  of them  knew  that  this was the  last  year of an  epoch,  and  that  such  men  as themselves  could   never  exist  on  earth   again.... They   knew  that   as  far  as  that quiet,  unmolested elect  life was concerned, they were  both  condemned to death:

10

THE  LAST EUROPEAN



that  the  chronological  future  was, in  fact,  a  future life,  about  which  they both felt very dubious. They might survive as phantasms  in a future  England:  or they might learn to live in some other way.

This  points  forward to The  Human  Age, a book  about  life experienced as a  fu­ ture  life. If it also points forward to  Momaco, that  is because  such  a future, one no European can  inhabit, already  exists on the  western side of the waters. Cana­ dians  are  apt  to  find  the  Momaco   details  implausible  -icicles  for  instance  six feet long  and  as thick  as a  man's  arm-as  though   the  country  were somehow being  misrepresented. But  Lewis  was  recreating the  paranoia of  exile;  and  one does see such  icicles sometimes,  even  in Toronto.
John Ruskin,  obsessed with  the  deterioration of all things,  lamented once that
the  very Alps grew shabby,  their  snow-caps  exiguous,  their  flanks grey and  bare. This  remark   was  seized  on  as evidence  of his  madness,  until  research  disclosed that  it  was  perfecdy  true.  There had  been  a long  cycle of scanty  precipitation. Ruskin's  emotional obsessions had  not  deformed  his vision of the  Alps, but  had shown  him  the  Alps as Lewis saw the squirrel,  abstracted from  habitual schemes of reference  which  tell men year after  year that  Alps are splendid  or that squirrels are  jaunty.  A  climatologist  makes  a  similar  abstraction, and  notices  among  the Alps the same  phenomena Ruskin  did. But the climatologist's  observations do not disturb  us;  Ruskin's do.  We  do  not  trust  a man  whose  passions arm  his vision. Yet we heed  a man  whose method  replaces  vision, even when  he brings the same news the obsessed man  does. We say the obsessed man's  facts must be wrong; we say this to exorcise his obsession, which  we fear is insidious.
A cold "as  impossible  to keep out  as radium," cold that  "walked  through  your heart,  it dissolved your  kidney,  it flashed  down  your  marrow and  made  an icicle of your coccyx"; a morning light  that  "seems to bang  you in the face, as it glares in at the window"; a newspaper  clipping  about  a boy's eyeball pierced by a splin­ ter  of ice;  tears  caught  by the  wind  "as  they  came  over  the  rim of the eyeball"  and  dashed  against  the  wayfarer's shoulder:  these observations, individually ac­ curate,  limn  a felt  hostility:  the  winter  not  indifferendy  there  but  actively male­ volent.  It  was  his sense of  being  menaced   that  shaped  Lewis's  perception, that  shapes  Rene's.  And  Lewis felt menaced  -by the seasons as by everything  else­ because  he was  menaced; he was menaced  by  annihilation. By a mere change  of state,  by translation in wartime across a body of  water,  Wyndham Lewis, painter, satirist,  pamphleteer, Enemy,  had  been  reduced  to virtual non-existence.
There would  seem to  have  been  no better  demonstration of his life-long  thesis that  the  human world,  identity  itself, is precarious, provisional: image  that  un-

II

THE LAST EUROPEAN



sleeping  intellect,   that   acetylene   will, still  blazing  but  rendered irrelevant,  dis­ regarded by professional  custodians  of the life of the  mind,  leafing  their  lecture­ notes  among  the  elms  and  the  squirrels  a mile  away! So little  does it  take -a mere  switching-off   of  attention-to  annihilate worlds.  But  something  of  more moment   was  going  forward   than   one  ignored  painter's privations.  His  troubles were  an  historical   paradigm. Midway  through his first  summer  in  Toronto he wrote to T. Sturge  Moore :

How calm those days were before the epoch of wars and  social revolution, when you used to sit on one side of your work-table and  I on the other, and we would talk-with  trees and  creepers  of  the  placid  Hampstead  domesticity beyond the windows, and  you  used to  grunt  with  a  philosophic  despondence  I  greatly  en­ joyed. It was the last days of the Victorian  world of artificial peacefulness-of  the R.S.P.C.A.  and  London  Bobbies, of "slumming"  and  Buzzards cakes. As at  that time I had  never heard of anything else, it seemed to my young mind in the order of nature.  You-I  suppose-knew it was all like the stunt  of an illusionist. You taught  me many things. But you never taught  me that.  I first discovered  about it in I 9I 4-with  growing surprise  and  disgust.

This  rhymes  with  the  doomed  communion of Rene  and  Parkinson  on the eve of a second  war.  The  full import  of the discovery  Lewis recalls making  in I 9I 4 did not  come  home  to  him  until  I94I. For  years he had  seen the  destruction of old illusions as opportunity for a new illusionist  ("I designed  an entirely  new London for instance") .
Between   I9I4   and   I945  millions  of  Europeans made  such  a  discovery.  The New  World  has  never  had  to  make  it.  The  New  World  has  tended  to suppose that  the order  of nature does dominate its arrangements, that  its opening  arms of welcome  symbolize   (however   scorched   the  earth   elsewhere)   access  to  all  that man's  heart  can  desire:   mountains and  fir-trees,  water  and  wheat  and  sunlight. Do  men  need  men?  Do  they  need  cities? The  New  World  inclines  to think  not. Her  sage  is Thoreau. She  feels that  her  cities are  her  problem  areas;  that  some economic  process, no doubt  related  to the  concentrations of capital,  makes them exist and  metabolize thought and  wealth; but that  they turn  cancerous.
But  Europe is a place  of cities, and  the  reliance  of a Wyndham Lewis on  his city is so  complex  that  a  city on  a  lower  plane  of organization than  London's deprived  him  virtually  of existence.  He  was not like the millions whose gratitude has confirmed  the New World  in its hypotheses, who deprived  by war and famine of  everything  took  life and  hope  from  the  gift of elements  in  an  elemental  con­ tinent.   It was  not  for  elements  that   he  expressed  so strident a  hunger  but  for

12

THE LAST EUROPEAN



community: for  all  that   can  cross neither  frontiers  nor  oceans: the  established web of relationships, indescribably fragile,  that  made  his life as painter and  writer possible. Even  his enmities  were such  relationships.
Despite  many  acts of particular kindness  such  a life was impossible  to him  in New York  and  equally  impossible in Toronto, for he had  left behind  what it is to be a European, and  so stepped  out  of himself. He stepped  into  the kind of  night­ mare  for  which  he had  been  all his life perfecting  the  notation:  phenomena be­ come  apparitions, charged  with  random detail.  Back in  England  (and  blind)   he applied   that   notation   to  the  Canadian  experience: Self  Condemned. Then   he generalized  the case and  reapplied  it; he repeated the fictive experiment of cutting  a man  loose from  Europe, but  this time set him,  as  Rene  Harding had  not been set, in alliance  with  the  centres  of power.  The centres of power  were successively the  Bailiff  and  Sammael, and  the  book  was  The   Human Age.  It showed  that power  was not  the  nutriment Rene's  soul  perished  for lack of. It  also opened  up theological  issues Lewis was still expecting  to confront in  1956.  In  1957  he died.
Rene  Harding in  Momaco, Pullman in  Third City  and  Dis,  are  beings  ab­ stracted   from  accustomed   spaces  and  times  and  so from  identity.   A  people  in­ creasingly  indifferent  to  accustomed  spaces  and   times,  increasingly migrant, increasingly  disrooted,  is both  growing  away  from  the  experience of those books and  unwittingly reliving  that  experience.  Little symptomatic adjustments occur: the  arts,  for  instance,  turn  anonymous, as we learn  that  the TV  commercial, not the  play  with  a known  author  or the  painting  validated  by some master's  signa­  ture,  is the  imaginative focus  of our  culture. The  bicycle chain  swings in  a su­ burban street.  An eye is gouged  out.  Crowds  walk  past death  indifferently.
It was  partly  in  such  a  world,  familiar to  us, that  Lewis  (prompted by  his
demon)  lived  all his life, but  partly  in an  older  Europe. When  he came  to  Can­ ada,  the  last  European, he  came  to  a future which  gratified   his demon  but  in which  he  was  miserable.  In  provisional  Canada, a Canadian city with  its  mini­ mal  communal bonds, its bleak  continuities and  nearly  unnoticed  convolutions  of police-court  violence,  prefigured  a human future into  which  Canada has  passed with a minimum of post-war  fuss. One thing we can learn from Wyndham Lewis's misery is the nature of the quiet  transmutation the very assumptions  of civilization have  undergone, which  today  makes  the  cultural  Arctic he barely  survived  seem normal  and  habitable everywhere.


THE OUTLOOK FOR CANADIAN LITERATURE




Desmond  Pacey







E.OVER   A  QUARTER OF  A  CENTURY now, I have  been engaged intermittently  in the task of publicly taking the pulse of Canadian litera­
ture. I am not quite so naive as to think that  my activity in this regard has been of any  particular  help either  to  the  patient  or to the  public, but it has been  a source of innocent  amusement  for  me, and  at  least  I  have  the satisfaction  of knowing that  the patient  is in  rather  better  health  than  when  my diagnosis  be­ gan. This is a statement  which not all doctors could make with equal assurance.
It was in December rgg8  that I made my first and very tentative examination.
I had  a few months before arrived  in Cambridge,  England,  as a Research  Stu­ dent in English Literature.  Although  I had  only lived in Canada  seven  years, I had  conceived a deep love for  the  country  and  a considerable  although  by no means  profound  admiration  for  its literature.  I  was  annoyed  to  find  that  my fellow-students at  Cambridge  were not only ignorant  of a  Canadian literature, but pretended  to believe that it did not exist. I therefore wrote, and  published in The  Cambridge  Review,  an  article optimistically  entitled  "At  Last-A  Cana­  dian Literature". There  was no question mark after that  title:  it was an arrogant  assertion, rather  than a modest question, and the symptom, no doubt, of a youth­ ful  brashness  which  I  have  not  even  yet  succeeded  in  eliminating  from  my personality.
The  theme of that  first article was that  after  a long  period of derivativeness, Canadian literature  was at last finding distinctive voices and distinctive modes of
utterance.  I  based my case largely on the  poetry of E.  J. Pratt  and  the novels
and  stories of  Morley  Callaghan; both  of  these  writers  I  had  come  to  know

THE OUTLOOK FOR  CANADIAN LITERATURE



personally  during my student days  at  the  University  of Toronto. The case  was certainly  not  argued  very cogently,  for  there  were  virtually  no  Canadian  books available  to me in Cambridge, and  I had  to write  almost  entirely  from  memory.
The  reception  of that  article  was not so enthusiastic  as to determine me to play
permanently the  role, recently  attributed to me  by The  Times Literary  Supple ment, of "the  distinguished  apologist  for Canadian literature", and  I might  well have  lost all interest  in  the subject  had  it  not  been  for  an  incident  in  my early teaching  career  at  Brandon College.  The   University  of  Manitoba at  that   time had  a series of  province-wide radio  programmes known  as "The University   on the Air",  and  Brandon College had  been  assigned  a group  of these  programmes with  the sub-title  "Manitoba Sketches". I was  asked  to do  a fifteen-minute talk on "Manitoba in Literature", and  as the  only  Manitoba author I had  ever read was Frederick  Philip  Grove,  I devoted  the  whole  programme to his novels. One thing  led  to  another: the  editor  of the  Manitoba Arts  Review asked  me  to  de­ velop the  radio  talk into  an  article; Dr.  Lome  Pierce  of the  Ryerson  Press  read the article  and  asked me to expand  it into  a book;  and  so my career  as a  Cana­ dian  literary  critic  was launched.
When  I began  my study  of Canadian literature, two much  more  distinguished men  were also -quite  unknown  to me-making  their  first systematic examina­
tions of it. I refer to the late  E. K. Brown  and  to A. J. M. Smith,  both  of whom
published  very  important books on  the  subject  in  1943.  As far  as the  study  of Canadian literature is concerned, the  decisive  turning point  in  my opinion  was the publication in that  year of Brown's  On  Canadian Poetry  and  of Smith's Book of Canadian Poetry.  Neither  of these  men  could  be charged   with  parochialism, narrow  nationalism, or special  pleading,  since both,  although of Canadian origin, had  received  their  postgraduate training at  great  overseas  universities  and  had taken  up important posts in American universities-Brown  at  the  University  of Chicago,  and  Smith  at  Michigan State.




AT THAT  TIME  the  study  of  Canadian literature was  far from  being  academically respectable. A few universities  included  a small  amount of Canadian writing  in their  literary  courses, but  there  were  no full-year  under­ graduate courses in  the  subject,  still less any  graduate courses,  and  still  less any professors of English  who made  Canadian literature their  specialty. The situation has changed  radically  in the past two decades, and it is changing so rapidly  today

THE OUTLOOK FOR CANADIAN LITERATURE



that  one begins to wonder  whether  the  pendulum  may  not swing too far.  The number  of students  taking  courses in  Canadian  literature  in our  universities is already large, and shows no sign of abating.  There  are approximately  two  hun­ dred and sixty such students  this year  ( 1965-66)  at U.N.B.,  and  I am  told  that there are four hundred  and fifty at the University of Western Ontario, well over a hundred  at the University of Alberta,  and over two hundred  at the University of British Columbia.  Even the University of Toronto,  which in my  day allowed us about  two weeks for a hasty glimpse of Canadian  literature  at  the end  of a course rather  misleadingly called "American  and  Canadian  Literature", has re­ cently initiated,  I understand,  a full undergraduate course in  the subject.
Furthermore, the Americans, who have so assiduously cultivated  English and American  literature,  are now looking for fresh fields to conquer-and many  of them are looking over our border. An Institute of Canadian Studies was recently set up at  the University of Vermont,  and  Canadian literature  is being studied, usually in  the larger  context of the literature  of the  Commonwealth,  at several other American  universities, notably Texas and  Pennsylvania. Another symptom of this growing American interest in our literature  is the recent establishment of a  Commonwealth   Literature   group  in  the  Modem   Language   Association  of America. This trend is sure to continue  and accelerate.
There  are yet other signs that the study of Canadian literature  has become academically  respectable. One  was the foundation  in  1959 at  the University of British Columbia  of the  magazine  Canadian Literature, which,  under  the  dis­ tinguished  editorship  of George Woodcock, has maintained  a  high  standard of literary history, criticism and scholarship. Another was the publication earlier this year of The   Literary  History  of Canada, a  book of  almost  a  thousand  pages issued by the University of Toronto  Press under  the  general  editorship  of Pro­ fessor Carl F. Klinck. This book is important  in itself, as it is the first truly com­ prehensive study  of its subject;  but  it  is  perhaps  even  more important for  the stimulus it is sure to provide for other, more specialized studies. Now that  at last we can all see how vast the field is,  before very long a host of busy miners will be sinking their exploratory shafts all over it.
For although  much has been accomplished in the scholarly study of Canadian literature  during  the past quarter  of a century, much  more remains to be done. There  are still no definitive studies of the main genres of Canadian  literature - of the Canadian  novel, Canadian poetry, Canadian  essays, Canadian short stories. And there are still almost no good biographical and  critical studies of individual authors, of Lampman, Carman,  Roberts, Scott, Pratt  or Leacock.

THE OUTLOOK FOR  CANADIAN LITERATURE



Another  virtually  unexplored area  is that  of Canadian travel  literature, which if traced  in  detail  from  its origins,  would  provide  us with  much  more  informa­ tion  about  our  social,  economic  and  cultural history.  Among  the  most  exciting chapters  in The Literary  History  are  those by David  Galloway  and  Victor  Hop­ wood which  deal  with  the literature of Canadian exploration. They  have opened  up  for  us a  whole  new  dimension  of our  writing,  and  extended   by  almost  two centuries  the  depth  of our  literary  tradition.
One  corner  of this area  is the study  of the  reactions  to the  Canadian scene of such  distinguished literary   visitors  as  Captain  Marryat, Charles Dickens,  Mat­ thew  Arnold, Oscar   Wilde,  Rudyard  Kipling   and   Rupert  Brooke,  and  more
recently  of English  writers such  as Wyndham Lewis and  J. B. Priestley. A study
of the  records  they  left of their  impressions  of Canada would  help  us to  under­ stand  not only this country,  but  the  country  from  which  they came.  A  little over two years ago, Mr.  Geoffrey  Keynes was kind  enough  to let me look  through his collection of the manuscript letters of Rupert Brooke, and  to read  and make  notes on those which  Brooke wrote  from  Canada. His sardonic and  often  supercilious  remarks  undoubtedly reflect the cultural poverty of our  country  at that time,  but even  more  clearly  they  reveal  the  kind  of  upper-class   English  snobbery   which made  Engishmen in those early years of this century  so suspect among  us.
Another   fruitful area  of  research  is the  reception   which  Canadian literature enjoyed  (or suffered) in Great  Britain. We speak glibly of the international repu­ tations  established   by  Haliburton, Parker, Roberts, Carman  and  Leacock, but no one has yet made  a close study  of the  precise nature and  extent of their  repu­  tations.  I spent  the academic year 1962-63  in Cambridge making  a beginning  on this study,  and  although all the  evidence  is not  yet available   I  can  offer  a  few tentative conclusions.
Firstly,  we tend  to exaggerate the  overseas vogue of these  authors. Haliburton was widely  and  enthusiastically reviewed  in  the  British  press, but  in this  respect he was a solitary  exception.  Gilbert  Parker  was never taken seriously as a novelist, and  was  judged  quite  rightly  to  be  an  entertainer rather than   a  serious  artist; Roberts had almost no British recognition as a poet, and only a brief and fairly perfunctory one  as a writer  of prose nature sketches;  Bliss Carman was the  only Canadian poet  to have  his books regularly  reviewed in the best literary  periodicals of England, but  he was always described  as a minor  poet  and  his vogue  (if that is not  too  strong  a  word)   lasted  only  for  slightly  over  a  decade; Leacock  was always  reviewed,  but  not with  any great  discernment.
To  illustrate the ironies that  turn  up in such  a study,  let me cite the first Eng-

THE OUTLOOK FOR  CANADIAN LITERATURE



lish review  of a  Leacock  book-his  Elements  of Political  Science  ( I9o6) -in the  course  of  which  the  reviewer  in  the  Athenaeum accused  Leacock  of  being unable  to see a  joke. Or  take  these  sentences  from  the  Times Literary  Supple­ ment's  review of Leacock's  Literary  Lapses  ( I910)  :

These are slight American humourous  sketches, on a great many subjects.... Mr. Leacock is not a subtle wit. He must be taken in small doses and hardly  bears  re­ perusal. But a little of him in the right mood is very comforting.

Do they not catch  perfectly  the smug  complacency of the  British intelligentsia in I 9 I o -even  to  the  failure,  still only  too  prevalent  in  the  United   Kingdom, to differentiate between  Canada and  America? It is only fair  to add,  however,  that by  I9I2, when  Sunshine  Sketches  of a Little  Town appeared, the  TLS had  dis­ covered  Mr.  Leacock's  Canadianism. The  reviewer  went  to  the  other  extreme: from  patronizing Leacock  as  an  American he switched   to  embracing  him  as  a Britisher:

His real hard  work ... is distilling sunshine. This new book is full of it-the sun­ shine of humour,  the thin keen sunshine of irony, the mellow evening sunshine of sentiment. Universal things like these are not intended  merely to pamper the pride of Imperialism.  Still, we cannot  resist a secret  joy in  the fact  that  all the  queer and  crooked  characters  that  flourish  in  maple-shaded  Mariposa ... are  British­ born.

Such  little  ironies  are  frequent. Early  in  I 929  two interesting but  admittedly imperfect novels by Canadians appeared in  England-Frederick Philip  Grove's Our  Daily  Bread and  Raymond Knister's White Narcissus. If they  had  been  re­ viewed seriously and  sympathetically in such  an influential English  weekly as the New  Stat eman  and  Nation, their  authors  might  have  been  decisively encouraged and  a  basis might  have  been  laid  for  their  English  reputations.  Instead, it  was their  bad  luck  to fall  into  the  hands  of that  supercilious  and  bad-tempered old Etonian, Cyril Connolly,  who was given eleven novels to  review  en  masse on  the eve of leaving  for  a  Spanish  holiday.  Blithely  he  dashed  off  a  review  of  which these are the  relevant  portions:

Our  Daily Bread and  White   Narcissus are  Canadian   novels. One  is soft-boiled and  the other  hard.  The  publishers are to be congratulated  on starting  a line in colonial fiction with  'a  country  which  has produced  remarkably  few  novelists of a thoughtful  quality.'  One  is a wistful little  love-story, mildly  sophisticated,  the other  a  typical family epic in  the  American  style. The  idea  is refreshing;  there must  surely  be  many  more  colonies in  which  the  necessary condition,  quoted

I8

THE OUTLOOK FOR  CANADIAN LITERATURE



above, will apply. Meanwhile  Canada  is behind Jamaica,  which has quite a good novelist within it, and a coloured expatriate  outside.
. . . These books have finished this reviewer-more than  he could do for  them­ and tomorrow  they will be left in a hotel or dropped  in the equable  Adour, while he makes his way still fleeing from simple people and those who write about them, towards the mountains  of Aragon.

Three years later  Raymond Knister  was  to die,  possibly by suicide,  certainly  in despair.



T,IE SECOND  CONCLUSION  I  would  draw  from  my study  of the reception  of Canadian literature in  England is that  our  cultural image  there is largely a function of our  political reputation. When  England was most Empire­ conscious, in the  period  from I 890  to I 9I 8, there  were  a good  many  favourable discussions of Canadian writers and  of Canadian literature generally. As Canada gradually asserted   its  independence  in  the   nineteen-twenties and   thirties,   the English  interest  in  us  proportionately declined.   Our   contribution  to  the  Allied effort in  World  War  II again  stimulated some  interest  in  our  literature, but  as we have  once  again  asserted  our  independent role the  interest  has  waned.  Only recently,  when  there  has  been  some  revival  of  imperial  sentiment in  the  terms of a  Commonwealth cultural entente, has  there  been  a  revival  of interest  on  a modest  and  tentative scale. But in spite  of all the improved systems of communi­ cation  in our  time,  Englishmen as a whole  are still ignorant of  what  Canada is really  like. The  supreme example  of  this  is the  Times Literary  Supplement re­ viewer  of  Robertson  Davies'  and  Tyrone  Guthrie's  book  about   the  Stratford Shakespearian Festival,  Twice  have  the  Trumpets  Sounded. Referring to  that  Ontario theatrical venture,  the  reviewer  wrote,  "Mr. Guthrie did  not  patronize his prairie  public.... "
But  I may  seem to be in danger  of confining  the  outlook  for  Canadian  litera­
ture  to the outlook  for the academic study  of Canadian literature. I do not mean to imply  that   the  health   of  Canadian literature depends   upon   the  amount of academic critical  scrutiny  it  is given,  but  this  is nevertheless  symptomatic of  a wider,  more  general  interest  in what  our  writers  produce.
When   he  wrote  On  Canadian  Poetry  in  1943,  E.  K.  Brown  began   with  a chapter which  is a  classic statement of  the  difficulties  which  had  traditionally plagued  Canadian literature until  that   time.  If we  consider  his statement, and see to what  extent  conditions  have improved in the twenty-odd intervening years,

19

THE  OUTLOOK FOR CANADIAN LITERATURE



I  think  you  will  agree  that   the  outlook  for  Canadian literature is  much   more hopeful  today  than  it was a generation ago.
Brown  begins  by  asserting,  somewhat defensively,  that   "there is  a  Canadian literature, often  rising  to effects of great  beauty,  but  it  has  stirred  little  interest outside  Canada.... Canadian books  may  occasionally  have  had  a  mild  impact outside  Canada;  Canadian literature has  had  none." It would  be  idle  to  pre­ tend  that   there  has  been  a  really  radical   improvement in  this  respect.  To  the authors  of international reputation whom  Brown  mentions-Haliburton,  Rob­  erts,  Parker,  Connor,  Montgomery, Service,  Leacock,   Mazo   de  la  Roche   and Morley  Callaghan-we  may  now  add   the  names  of  Ethel   Wilson,  Mordecai Richler,   James   Reaney,   Norman  Levine,  Margaret  Laurence and   (somewhat dubiously,  since  they  are  not  clearly   Canadian)  Brian   Moore   and   Malcolm  Lowry. But it is still true  to say that  these writers are  known  rather as individuals than  as parts  of a specifically Canadian tradition. For  reasons which  I have  men­ tioned,  interest  in  our  national literature, as a  distinctive   part  of  the  literature of the Commonwealth, is growing  and  will continue to grow,  but I do not believe that  the growth  will be as rapid  or as far-reaching as we might  like it to become.  Why should  the British or Americans-our most likely outside  readers-devote much  of  their  attention  to  our  literature, when  they  already   have  so  much  of their  own?  Canada is simply  not  yet an  important enough  figure  on  the  world's  stage  to command  that kind  of  interest.  The  United   States  is now  so powerful  that  the  British  feel  they  must  seek to understand her,  but  an  understanding of Canada is not,  and  is not in the  foreseeable future likely to be, high on  their  list of priorities.
To  put  my conclusion  on  this  point  briefly,  I  believe  that  the  growth  of  out­ side interest  in  Canadian literature over  the  next  generation will be  measurable but  not large.  This  means  that  we Canadians must scrutinize our own  literature, and  learn  to set  and  apply  our  own  standards of  judgment. We  have  been  too prone  in the  past  to await  the  verdict  of London  or  New  York; our  verdicts  for the foreseeable  future  will have  to be largely our own.
This  brings  us to Brown's  next  point,  which  is that  "even  within  the  national borders  the impact of Canadian books and  of Canadian literature has been  rela­ tively superficial." Here  I believe there  has been  a demonstrable improvement in the  space  of  a generation. For  a  long  time  Canadian  writers  had  to  find  their publishers  and  their  public outside  Canada; now a Canadian book can command a large  enough  audience  at  home  to make  its domestic  publication economically  viable, even on occasion  profitable.  Irving  Layton  is a good  example  of a Cana-

20

THE OUTLOOK FOR  CANADIAN LITERATURE



dian  writer  who  surv1ves almost  exclusively  by  virtue  of  his  reputation  within Canada, and  the  bulk of the sales of such  accomplished  writers  as Ethel  Wilson, Robertson  Davies,  Hugh  MacLennan and  Earle  Birney  are  transacted in  Cana­ dian  bookstores.  There is a tremendous voluntary enthusiasm for  Canadian books among  Canadian students, and  among  a  growing  number of  Canadian adults.  I have  some  evidence  that   this  conclusion  is not  merely  the  result  of  my  own prejudices: Norman LcYine, who is serving  this year as writer in residence  at the University  of New Brunswick  after  sixteen  years of voluntary  exile in the  United  Kingdom, tells me  that  he finds  an  almost  miraculous  change  for  the  better  in the Canadian interest  in books and  writers.
Brown's  third  major  obstacle  to  the  development of  a  Canadian literature is what  he calls "the  colonial spirit." "A colony," he says, "lacks the spiritual energy to  rise above  routine" and  "it  lacks  this  energy  because  it  does  not  adequately believe in itself." He  goes on:

It applies  to what  it  has standards  which  are  imported,  and  therefore  artificial and  distorting. It sets the great  good place not in its present,  nor in its past  nor in its future, but somewhere outside its own borders, somewhere beyond its own possibilities.... It is clear that  those who are content  with  this attitude  will seek the best in jam and toffee, from beyond the ocean. That  anything Canadian  could be supremely good would never enter their heads.... Canada  has no distinct flag, and  no single distinct anthem  although  Mr.  Mackenzie King  paused on the very brink of asserting the latter;  the relations between the Canadian Provinces and the federal government  are subject to review in London;  and  the Judicial  Committee of the  Privy Council,  also in London,  is our  highest court.  But Canada  has her own ministers  in  foreign  countries,  makes  treaties  without  reference  to  Britain, and declares, or refuses to declare, war by the instrument  of her own Parliament. Is  it  any  wonder  that  Canadian   thinking  about  Canada   is confused ... ? The average English Canadian  would  still like to have it both  ways and  is irritated, or nonplussed, by the  demand  that  he make  a resolute choice;  at  heart  he does not know whether  Canada  or the  Empire  is his supreme  political value.

Our  first reaction, on re-reading those words a scant  generation after  they were written, is to be heartened by the progress that  we have made.  We do have a flag, we shall soon  have  an  anthem, and  for  better  or for  worse  we have  cut  almost all the imperial ties. On  second  thought, however,  we may  wonder  whether   we have  merely  replaced  one  dependence with  another: are  we not  now  in  danger of  becoming   a  mere   appendage  of  the   United   States?   Temperamentally  an optimist,  I do not think  so. Although we have  yet far  to go in fully defining  and valuing  our  Canadian identity,  I believe that  we are  on  that  road,  and  that  as

21

THE OUTLOOK FOR CANADIAN LITERATURE



we clarify  our  national goals our  literature will at  once  reflect  and  guide  us  to­ wards  those objectives.  vVe are far  more  ready  today  than  we were a generation ago to judge  what  we have  by our  own standards, to put,  for  example, our  own imprimatur upon  our writers  rather  than  to await  the  judgment of critics beyond our  borders.  As The  Times Literary  Supplement  noted  of Canadian criticism  in its recent  Commonwealth issue, we are  no  longer  on  the  defensive:   we see our own strength and  weakness and  neither boast of the one nor grovel over the other.  We are at least approaching that  state of cultural maturity in which  we are ready to see ourselves steadily  and  see ourselves whole.
The  next  obstacle  to  the  development of  good  Canadian  literature cited  by
Brown  is the spirit  of the  frontier,  or its afterglow.  He  explains  this  as follows:

Most Canadians  live at some distance from anything  that could even in the loosest terms be known as a material  frontier;  but  the standards  which  the frontier-life applied  are  still  current,  if  disguised. Books are  a  luxury  on  the  frontier;   and writers are an anomaly. On  the frontier  a man is mainly  judged by what  he can do to bring his immediate  environment  quickly and  visibly under  the control  of society. No nation is more practical  than  ours.... The  uneasiness in the  presence of the contemplative or aesthetic is to be ascribed to the frontier  feeling that  these are luxuries which should  not be sought at a time when  there  is a tacit  contract that  everyone should be doing his share in the common  effort to build the  mate­ rial structure  of a nation.  That  a  poem or a statue  or a  metaphysic  could  con­ tribute  to the fabric of a nation is not believed.

This  passage  now  has an  even  more  old-fashioned ring  than  Brown's  descrip­ tion of our  political  dependence upon  Britain.  Theatres, art  galleries, and centres for  the  performing arts  have  sprung up  all  over  the  country;  poets  read   their works to large and  enthusiastic  audiences  in every major  city from  coast to coast;  our  writers   and   artists  are  generously   provided   with  fellowships,  medals   and travel  grants  by the  Canada Council; resident  painters, sculptors,  musicians  and writers  are  becoming  a commonplace feature of our  universities.  We  have  come to realize that  the  quality  of our  lives and  the prestige of our  nation  depend   just as  much  on  our  art  and  culture as  upon  our  science  and  technology,  and  we manifest  an almost frantic  desire to make up for our  long neglect of things of the mind  and  the spirit.  The  Canada of the post-Massey  Report  era is no longer  con­ tent  to be a frontier  society.
We  are  not content  to be -but there  are certain  senses in which  we still are, for all our  frantic  efforts to progress.  The  interest  in literature in  particular and the  arts in general  is still confined  to a relatively  small  group  of our  population.

22

THE  OUTLOOK FOR CANADIAN LITERATURE



The   theatres   and   art  galleries  have  been  built,  but  by  the  great   mass  of  the population they  are  regarded  as exotic growths.  In  many  cities the  theatres  have trouble  maintaining themselves,  and  the  art  galleries  either  fail  to  draw  many visitors or draw  them  for the wrong  reasons-for such  reasons  as social  prestige and  the desire to display one's  new dress or hat.  Of  more  direct  relevance  to the welfare  of Canadian literature is the  generally  low cultural and  intellectual level of our  newspapers,   magazines,  radio  and  television  programmes. In  a  country like England, a serious writer  can  augment his income  by writing  occasional  re­ views or essays for such newspapers  as The  Observer, The  Sunday Times, or The Guardian, or for such  magazines  as The New  Statesman and  Nation, The  Spec­  tator, or The  Listener. We have  no such  newspapers  or magazines in this country.  The  book pages of even our  best newspapers are naive and clumsy in comparison, and  the  fees  they  pay  for  reviewing  are  ridiculously  low.  Although  Saturday Night  is making  a real effort to play a role in Canada similar to that  of The  New Statesman and  The  Spectator, its circulation is still so relatively small  that  it can­  not  exercise  the  kind  of  influence  or  command  the  prestige  which  would  en­ courage  our  best  writers  to contribute frequently  to  it.  And  of course  when  we look  at  radio  and  television  we  realize  only  too  keenly  that   we  have  not  fully outgrown  the frontier  mentality. Despite  all the  heroic  efforts  of the  C.B.C.,  the intellectual level of ninety-five  percent  of our  television and  radio  programmes is moromc.
We  have  not  yet, then,  really  outgrown the  malign  influence  of  the  frontier spirit,  although we  have  made  some  demonstrable progress.  A  more  thorough­ going  transformation  has  occurred   in  the  space  of  a  single  generation  to  the puritanism which  Brown  lists next  among  the  obstacles  to  our  literary  develop­ ment.  Canadian Puritanism, says Brown,  "allows  to the  artist  no function  except watering   down  moral  ideas  of  an  orthodox  kind  into  a  solution   attractive  to minds  not  keen  enough  to study  the  ideas  in  more  abstract  presentations." No one can  deny  that  puritanism is still a force amongst  us, but  it has lost its power to control  the  media  of communication. Books  which  were  in  trouble  with  the censors  thirty  or  so years  ago,  such  as  Frederick  Philip  Grove's  Settlers  of the Marsh  or  Morley  Callaghan's Such  is  my  Beloved,  now seem  innocuous, almost naive,  beside some  of the  poems  of  Irving  Layton  and  Leonard   Cohen  or such recent  Canadian novels as Hugh  Hood's  White Figure, White Ground  and  Ste­ phen  Vizinczey's  In  Praise of  Older  Women. There is virtually  no subject  that  a Canadian writer  cannot  discuss frankly  today.
The  final obstacle  which  Brown  mentions,  regionalism,  I have  never  been able

THE OUTLOOK FOR CANADIAN LITERATURE



to see as an obstacle. He admits that  regionalist art may have its virtues, particu­
larly that of accuracy, but he asserts:

In  the  end,  however,  regionalist  art  will fail  because  it stresses the  superficial  and the  peculiar   at  the  expense,  at  least,  if  not  to  the  exclusion,  of  the  fundamental and  universal.  The  advent  of regionalism  may  be  welcomed  with  reservations   as a stage  through which  it may  be well for  us to pass, as a discipline  and  a  purga­ tion.  But  if we are  to  pass through it,  the  coming  of great  books will be  delayed beyond  the  lifetime  of anyone  now  living.

What  worries me about  the  logic of Brown's  argument  is his assumption  that regional accuracy and universal validity are incompatible.  Are they incompatible in the Irish poetry of Yeats, or the Wessex novels of Thomas  Hardy, or the Rus­ sian  plays of Chekhov? Rather  than  seeing the strong  regional  particularities  of this country  as an  obstacle to great  art,  I see them  as an  advantage-an ad­ vantage  which  we only began  to exploit in  the  poetry of  Carman,  Lampman, Roberts and Scott and the novels of Grove and  MacLennan. A regional novel or poem may be merely a pretty idyll; and  too  many of ours have been only that. But it may also be a work which  reveals  the  basic stuff of human  nature  by a penetrating  study  of the here  and  now,  and  that  is what  I  hope  much  of our literature  may become.
Brown summarized  his account of the difficulties confronting  Canadian  litera­ ture  in I 943 with  this sad sentence:  "What I  have  been attempting  to  suggest with as little heat  or  bitterness as possible is that  in  this country  the  plight  of literature  is a painful one." I do not think that any honest writer could subscribe to this verdict today. The  life of the artist is always a painful  one, but  the  pain today in this country is the inner torment caused by the effort at creation, and the anxiety generated  by the apparent  drift of the world towards  nuclear  war. The specifically Canadian  environment  is not hostile to the writer, although it may in some areas still be indifferent  to him. Gradually,  all our  traditional  excuses for inaction  and lethargy are being removed.


W. HAVE  TODAY  a literature  which  is still not great  by world standards,  but which is lively and  interesting. Poets such as Layton,  Rea­
ney, Mandel,  Birney, Jones, Souster and  Nowlan are as productive and as skilful as any comparable group writing in the English-speaking world, and prose writers such as MacLennan, Frye, McLuhan,  Richler,  Moore,  Davies, Wilson, Kreisel

THE OUTLOOK FOR CANADIAN LITERATURE



and  Levine  are  for  the  first  time  in  our  history  as plentiful  and  as dextrous  as our  poets. Every  year sees the emergence  of new talents,  so that  today,  again  for the first time in our  history, we have  productive writers in every age group.  Only in drama  is there  still a dearth  of activity.  Our  great  distances  and  our  scattered population have  so far  been  almost  insuperable barriers  to the  growth  of an  in­ digenous theatre and  theatre literature, but  the theatres  which  have been recently built  in  almost  all our  major  cities  are  bound -since art  like  nature  abhors  a vacuum-to  stimulate  playwriting in  the  not  too  distant   future.  Already   the inimitable  James  Reaney  has made  a promising  start.
To  return  to my original  metaphor, my diagnosis  and  prognosis  must  be that the patient  is healthy  and  is likely so to continue for the foreseeable  future. Cana­ dian  writers  have a growingly  eager  audience, and  the old obstacles to our literary  development have  virtually  disappeared. Whether or not my optimism  is  justified will depend   upon  factors  beyond  our  national control:  upon  the  diligence  and talent  of  writers  who  are  born  amongst   us,  and  upon   the  survival   of  human civilization  in this anxious  atomic  age.


WINTER AND
THE NIGHT-PEOPLE



William H. New






TE Fn<ST  SIXTY  PAGES of  Return  of the  Sphinx  ore among the worst that  Hugh  MacLennan has written. A blunt  statement: but a book like this  one,  which  contends  even  in  fiction  with  the  thorniest   political  problem  in Canada today,  is bound  to arouse  blunt  statements. It is not  paradoxical, I hope, to add  that  this is in  many  ways MacLennan's most important novel too, which makes  the  faults  in  it  seem  larger  than  under  other  circumstances they  would. The  novel emerges  not only out  of his earlier  works and  relates  to them  by both theme  and  imagery; it  also demonstrates a  distinct  advancement. What  before had  been  nebulous  and  sometimes  even  noncommittal in  the  resolution  to  his works  has here  been extended  into  a tragic  vision -for Canada, for the charac­ ters, and  for  the world.
Ambitious?   Yes.  Worthwhile? Indeed,  yes. But  successful  only  on  occasion. Briefly, the  novel  concerns  the  conflict  that  assails Alan  Ainslie, federal  Minister of Culture in a cabinet  that  seems to have  both  Diefenbaker and  Pearson  figures in  it  (a  situation ripe  with  fictional  promise  in its own  right,  but  by the  way). His French-Canadian wife has been killed by a truck overturning in a freak  acci­ dent; his daughter, Chantal, is in love with  his best friend,  an emigrant  French­ man  near  his own  age named  Gabriel  Fleury; and  his son, Daniel, tortured by a Jansenist schooling  and  by awakening sexual  urges, torn  between  respect  for  his gentle father and  antagonism towards  all things and  all people not French  Cana­ dian   and  of  another  generation, is  becoming   more  and  more  involved  in  the Separatist cause.  For  Alan  the problem  is only partly  a political one;  much  more so is it  emotional  -at a  national   level, where  his  commitment  to the  cause  of Confederation is both deep and  honest, and  at a personal  level, where his memory  of  past  happiness  with  his wife is so strong  that  he  has  really  lost contact  with the world  that  is growing  up, here  and  now, around  him. The  two are obviously

WINTER AND THE NIGHT-PEOPLE



symbolically  related.  Alan's  tragedy  is that  he does not recognize what  is happen­ ing  until  it is too late,  until  events  have  taken  place  that  divide  him  irrevocably from  his position  in government and  effectively from  his children. His  world,  at the  end  of the  novel, is different  from  the  one  he has seen  at  the  beginning,  al­ though  in the  background there  still broods a hint  of the ideal world which  Alan has  been  conscious  of  and  which  MacLennan himself  has  been  concerned  with throughout all of his fiction.
\Ve have met these characters before in MacLennan's work. Chantal, idealistic,
young  and  therefore  confident,  at  once sophisticated and  naive,  intelligent, cap­ able,  and   determined,  has  under   different   guise  appeared  as  Penny  Wain   in Barometer  Rising  and  Sally Martell  in The Watch that  Ends  the Night. She per­ forms  much   the  same  function here-the  representative of  the  realization   of young love-but she is less of a stick figure than  the other  two and so more satis­ factory  as  a  character. Daniel  has  developed  out  of  Marius  Tallard, the  young rebel  and   Oedipally-motivated father-hater  in  Two  Solitudes, but  again  he  is more  rounded   and  more  credible.  \Vhereas  Marius had  been shallowly  drawn, a shadow  figure  defeated  as much  by his own  character as by the  System  he was reacting  against,  Daniel  is by contrast  brimful with talent  and  possibilities. Tragic again  is his commitment to an  increasingly  narrowing cause, for the mistakes  he makes  in  judgment cease to be the  excusable sins of youth  when  they  affect  the life of the  nation  itself.
Alan  Ainslie is, of course, quite  literally  the boy Alan  (MacNeil) Ainslie from Each  Man's Son, now grown  up-trying, as so many  MacLennan characters do, to  forget  his  origins  (wandering father, murdered mother),  and  attempting  by this means  to attach  himself  and  his family  to a kind  of order  it has never really been  his  to  know.  We  have  seen  this  in  Neil  Macrae in  Barometer  Rising, in Jerome  Martell, and  even   to some extent  in Paul Tallard. In all the earlier  books MacLennan has implied  that  the order  is achievable, that  the characters have conquered   the  major  obstacles  in the  way of their  happiness.  But in fact  there  is always  another   note  present   as  well,  which,   in  imagery   involving  winter   and darkness,  hints  of isolation  and  of further conflict  yet to come.  Neil  and  Penny, for  example,   are  reunited   by  the  end  of  Barometer   Rising,  and  the  Canadian nation  they  represent  has  severed  itself successfully from  the  nineteenth-century control  of Great  Britain.  But the language is not altogether joyful:  "They  paused on  the  narrow,  snow-banked  platform   and   watched   the  lights  of  the  coaches disappear around the next  curve  and  heard  the dying echoes of the whistle rever­ berating  through the forest." Similarly, Two Solitudes  ends with Paul Tallard and

WINTER  AND THE NIGHT-PEOPLE



Heather  Methuen together,  with  autumn golden,  and  yet  things  are  not  really stable: "Only in the far north  on the tundra was the usual process of life abruptly fractured"; the  nation  is going  into  war,  "knowing against  her  will that  she was not  unique   but  like  all  the  others,  alone with history, with  science,  with  the future". Each Man's Son, moreover,  ends with Ainslie adopting Alan MacNeil­ which  closes a novel largely about  ignorance and single-mindedness, but also inti­ mates  the  beginning  of another phase  of  human  conflict: Ainslie "had no sense of the distance  he had  walked or what time of night it was. He stood in the dark­ ness outside  his own house for a long while, hearing  the sound  of the broken water in  the brook."  And The  Watch  that  Ends the Night, which  closes at the end of a summer  with  George  Stewart  discovering  a kind  of metaphysical peace, ends also with  his knowing  the world  about  him as a shadow,  knowing  politics as an unreal  thing  in that  world,  and  knowing  light only insofar  as his life is now illuminated from  within  himself. Return  of the Sphinx  picks up these darker  threads  of Mac­  Lennan's thought, in a study  of the  breakup of the order  of a single man's  family and  a  parallel  disruption of society at  large.  No answers  exist-only  the sphinx
-and  this novel, too, closes with  "the  long snows"  approaching.



1E EXTENSION OF  CHARACTER     into  political  affairs,  by a kind of  modified  allegory,  is also a feature of  all of  MacLennan's books -most  de­ monstrably forced  in Two  Solitudes and The  Precipice, where  the one-to-one cor­ respondence between  character and  political  entity  is so defined  as to  make  any proffered  solutions  seem facile.  The  allegory  is most  competently  handled  where it seems effortless, where  the  technique becomes an  integral  part of the  message. Barometer Rising, for example,  is brilliantly structured, yet the reader  is conscious less of the form  than  of the  reality of the novel's focal situation; and The  Watch that  Ends  the  Night  succeeds  because  the  political  allegory is implicit  in  the imagery   rather than   explicitly  enunciated  by  the  central   characters. Return  of the Sphinx  wavers  a little  between  these  two  groups,  but  ultimately, because  of its  overt  commitment, it  most  closely  approximates The   Precipice, except  that  large  parts  of it are  better  written.
MacLennan uses here some of the same image  patterns he has used before, and handles  them  well.  Night,  winter,  flowers are  all important strands in exploring the  conflict.  The  story  takes place in Eastern  Canada as a hot,  humid  summer is settling  down  on  Montreal. It is the  ripe  time  for  riots in  North  America.  The oppressive  climate   and  oppressive  situations   (real  or  imagined)  seem  to  come

WINTER AND THE NIGHT-PEOPLE



together  then,  and  if causes exist in the mind of a people, they can manifest them­ selves  in  forceful,   concerted,   mass,  and   therefore   often  dangerous and  violent ways.  Some  emotionally   sensitive  individuals, like  Daniel   Ainslie,  will  be  used by the  power  structure that  orders  any  political  demonstration, and  if  this turns  to  riot,  they  are  consumed.  Others, like Alan,  will be so committed  to  another  ideal  that   they  may  be  overwhelmed  by  the  moment. Still  others,  like Gabriel  Fleury,  arc  taken  out  of  their  personal  isolation  during  a  time  like  this;  if they discover the  real meaning of love, they survive. This  last situation is figured early in the novel when we are told that  Gabriel  "was  not a good golfer -he preferred  winter  to summer on  account  of the skiing,  at  which  he was very good-but it was the only summtr game  he knew and  physical exercise was the one permanent security  in  his life."  The  problem  is the  same  one  presented  to George  Stewart in The  Watch that  Ends  the  Night. He  has to discover that  the winter  snows­ symbolic  of  an  innocence  that  this country  perhaps  once  knew -are  no longer the only identity  to be met with.  He  has to learn  the games of summer, in effect, so that  in any season he can survive,  but in doing so he will learn  the facts of heat and  discord  as well. So with  Alan,  whose happiness  (Constance, the  children,  a lake  and  a cottage  and  a summer  when  "the  daisies  were  like snow in the  high Gaspesian  meadows") lies in the past;  and so with Daniel  as well (whose blinding  focus on  the  present  is jolted when  he discovers not only the identity  of his Cape  Breton  grandfather-the Nova  Scotia/French  combination in the  place name  a probably  unintentional added  irony  here-but  also how  alike they  are).
This   tension  between   past  and   present  is given  further  development in  the overtly  political  pa5sagcs in the  book,  but  first we must see that  Gabriel's charac­ ter is extended  by the imagery  of night  and  flowers. His name,  for one thing,  and his  recurrent  association  with  nicotianas ("they're  night  flowers  and  I'm   only here  at  night")  are  a  constant   reminder of  the  possibility of  flourishing and  of being  at  peace  with  one's  environment. His  union  with  the  younger  generation, in  his love for  Chantal Ainslie, is a happy  one for  them  both,  and  the last time we see them,  though  the summer  is ending  and  the  country's innocence is gone, the  flowers "of  late  summer  were in  bud". For  Daniel  and  Alan  the  contact  be­ tween  generations is more  difficult,  and  when  the  book ends with  winter  coming on  and  with  Alan  outside  the  city  contemplating the  landscape, thinking  "The vast land.  Too  vast  even for fools  to  ruin  all of it",  we can  see that  symbolically the ideals of Confederation, co-operation, and stability  are still held as possibilities within  man's  reach.  But for Alan it seems more like an insistent  belief in the mask than  an acceptance of the night  and  the heat that influence  the human landscape.

29

WINTER AND THE NIGHT-PEOPLE



Daniel,  like Chantal, also has  the  opportunity to  respond  to both  the  city and the land,  and  as his first sexual encounter is with a woman  from  the older genera­ tion,  the  parallel  with  his sister is strengthened. Chantal is learning from Gabriel  as well as giving  to him,  however.  Daniel  is affected  rather less by Marielle's  wis­ dom  than  she is carried  away  by his impulsive  desire for satisfaction  and  revenge. The  "revenge" is against  many  things -his Jesuit schooling,  his conscience,  his father, his mother's death,  les anglais, the American  influence  in his society and among  young  people,  and  so on.  MacLennan's extension  of the  image  patterns into  the  political  sphere  becomes obvious in Daniel's reaction  to his city:

It's fantastic,  the truth  you can see in this city at night. You can go for miles with­ out  seeing a single Anglais.  They  know no more about  this city than  the  English knew about India.  When I learn more about television techniques I want a program about  this  city after  dark.  About  la  nation  after  dark.  The  camera  spying. The camera  working as if it had a mind of its own. The  camera  just  telling me what to do with it. The  people speaking in broken sentences. That's where the truth  is, in  broken  sentences. Their  expressions when  you catch  them  with  the  truth  on their  faces. The  people are  smoldering.  There's  not enough  room for  them  any' more.  They  live in the  city like a huge African  kraal  with  the forests all around them. The  lights on the snow in the streets, the dirty snow in  the streets....

In  the city, in Montreal, the mask of innocence  that  the land  has held before itself no  longer  exists, but  it  is not  a  world  of sophistication which  by and  large  has replaced  it.  Gabriel  Fleury  is sophisticated, is part  of the  night,  and  he survives, but  in  the  world  Daniel  recognizes  only  negation   exists:  surrender to  material pleasure,  decadence, bombing   (ironically  for  the  sake of a culture), and  rioting simply  for  the  sake  of  being  divisive.  Even  this is  a way  of living  to  which  he wants  to  attach himself,  but   he  cannot. For  all  his  activities,  he  remains  the spectator-television interviewer, trying  to escape himself  and  discovering  only an­ other  kind  of incarceration.
The  political  problem  of canadien  separatism is of course a particularly grave one in Canada at this time.  MacLennan is right  to feel that  this can  be the focus of a work  of fiction,  but  when  he writes a work of this kind  he is creating some­ thing  that  seems less readily  apprehensible by the  Canadian imagination  than  by the  American or  English  one.  All  those  works  in  Canadian literature  that  ap­ parently  emphasize  sociological  phenomena, for example-The Loved  and  the Lost, The Master  of the  Mill, Scratch  One  Dreamer, The  Man  from Glengarry
-are all  much  more  obviously  studies  in  the  psychology  of an  individual  con­
science. Such  a categorization is less obvious,  I think,  in works by C. P. Snow  or go

WINTER AND THE NIGHT-PEOPLE



Robert   Penn  \Varren,  and  the  disposition  of American writers  towards  political criticism  is what  perhaps  lies behind   Edmund Wilson's  approval of  both  Mac­ Lennan's The  Precipice and the novels of Morley Callaghan. In these works some­ thing   of  man-the-Canadian-political-animal  comes  closest  to  the  surface.   But Return of  the  Sphinx, political  as it  is, captures  only some  of  the  character of either  the  country  or  the separatist question.



CANADIANS SEEM, in other  words, to be much more addicted to the onlooker-interviewer role than  most are willing to admit. Daniel  and  Alan Ainslie are our  men,  that  is, just as George  Stewart was in The  Watch that  Ends the  Night- no  matter   how  stuffy,  thwarted, or  unaware any  of  them  might appear. MacLennan is right  to set  up  this  kind  of  character, right  to interpret much  about  the  nation  this  way,  and  curiously  wrong  when  for some reason  he locates  a different  kind  of character in the  West. He suggests that  Westerners  are delighted  with  Quebec's threatened withdrawal from  the  nation, for  that  event would give them a wealthy independence themselves, and  he is wrong.  Westerners, plain  and  simply,  are  the  onlookers  again,  goaded  in  this  decade  into  calling  a plague  on  both  houses, which  they  locate  specifically in Toronto and  Montreal, whose  perennial   opposition   is now  more than  just  high  school  rivalry.  It is a continuation of  an  historic  clash  of  cultures,  which  MacLennan himself implies in his book, but  never makes clear, and  it is this local antagonism, misunderstood by both  locales,  who  both  erroneously  consider  themselves  representative of half the nation,  that  has been grotesquely  magnified  into an almost insoluble  problem.
Like Daniel  and  Alan  Ainslie, each side is magnificently  sure of the other  side's position.  In  this lies inevitable  tragedy,  for it demonstrates a previous  foreclosure on  both  imagination  and   understanding. When   Daniel   thinks:  "Endlessly   the French   Canadians talked  of  their  deprived   past  and  what  did  that  do  except weaken  their  purpose  to make  the future theirs?",  both  he and  MacLennan have seized  on  a  major   truth   underlying  the  whole  situation. The   parallel   United Empire   Loyalist-Upper Canada syndrome  that  afflicts some  English  Canadians, valuing  some invalid  sense of historic superiority, also prevents  some people from preparing adequately for  the  future. Together these underline the  fact  that  not only  is the  conflict  in  the  present  emerging  out  of the  past,  it is also very much of the  pa<st, still based on attitudes that  most of the nation's people-from what­ ever cultural source  (many  young  \V esterners,  for example,  do not regard  them­ selves  as  being  English  Canadian  particularly) -do  not  here  and  now  share.

WINTER AND THE NIGHT-PEOPLE



Daniel's  immaturity is shown  in  that  he  does not  trust  his  perception of truth; instead,  he goes along  with  the  riots and  the bombs, which  solve nothing. Alan's generation is by and  large  no better,  for its members, violent  in  their  own  way, talk and  talk,  and  again  solve nothing.
It is interesting, at this point, to place the political argument of this book beside that  in  Peter  Weiss's absurdist  and  terrifying  play  M arat IS ade. Part  of the  dia­ logue  is apropos :

SADE:		Nature  herself would watch unmoved I if we destroyed the entire human race I I hate Nature  I this passionless spectator this unbreakable ice-berg­ face I that  can  bear  everything  I this goads  us to greater  and  greater acts I Haven't  we always beaten down those weaker than ourselves I .... I
MARAT:   what  you call the indifference  of Nature  I is your own lack of compas­
sion I .... I
SADE:		no small emotions please I Your feelings were never petty I For you just as for me I only the most extreme actions matter  I
MARAT: If I  am  extreme  I  am  not extreme  in  the  same way as you I Against
Nature's  silence I  use action I In  the vast indifference  I invent  a mean­ ing I I don't  watch  unmoved I intervene I and say that  this and  this are wrong  I and  I  work to alter  them  and  improve  them  I The important thing  I is to pull yourself up by your own hair  I to turn  yourself inside out I and see the whole world with fresh eyes
(I,  12)

One  of the many  fascinating things  about  this play is that  its technique of  depict­ ing  plays  within  plays forces  us all into  roles both  as spectators and  actors:   all implicated  in  whatever   guilts,  animal   motives,  insanities   and  oppressions  may be  represented. Towards the  end,  Roux,  the fettered  radical,  is still shouting out
"When will you learn to see I When  will you learn to take sides" as pandemonium
engulfs him.  What  we do see above all else is the extent  to which  both  Marat and
Sade  intellectualize humanity, and  therefore, though opposites, how much they are alike.  The   other  opposites-freedom I confinement; sanity  I madness-also come  in  a sense to be indistinguishable, for  one  cannot identify  which  is which.
But we are  actors  as well as spectators in such a play, and  so if we respond  at all these are  truths  for own own lives as well.
MacLennan's novel  bears,  it  seems  to  me,  enough  likeness  to  Weiss's  theme to make  this digression reasonable. In  Alan  and  Daniel,  and  in the views of  Can­ ada  which  they  represent,  we have  just such  intellectualization coming into  con­ flict.  In  the  demonstrations Daniel  plans,  and  the  resultant  riots  which  destroy Alan  as a  political  figure,  are  just such  unidentifiable motives  as those of the  re-

32

WINTER AND THE NIGHT-PEOPLE



volution  and  the madmen of Charenton. Liberty?  But the Quebecois  have liberties under  federal   law  now  that   would  be  lost  to  them  if   they  seceded.  Equality? Fraternity? Yet  as  both  Hugh   MacLennan and  Peter  Weiss show,  these desires are  not  necessarily distinguishable from  the desire to exercise power.
The   difference   between  the  two  writers  is partly  in  technique, partly  in  the fact  that  Weiss does not  draw  a moral; his effect lies in his presentation and  in the  extent  to which  that  alone  can  cause  us to pull ourselves up  by our  own hair and  see  the  world  with  fresh  eyes. MacLennan, on  the  other  hand, guides  the reader  to a point  of view rather  more  deliberately,  and  the sadness of this is that the  novel  would  have  been  more  powerful   had  the  characters and  the  images been  capable  of  doing  it on  their  own.  For  all  the  novel's  political  importance and  for  all  the  clarity  with  which   the  author views  some  political  situations, no  novel  can  absolutely   succeed  unless  the  characters come  to  life.  With  Re­ turn  of  the  Sphinx  we are  up  against  a  problem  that  has  plagued  MacLennan throughout his work:   much  of the  dialogue  is stilted,  therefore lifeless, and  the characters, who in other  situations can  be perfectly credible,  will occasionally  die. Regrettably,  at  those  times,  the  novel  dies  with  them.  MacLennan can  write magnificent  monologues; of this there  is no question,  but so much  of the dialogue  is simply  punctuated monologue  that  it becomes incredible. Where  it is good, the formal  language is inherently  part  of the situation being  presented. Some of the arguments between  Alan  and  Daniel,  for  example,  and  the  passages of House  of Commons   debate   are  handled   well.  But  where  the  conversations should  be in­ formal,  even if they  are  not exactly  relaxed,  the language remains  repetitive  and starched:

'He's  wasting  his life.'
'Can  you be so sure he is?'
'Oh  yes, I can be sure.'

This  sort  of  thing  is so constructed  as to  be  artificial,  too  formalized to  seem natural, and it occurs so often that  one's attention shifts from the heart  of the book to its method. It is a frustrating novel,  because  it promises so much  and  wavers so much  too. For  l\1acLennan scholars it will be a key work, one which shows not only  his  descriptive   abilities  but  also  his consciousness  of  the  tragic  possibilities in modern  life. For many  more readers  its topic will make it an interesting enough narrative to warrant reading.  But for very few, unfortunately, in spite of its poten­ tial,  will it  be  the  impetus  for  seeing  the  world  with  eyes that  have  been made  fresh.

33


FLIGHT FROM LIBERATION




D.]. Dooley










JAMES  jACKSON's NOVEL,  To  tM Edg'  of  Moming, did   not attract a great  deal of attention when it appeared in 1964.  No-one seems to have suggested  that  it was anything more than  a fairly interesting  first novel;  reviewers treated   it  with  that  benign  condescension  which  they  employ  for  novels which have  not  engaged   their  attention fully  but  which  have  the  merit  of  being  by Canadian  authors. In  the  fiction  section  of  "Letters in  Canada:  rg64,'' F.  W. Watt  paid  brief attention to it. He  paired  it with  Ralph Allen's The High  White Forest;  both  of them  he considered  novels which  "take us back  into  the simpler realities of war-time action," and  he judged To the Edge of Morning the inferior of the two:

The  former is little more than  a fragment,  the story of a few months at a stagnant airbase in the  heart  of the Ceylon jungle where the airmen  fight less against  the Japanese  than  against  the  heat  which  saps  strength  and  morals, the  threat  of insects and  disease, drunkenness,  crudity,  cowardice, despair,  and  other  fruits  of inactivity  and  the sense of futility. There  is power and  drama  in the descriptions of the Ceylon  jungle and  of the Liberator  bombers in flight, but the human story of guilt and  expiation  is unconvincing.  Ralph  Allen is an experienced writer  and a good deal more ambitious.'

I would  agree  that  Jackson's story  of  guilt  and  exp1atJ.on has  unconvincing aspects;  but  my  contention is that  his novel is, if anything, too ambitious, since it tries to explore the immense  problems  of free will and  destiny within fewer than two  hundred pages. Begun  in a creative  writing  class at  the  University  of British Columbia while  Malcolm   Lowry  was still  alive,  it  is an  interesting  example  of his influence.  Like  Lowry,  Jackson  employs  a triangular situation involving  two

34

FLIGHT FROM  LIBERATION



men and  one woman  (though he leaves this situation shadowy  and  undeveloped). There   are  many   other   resemblances; Jackson   deals  with  alcoholism,  guilt  and futility,  and  he  has  some  of  Lowry's  faults,  such  as overwriting and  overuse  of symbols-it is not  only  that  there  are  too many  of them,  but  that  they  call too much  attention to  themselves.  Lowry's  conception of man  being  given  a garden for  his enjoyment and  turning it into  a  rubbish  heap  runs  all the  way  through Jackson's   book;  like  Lowry  again,  he  identifies  the  circle  of  hell  in  which  his central  character is to be found  or for which  he is headed-it is the one reserved for  those who  have  wasted  their  gifts. In  a way the  theme  is that  which  Lowry described  as his own:   the  forces in man  which  cause him  to be terrified  of  him­ self. But  as the  epigraph from  Donne  suggests, Jackson  intends  to  include  both evil within  and  evil without:

Fire  and  air,  water  and  earth  are  not  the  elements  of man;  inward  decay and outward  violence, bodily pain  and  sorrow of heart  may  rather  be styled his  ele­ ments, and  though  he be destroyed by these, yet he consists of nothing  but these.

Therefore the story is something  more than  a plain narrative of wartime events. Ostensibly  it deals with  a Liberator flying a thousand miles from  Ceylon to make a photographic reconnaissance of an  airfield  on  Japanese-held Sumatra. But  the main  battle  is not  with  the  Japanese; it  takes  place  in  the  mind  of one  central character, Gil  Kramer. At  the  end  of Chapter Three of Under  the  Volcano, as the  Consul  sips strychnine, contemplates the  two volcanoes  which  are  the image of the  perfect  marriage, and  considers  the  two  alternatives open  to him -mar­ riage to Yvonne  and  marriage to the bar  or the  cantina, he makes  an affirmation which  is of great  importance in the novel:

"The  will of man  is unconquerable.  Even God cannot  conquer  it."

Lowry,  of course,  shows how  the  will of man  is conquered; while  the  Liberator is in flight, flashbacks  in Gil Kramer's mind  explain  how he lost his sense of  pur­ pose and  raise  the  question  of whether  the  disintegration of his will is  complete.  The  cockpit of the airplane becomes an arena  in which  Lowry's problem is fought  out once again.
On  his arrival  at  the  airbase  nine  months  before,  Kramer had  felt  himself in a  nightmare world.  The   details  of  the  setting   are  concrete   and  particularized enough,  yet this is an  outer  landscape which  reflects inner  chaos. The  rooms in the officers' billets are  covered  with  a grey dust  which  makes  the  rubble  in them seem  like  the  leavings  of  an  army  in  retreat. The  impression  of decay  and  in-

35

FLIGHT FROM LIBERATION



coherence  is strengthened by the  first man  Kramer meets, who  is clammy  white and  wrapped in a shroud:

"You mustn't  stick to the roads, you know; you mustn't  stick to the roads because the roads go round in circles. After you've been here a while it won't matter; I've been here seven months and  it doesn't matter  to me now, but  just for a time you mustn't  try to stick to the roads. They don't  go anywhere, any of them."

From  the  officer in  charge  of the  base,  Kramer might  have  expected  a clear outline  of  his duties,  perhaps  a  pep  talk  encouraging him  to do  them  well;  the wing  commander,  however,  says  nothing   about   the  war  effort,  effectively  dis­ courages  heroic  action,  and  raises  the  fundamental question  of whether  any  of man's  actions can have any possible significance:

"Don't   expect  anything,  Kramer.   Don't   expect  a  god-damned   thing.  I've  got nothing  to tell you, do you understand?  ... You will not fly because there  are no spares for our machines; you will have no recreation because no one has the energy for  recreation;  you will spend  about  a year here, doing  perhaps  ten operational trips,  and  then  if  the  jungle or  the  dengue  or  the  machine  or  the  liquor  don't get you, what is left of you will be sent home.... Watch out for scorpions, though they come  later.  Beware the  sidling tarantula; he's very painful.  Pass your hour with  grace  if  not  with  any  purpose.  They  maintain,  the  ecclesiastics, that  there is a salvation."

The   ambiguous use of grace and  the  vague  allusion  to salvation  set  against  the pervasive  hopelessness make it evident  that  this novel is one of the many twentieth­ century   parables   about  the  human condition which  owe something  to  Prufrock and  The  Waste  Land. The  tarantula is a real objective  threat, but it may also be a spectre  which  the  mind  conjures  up;  the scorpion,  in turn, symbolizes the only kind  of vigorous  response  which  the  individuals here  are  likely to make  to each other-spite,  hate,  or  malice.  The  wing  commander  wants,  above  all, to keep his isolated  community, his microcosm,  in a state of  harmony; he will be satisfied with  keeping  a little life alive, and  he wants  no  overwhelming questions.  Unlike  Prufrock, however,  he  has  responded   heroically  at  one  stage  of his life:  he is a veteran  of the  Battle  of Britain.  Now  he is disillusioned,  guilt-ridden, and  obses­ sive, and  the  irony  is that  Kramer is unconsciously  going  to pattern his life after him.
Kramer's model  till  now  has  been  his  cousin  Leowy,  who  is flying  in  more active  theatres  of  the  war;   his own  frustration is made  more  bitter  by the  con­ comitant story  of  Leowy's  success.  The  other  members  of  his  crew  illustrate   a

FLIGHT  FROM LIBERATION



number  of possible kinds of adaptation to circumstance -one becomes  a tourist, systematically  visiting  every  interesting place  on  the  island,  and  another  takes to the  study  of  Hindu mythology-but  Kramer wants  only  to fly. His struggle  to make his existence meaningful comes to the predictable result, when  a minor acci­ dent  to an  aircraft brings him into conflict with  the engineering officer, Gunnory, and  he  finds  himself  being  reproved   by  the   wing   commander  for  being  too energetic; he is advised to adopt  a more  graceful  resignation  to the reality of their boredom.   In  disgust,  he  follows  the  common   course  and  relapses  into  passivity and  alcoholism.
He  has  thus  accepted  conditions  of existence  which  make  life not  purposeful
but  at  least  possible-though always  there  is the  threat of  spiders,  scorpions, and  bandits,   and  from  time  to  time  he  hears  the  drone  of  a  plane   (ironically called  a Liberator) taking  off to be murdered by fighters or perhaps  to crash  just off  the  end  of  the  runway. Life  is bearable, therefore,  but  it  is still  troubled. Kramer is afflicted with  intestinal  bugs but  obstinately refuses to go into hospital to get completely  clear of them: "Deep in his conscience he felt it was bad enough that  he  had  stopped  striving,  but  to fail  even  to endure would  be worse, would be  almost  complete   surrender." And   he  cannot   ignore  the   jungle;   because  it contains  decaying   temples  and  fortresses,  aircraft   waiting  to  be  flown,  and  the burnt   places  \rhere aircraft   have  crashed,  it  becomes  a  menacing thing  to  be banished  by  brandy: "The tentacles  of fear,  growing  from  no  definable  source but  growing,  crept  into  his mind  and  joined boredom  and  failure  to spread  their paralytic  seed."  " 1hen  another   pilot  commits  suicide,  he  realizes  that  lassitude is a  nry insecure  refuge.  Yet  he  neither  sees nor  wants  a way  out  of it.  He  is horrified  when  the  wing  commander  recommends him  for  the  position  of flight commander; the  last thing  he wants  is to think  or to make  decisions:  "It would be wonderful if everyone  left him alone,  if he could but  lie in the darkened room for the rest of his time, seeing the vague  half-formed visions ..." The  paralysis of his will seems complete.
Yet when  Gunnory tries to  convince  him  to take  the  promotion by describing the  attractions of power,  he succumbs  to the  offered  temptation:
Authority was disembodied, prescribed, official, complementary  with responsibility, and neither  had any attractions.  But power, he saw, was personal, and thus stimu­ lating  and  exciting.  Power  was wielded  by the self, for  the self's  satisfaction ... power, he saw with the sudden shock of insight, was the promise of  release.
The  lust  for  power  is thus  shown  by Jackson  as something basic  and  strong  in man,  something  which  continues  to  appeal  when  almost  every  other  motive  for

37

FLIGHT FROM LIBERATION



action  is lost. He  does not  let his hero  have  his power,  however,  but  snatches  it away  from   him;  in  a  perhaps  predictable but  certainly   too  neat  turn  of  plot, Kramer's cousin  Leowy  arrives  on  the  scene  to  take   the   job  which  has  been offered.  Now  the scorpion  in  Kramer emerges:

His  thoughts  moved  in  swift explosive rushes;  his mind  was full  of hate,  fury, and  a burning  need for violence. He wanted  to go back into  the  jungle, into  the teeming proliferation  of dense growth  and darkness ...

He  has  become  a creature which  stings, which  is an enemy  to the community of mankind and  at  home  in  the  jungle.  This  psychological  state  is at least partially responsible  for  disaster: Leowy  is killed in  the  crash  of a  plane  which  Kramer has  tested  and  pronounced fit to fly. Kramer is now shocked  into  a sense of his responsibility-perhaps even  an  exaggerated sense-and it is in this state  that we find him when the novel opens.
The  flight  to Sumatra therefore  comes when  he is in  a state  of shock  and  in­
decision.  At its beginning,  he feels a sense of release:  "he  could sense the  jungle falling  away  and  diminishing behind,  could  feel the  almost  imperceptible  begin­ nings of calm  within  him."  But the real  jungle is in his own  mind:
Whether  he closed his eyes or not the light was a pervasive green, green faces and reflections a dim clutter of levers and handles against a black ground ... the lulling rumble  of the engines a huge wind at night among the trees, where the quadrant levers were  the  slow wavering  hands  of the  undergrowth  and  the luminous  tips of the  myriad  switches little  phosphorescent worms crawling....

He  has brought  all his obsessions with him, and  he knows that  the flight is neither expiation  nor escape. He  can temporarily avoid the  jungle by thinking  in concrete terms,  by concentrating for example  on the little luminous  aircraft in the artificial horizon.   But  the   human  consciousness  can   never   confine  itself  to  immediate sensible  reality  for  very  long;  the  image  of the  jungle  returns, and  with  it  an­ other  image   (suggested  above  by  "little  phosphorescent worms")  of the  cockpit as a death  cell. It is probably  Kramer's own death  wish which  has sent the plane and  crew on a mission which  is likely to terminate in their slaughter by Japanese fighter  planes.  Yet he feels curiously detached from  these former comrades  whose fate is bound  up with his own.
The  storm  which  ends  his  paralysis  of  will is, as  F.  W.  Watt  says, the  most powerful  and  dramatic section  of the  book.  It is an excellent  piece of descriptive narrative, in  which  the  reader   is  caught   up,  whirled   about,   and  made  to  feel that  he has escaped  destruction only by the narrowest of squeaks. But along  with

FLIGHT  FROM LIBERATION



the  factual   description   of  what  it  is like for  a  plane  to  be  caught  in  a  tropical storm  comes  a  philosophical enquiry:  what  is there  in  man  which  makes  him fight  against  the  forces of nature when  it would  be so easy for  him  to succumb to them?  The  complete  rationalist might  argue  that  no better  explanation could be  found   than  the  one  which  Kramer quotes  from  the  aircraft handbook: "at fifty inches of boost and  2700 revolutions  per minute  the Pratt and  Whitney  Twin Wasp  Engine Type  R-I 8go-43  develops approximately I 250 horsepower." Yet this scientific  explanation of  a  certain   amount of energy  being  required   to keep  the plane  in flight  when  a certain  force  is bearing  down  upon  it is, Kramer  realizes, ultimately  inadequate. In  spite of his wish for  death,  he has  worked  to  the limit of  his  strength   and  skill  to  live.  Whether the  most  important  reason  was  the "instinctiYe  supplication" he  had  made  at  the  crucial  moment, or his  feeling  of kinship  with  the  pilot  of  a  "lone  aircraft  limping  through the  same  night  over the coast of Burma  far to the north" whom he knew only through a distress signal, is not  made   clear,  either  to  him  or  to  us:   "The  burden he  had  assumed,  the burden  he had  admitted to in thus surviving  was not within  his ability to compre­ hend." At any rate,  he has been released from  the prison-house of self; the images now applied  to him  are those of exhaustion, extinction  of his former  self, rebirth, and  the  promise  of  the  dawn.  He  sees himself  with  a  new  objectivity  and  de­ tachment; he realizes that  the  threats  which  he held  in awe  are  not  perdurable; he  has  arrived   at  a  stage  of  affirmation  and   tentative  meaning. If there  is  a "message"  to the  book, it at  least  begins  with  the  idea  that  there  is considerable benefit  to human solidarity.
After  this  resolution,  Jackson  quickly  dismisses his central  character from  the scene and  concludes  his story;  the fact  that  the underlying rather  than  the surface meaning  is more  important to  him  is suggested  by his not  even  making  it clear whether  or not the Liberator got back to Ceylon.  (It seems likely that Kramer­ "disembodied," "disinterested"-died of wounds  after  a Japanese fighter scored
a hit  on  his plane.)  The  author's chief  interest  is in the  infinite  metamorphoses of  the  human  personality; he  is dealing  with  a  world  of external violence,  but like  Lowry  he  shows  how  the  human mind  itself fabricates the  worst  demons  it has to face. He  develops this theme  on a number of levels, some of which -such as  that   associated  with  Hindu   mythology-I have  not  even  touched  on.  The realities of wartime action,  as Jackson  portrays  them,  are not simple;  To the  Edge of  Af orning possesses a  much  greater degree  of complexity  than  has so far  been pointed out.
•   University of Toronto Quarterly, XXXIV (rg64-65), 380.


39


WHY JAMES REANEY IS A BETTER POET


( 1) than any Northrop Frye poet

(2) than he used to be





George Bowering






BY NOW   IT   IS  APPARENT that  the  maffistremn of  today's
Canadian poetry  (in English)  flows in the same river-system as the chief  Ameri­
can one-that  (to change figures of speech in mid-stream)   nurtured  first-hand or second-hand  by followers of William Carlos Williams and  Ezra  Pound.  The Contact  people in Toronto  of the fifties, and the Tish  people in Vancouver of the sixties are in the middle of what  has been happening  in Canadian poetry, mid­ wars.
But there is a small group of poets in Ontario  who arose after World War  II,
and  who  remain  outside  the  contemporary  mainstream.  They  may  be said  to descend not from Williams and Pound,  but from T. S. Eliot and Robert Graves, especially, to bring it on home, as those figures from an earlier time are reflected in the literary  theory of Northrop  Frye of the University of Toronto. The  poetry produced  by this group has not had any noticeable influence on younger Canadian poets and  their  magazines, possibly because it takes literary  criticism as an  im­ portant  source; it tends to find its audience in the universities of Canada,  or more precisely, of  Upper  Canada.   To  speak  of something  perhaps  not  as  relevant, the work of these poets looks more British than American -one could say more bookish than  American.

JAMES  REANEY



The  poets  I am  writing  of are  Jay  Macpherson, Douglas  Le Pan,  and  James Reaney.  Eli  Mandel was once  drafted  into  this tradition by some critics, but  has lately  opted  out.  James  Reaney,  as I will want  to show, is also of late  finding  a separate  way.
Northrop Frye has written  a lot of literary  theory,  which is best known from his Anatomy of Criticism. A few years ago he chose to popularize  his critical  thoughts in a short  series of CBC  talks, published  by the CBC  as The Educated  Imagina­ tion,  which  title  suggests  one  main  belief  to  be  found  in  the  poetry  written  by the  members  of  the  "Frye  School," that  they  are  dealing  with  a  knowledgeable and   critical   rendering  of  discoveries  made   through   the  imagination, usually thought  of in  terms  of archetypal mythology.
There, too, is their  principal  weakness and  contradiction, that  while they want to tap  the enormous resources of the  unconscious  to body forth  their  poetry,  they appear  rather  as super-conscious and  architectural poets, making  verses with  too much  obvious  eye for critical  theory.  Critical  theory of Frye's sort is interesting as long as it remains  a game  (in the philosophical sense)  but when it begins to shape poetry,  then  it  defeats  its own  proclaimed premises, as the  unconscious  becomes a  thing   mocked.   Poets  who  operate   this  way  can  look  like  upper-middle-class adults  doing  teenage  dances  at a rock-blues  dance.
But  I will look at  Frye's  Educated   Imagination, and  some of the poems of the "mythopoeic" poets,  and  see whether   and  how  Frye's  pronouncements  describe (or  prescribe)   what  has been  happening.




EYE's MAJOR coNCERNS,  of  course,  seem  dated,   no  matter what  truth   may  lie in  them.  They  are  filled  with  nostalgia  for  the  critical  rape of the  unconscious  that  happened in the twenties and  thirties.  And  they are some­ times, for all Frye's  talk of the imagination, quite  turgidly  clerical.
The  first thing  man  notices, says Frye,  is that  nature  is objective,  apart from man's  sense of himself.  Then   he  makes  or sees a series of consequent splits,  be­ tween  his emotions  and  his intellect,  between  the  world  a man  lives in  and  the world  he  wants  to live in. So man  sets to work in this context  and  tries  to make the  world  over,  to create  a humanized world.  Frye seems to me to be  calling for the  maker  as one  who  imposes  his desires on  the  world  of  nature-and  that  is the   conventional  Christianj\Vestern   conception,  regarding  the  settlement  of America,  for  instance.

JAMES REANEY



Developing  his argument in  a  classical way,  Frye  then  speaks  of a third  level of the mind,  beyond the simply emotional or intellective levels -the imagination, where  a man  sees a vision or a model of a world  beyond present  accomplishments. That vision  has  nothing   to do  with  time,  with  the  future. It is nothing  like the scientist's   or  engineer's  plan,  which   is  only  a  progressive  improvement of  the present  accomplishments. Literary  people, says Frye, are left in the cold by things, like science, that  evolve. Artists could never run the objective world. Poets are superstitious, living  by  the  evidence  of their  senses -a  flat  earth, for  example. As in most of his pronouncements Frye is here half right,  as Freud  was. He agrees with  Freud  in  associating  the  artistic  and  neurotic  minds.  He  agrees with  many other  professors that  the  artist  has to be a Iuddite.  The  "limit  of the imagination is a totally human world," he says, but here he is led astray  by his original opposi­ tion  of  human and  objective,   the  subject-object split,  which  may  be  conceived only by the self-appointed "subject."
So  he  says that  the  poet's  job  "is  not  to  describe  nature, but  to show  you  a world  completely  absorbed  and  possessed by the human mind." This  is where  the poets of the Frye school are outside  the Canadian mainstream. A poet who would possess the world with his mind  writes his poetry from  the mind,  the possessor. He begins  by subjecting the  rest of his faculties  and  responses  to the  admiral mind. Get  a  hold  on  yourself, is his advice  to himself. Then reach  for everything else. The  ego rules, or  thinks  it does. As Eliot  treated  history,  Frye's  poet  would  treat nature, as organizer and  possessor of it. Today my quatrains, tomorrow the world. This  is different  from  the  poets outside  this particular myth -they would  rather become  possessed by nature, to discover  their  natures,  by exploring  with  all their faculties,  the  mind  as one among  them.  Frye speaks many  times of the poet seek­ ing  identity  of mind  with  nature. The  un-Fryed, or  "raw" poet, is likely  to sur­ render   identity   (as  in  a  psychedelic  awakening)  as  a  step  toward  communion with  the  rest of his self (see Whitman's use of that  last word) .
Frye tells how his poets  (he tends to generalize  his ideas to cover all poets)  seek identity  of mind  and  nature. Men  create  gods, creatures  who  are similar  to both men  and  objective  nature-hence  the  wind-god  and  the  wolf-god.  Then  when men  no  longer  believe  in  those  creatures, they  become  part  of literature. Poets, says Frye,  do  not  literally  believe  the  things  they  write,  but  rather make  codes. When,  as with  Hemingway and  his bullfights,  the  writer  seems to believe in the truth  of his rituals,  Frye says that  he is actually  imitating previous literature. Frye would  not  accept  that  Allen  Ginsberg   actually  saw  the  face  of  Moloch  on  the skyscraper   wall.  But  Jay   Macpherson,  Frye's  most  ardent   follower,  obviously

42

JAMES  REANEY



agrees that  the  names  and  events in poems are myth-charactered codes of experi­
ence:

I'm  Isis of Sais,
If you'd know what my way is, Come riddle  my riddle-mi-ree.

Frye's  point  is that  Aristotle's  arrangements hold;  there  is a universe  of things and  a universe of ideas, and  a universe of literature. To  write literature, the poets draw  from  the universe of literature. Forms,  he says, come only from earlier litera­ ture,  but  by forms  he appears  to mean  ideas and  events.  (He  says that Canadian writers  imitate the  models  of D. H.  Lawrence and  W. H. Auden-and  he says this on the radio  in  rg62! His being  that  far out of touch  with  Canadian writing  helps  to  explain  the  distaste  for  Frye  among  most  Canadian  writers.)
I  don't   want  to  give  the  impression  that  I  thoroughly disapprove of  all that Frye says. I  agree  with  many  of his words.  He seems to agree with  Williams, for instance,  by saying  that  "it  isn't  what  you say but  how it's said that's important," but then  he moves to something  I can't  agree with when he speaks of poets' "trans­ ferring their  language from  direct  speech  to  the  imagination."  (Italics  mine.)  Once  again  the  human mind  as separate from  and  superior  to  the  materials  of the  natural universe.
Primitives  feared  the  animals  and  their  spirits,  so they  donned   their  skins in dance  and  poetry.  Frye  would  say that  we now make  poetry  by pretending to do the  same  thing,  while  scientists  and  others  study  primitives  and  animals  among other  things.  But  today  we fear  our  own  technology  and  not  nature, because  we have  subdued and  understood nature, or so we are  told.  In  modem dance  and poetry it is the skin of the technology  we wear, including the skin of Relativity  and Quantum. The  poets are the unacknowledged shamans of the world. They  do not get  their  forms  from  literary  code  alone.  Literature is not  myth  with  belief  re­ moved,  though  it may  be written  as though  it were, as witness Miss Macpherson.
Frye  says that  the  great  theme  of English  poetry  is the  desire  to regain  para­ dise, and  James  Reaney  says that  is what  Jay  Macpherson is trying  to  do. The  poet  who  wants  to  possess the  world  with  his mind  often  writes of that  desire as his subject  material. The  poets who want  to become  possessed act like primitives, hoping  to  know  paradise  in  their  poetic  forms,  all  the  faculties  engaged,  as in dance  with  music  and  incense.  It is not  what  you say that's  important but  how
you say it. The  poetry  of Eliot's  age  and  mode  was ironic  in  tone  as it spoke of
the terror  in this fallen  world outside  paradise.


43

JAMES REANEY



So the  raw  poets  think  of poetry's  words  as action,  often  ritual  action.  Frye's poet  thinks  of it  as code  of  thought. In  Frye's  view, characters in literature are different  from  characters in history in that  they are typical or universal manifesta­ tions,  representatives, representing  parts  of  our  lives. Allegory  has  crept  in.  All images  are symbols-Frye says that.  Williams  distrusted  symbolism  as an act of the overbearing intellect.  To  go to the  extreme  of this line of  thinking, Frye says that  knowledge  of literature cannot grow  without  knowledge  of the  main  stories in  the  Bible  and  classical  literature. That  would come   as  a  surprise  to  many readers  of the Tale  of Genji.  Of course Frye probably  had only a Western  literate in mind.  That is one of the limitations of his argument.
I have  said something  to the effect  that  Frye sees the  poet gathering materials of life, nature, literature, to himself and  his poem, much  as Eliot's persona  is seen trying  to do at the end of The Waste  Land, and  that  the raw  poets see it another way around. It is not surprising  then,  that  Frye embraces the old favourite  notion of the writer's  detachment, that  he favours  things in literature to be removed  just out  of reach  of action  and  belief. Of  course we know  that  we are hearing  about two ways of viewing  poetry  written, when  we hear  from  Frye  and  his opposites. Frye  could  likely make  a logical  case for  Blake as detached, much  to the dismay of some other  writers.
I  think,  though, that  we  can  fault  Frye  especially for  his generalizing  on  the process of writing  literature. Related to that is his overstressing of literature as inspiration for  literature.  (Much  of important new  writing  may  be seen  as  at­ tempt  to  provide  alternative for  literature.)  And  related  to that  is his  confusion between  the  writing  of lyric and  the writing  of its criticism.  Anyone who has too much  Graves  and  Frye on the mind  might  plead for myth  rather than creating  it, asking readers  to see with  the eye rather  than through  it. Witness Jay Macpherson, who  often  jams together  homely  observations and  spooned-on  myth-figures:

My mother was taken up to heaven in a pink cloud, My father  prophesied,
The  unicorn yielded to my sweetheart,
The  white bull ran away with my sister, The  dove descended on my brother, And a mouse ran away in my wainscot.

Why,  no one  ever sees or mentions  a "wainscot" in Canada!




44

JAMES  REANEY




BUT IN  THE FRYE MIND, literature is a game.  Literature, says Frye,  has no moral  referent  (all  these remarks  are secularizations or diminishings of  Keats'   remarks  about  the  poetical  character), and  so in  that  endless  debate about  the topic,  he stands  opposed to Pound  and Williams and their followers, ten­ uous as that  following  may be. In  fact  he goes so far as to say that "literature has no consistent  connection with  ordinary life, positive or negative," though  later  he calls the world of literature a model to be striven after.  (But  the self-contradictions in  Frye  have  been  a  topic  of conversation in  the  learned  journals  ere now.)   He carries on the closet fiction of the New Criticism,  the idea that  the poem is entirely self-contained, which  may  be a good system for criticism, but  lousy for literature. As a poet,  I feel it impossible  to agree  with Frye  that  my writing  looks either  up toward  heaven  or  down  to  hell, never  horizontally  at  life.  I find  that  horizontal view possible as soon  as my self begins  to expand  outside  the  bounds  of the ego, the "subject."
But  literature, says Frye,  is there  to refine  the sensibilities,  always with  knowl­ edge of the  artifice  foremost.  That is literature as a game.  Games  have  counters,  players,  rewards,  all  totally  symbolic,  with  no  referents  save in  the  psyche. The  reader,  as well  as  the  literary  character, exists "only  as a  representative of  hu­ manity  as a whole." So it is that  Jay  Macpherson may declare  that  her first person in  the  poem  is Isis. I  find  that  a  reasonable  stance,  but  shallow  compared with Olson's  "Maximus" or  Williams'  "Paterson" -and  I will  not  accept  it  as the only  possible  way.  I think  Raymond Souster,  for  example,   walks  through  the Toronto streets of his poems in no one's  skin but  his own,  perceived  through, not by, the  literary  imagination.
But,  says Frye,  "how  dangerous the  emotional response is, and  how  right  we are  to distrust  it."  Distrust  rhetoric,  his opposers  would  say, for he does not, and distrust  reason  at  least more  than  you distrust  emotion.  Emotion, at least, makes for  better  dance,  and  the  primitive  mind  is in the head  of the  best dancer  in the world.  Frye  is right  to say that  poetry  is the first primitive  writing,  but  he wants, he says, a poetry of impersonal nexus, the  poem  as dance  removed  from  the dan­ cer. The  beginning of reason,  where  it is not primarily  intuitive, causes awkward  stumbling, as seen in the  poetry of Auden  or Spender.
Or  of Jay  Macpherson, for instance. Her  verses tend  toward  closed form, with the  ever-present   threat   of  disorder-that is fine,  a  creditable imitation of  the primitive.  But the  jungle dance  seeks to evoke a favourable response from  nature (external or internal), not  to cow it.  Miss Macpherson's syntax  and  vocabulary

45

JAMES REANEY



are  awkwardly and  deliberately  "literary," poetic  diction  as an  attempt to make magic-thus to impose her will on nature. The  ordering ego hulks over Miltonic inversions :

In  the snake's  embrace mortal she lies, Dies,  but  lives to  renew  her  torment, Under  her,  rock,  night  on her  eyes.
In the wall around her was set by one Upright, staring,  to watch  for  morning With  bread  and  candle,  her  little  son.

There is no  doubt   that  Miss  Macpherson is Frye's  most  faithful follower   (her book  is dedicated to  him), especially  concerning his notion  that  all literature is imitation of earlier  literature. In  reading  a poem  such  as her  "The Marriage of Earth   and   Heaven," one  encounters  metrics   and   philosophy   copied  from   an earlier  century.
But  I  don't find  a real encounter with  myth.  Such  real encounter would  be a
here-now  fright  or swoon or rapture. Myth  is the imaginative base of culture,  and culture  is not  alive if it is not  being  formed  with  the  materials  and  shapes avail­ able  to  the  senses. The  literary  mind  thinks  about  past  culture, but  to  copy  the modes  of past  culture  is to give oneself over  to time,  where  gods and  giants  are only  reported, never  met.  They  must  be  met  in  the  here  and  now,  where  their faces  and  limbs  are  seen through eternity's film.  (In  "The Rhymer"  Miss Mac­ pherson  usesI 940 slang  in theI gso's, and  is false even to time.)  Miss Macpher­ son  should  look  to  Robert Duncan, the  great  American  Romantic, who  under­ stands  these  things  in  his poems of Osiris  and  Set,  not  as literary  gentlemen but as fleshy shadows  in his room's  corners.
In  his article'  on Jay  Macpherson's book, James  Reaney  says that she is trying to return  to  Paradise,  an  effort  that  fits into  one of the  major  themes of English poetry.  But  Paradise  is straight ahead, not somewhere on the trail  we have made since the Fall.  (Incidentally, in that  article  Reaney  points out  the most important contribution of  Miss  Macpherson, her  attempt to  make  a  book  rather than   a collection  of  poems.  The   suite  of  poems  was  a  valuable   artistic  innovation in Canada, and  Miss Macpherson and  James  Reaney  seem to have led the way with theirs.)
Reaney  also mentions  Miss Macpherson's care for  the  "myth  of things  within things" -which may  be a way of avoiding  the  horizontal view, but  which  may also  be  an  illusion  disguising  a  bookish  isolation.  The  poet  makes  the  choice  of

JAMES  REANEY



either  the  easy acceptance of that  old  pattern or  trying  to make  metaphor from contemporary discoveries  and  views, in his own skin.
I  catch,  in  the  poetry  of  Miss Macpherson, as well as in  that  of Le Pan  and Reaney,  Frye's  disinterest  in or  distrust  for science  and  technology.  The  poets in what  I've  called  the Canadian mainstream hearken  in their  various imaginations, to  Whitman's decree  that  science  and  art  are  no  enemies,  which  extends  from Blake's  pronouncement that  the  body and  the spirit  are one.
Douglas  Le  Pan  gives his view of the  result of man's  technology  in his poem, "Image of Silenus,"  where  in  contrast  to the  wilds he sees the  city, and  calls on his reader  to look at how men shrink  the gods in themselves, to


See them, the shrunken figures of desire,
Swarming  complete as when they were first here deposited, But  not  heroic, filling all the sky,
Miniatures  rather,  toys in a toy shop window.


There is Eliot's  detestation of his surroundings, which  is finally  a detestation of self, a useful Christian emotion,  but poor starting view for a poet, unless he really does feel  that  literature looks only  up  or  down,  in  this case down,  where  "The figures  fashioned   out  of  desperation/  ... all  throng   behind   the  ironic  mask." The  pun  says that  our  technology  will not  permit  myth-figures anywhere  but  in literature. The  romantic fallacy  holds  that  the  city destroys magic,  a sentimental and  reactionary view.  I suspect  that  Douglas  Le  Pan  doesn't  like  Marshall  Mc­ Luhan's books, for the wrong  reasons.
The  opposition  of wild  nature  and  ugly city, and  the diminishing of myth  are two consistent  themes  in Le Pan's  poetry.  He seems to be resentful  that  the Cana­ dian  forests were  not found  filled with  nymphs  and  sprites  and  their  chroniclers. In  "A Country Without a Mythology" he begins to lament  that  no mythology  has been  fashioned,   as  "No   monuments or  landmarks guide   the  stranger," but  a reader  begins later  to see that  it is history that's  not here in  (presumably) frontier  Canada, that  mythology  dances in its wild danger, figured by a war-painted "lust­  red  manitou." God  enough  for any land.  But  there  Le Pan  is stuck, in the wilds. Canada  confronts the  explorer  with  waterfalls   and  tangled   forests  that  a  man must  find his mind  in. Le Pan  seems to be trying to do what  Frye suggested-to identify  himself or his mind  with  the external  world, to choose where  he will pre­ tend  that  he sees gods.  As man  separates his self  and  the  "objects" of his sight, he  here  separates the  areas  of  those "objects," into untouched nature, to which

47

JAMES REANEY



the poets looks upward, and  the city of man's  technology,  to which he looks down, with irony.
In  falling  easily  to  the  romantic fallacy  (truth and  beauty  and  innocence  in
nature-all opposite in cities),  Le Pan  (punning on his name?)   also takes refuge in  literature as  alternative to  common   life,  answering   another Frye  description and  stepping  out  of the  mainstream, into  the forest  preserve.
I invite  you to read  these titles:  The  Boatman, The  Net  and  the Sword, The Wounded Prince,  A Suit  of Nettles.  They  all make  reference  to standard literary myth,  hoping  to suggest  universal  archetypes. But  any  reader  knows that  he has to  be prepared by books to know  what  the  universalities  are,  before  reading  the poems. In  so doing he knows that  he has made  himself a specialist. He is aware  of that  irony.  He  is so aware  due  to  the  knowledge  in  his conscious  and  civilized mind  that  has  forever  removed  all  possibility of stepping  into  the  world  of the child  or  the  primitive.  That is likely why  Frye  thinks  that  poetry  is myth  with belief  removed.




JAMES REANEY  was  once  a  Fryed  poet,  (A Suit  of Nettles,
1958)   but  has in  most recent  years broken  loose to make  myth  from  local  mate­ rials rather  than  spooning  it on from  the golden bowl of literary  materials. In  the later   poems  and  theatrical  experiments he  has  sought  a  way  of  understanding myth  and  myth-making not  as alternative to history  and  politics  and  commerce  and  city-planning, but  as the  register made  on the  emotions  and  unreason  by all those  things.  He  is not  the  reader  encountering Icarus  in  book  or  painting, and observing   his  after-images   in  contemporary flights  and  minds.  He  observes  the materials in Winnipeg or Stratford, and shines the infra-red light on them,  reveal­ ing  their  own  vibrations  that  are in the  present  act of  producing myth.  He is the man  on the  ground, seeing Icarus while he flies, and  understanding the meaning without gloss.
The  process really got under  way, I believe, in Twelve Letters to a Small Town, and  has  continued, despite  misunderstanding by CBC  actors,  in the  recent  radio suites,  and  is best apprehended in  the  latest  forms  Reaney  uses-amateurs  and children, the  actual  human materials produced   by  the  soil, speaking  the  words discovered  by both  the poet and  themselves, not simonized by the wax of literature.
Reaney   begins  to  move  beautifully away  from  Frye's  strictures  with  the  first quatrain in Twelve Letters  to a Small  Town  (Reaney may  deny  all this), where

JAMES  REANEY



the poet tries to see under  the literary  name laid on the "Avon  River Above Strat­
ford,  Canada" :

What  did the Indians  call you? For  you do not flow
With  English accents.
I hardly know
What  I should call you
Because before
I  drank  coffee or  tea
I  drank  you
With my cupped  hands
And you did not taste English to me

I find two things  important here -the  personal  pronoun  and  the determination to find myth  with  the senses, the taste of water  in cupped  hands,  not the idea of a sacred  Greek  or English stream. So that  when  Reaney  comes to say

The rain and the snow of my mind
Shall supply the spring of that  river
Forever

he has  moved  inside,  he has made  the world  human, as Frye  would  say, but  he has done  so by finding  out  that  what  is human is in  the  world  as surely  as the stream's water  is in his body, here  and  now. Not  Noah  of the book, but  Reaney of the river, is the prototype of this myth's  beginning  (and  middle,  anyway).
And  that  river, the river running through Stratford, runs into the Canadian mainstream at last, enriching it. Not that  this is final aspiration or subjective con­ cept of good. Just  a view of how it is to this horizontal sight.


NOTES

' James  Reaney,  "The   Third   Eye:  Jay  Macpherson's  The  Boatman,"    Canadian
Literature No. 3: 23-34 (Winter  1g6o).











49


LETTRE DE FRANCE


Echos Litteraires



Marguerite Primeau



UNMEME   PROBLilME  amf<onte  '" univenritai'" de' cilte;
du  Pacifique  qui viennent  passer quelques mois en France: celui de choisir parmi les
innombrables romans,  pieces de theatre, etudes litteraires et revues de taus genres, les ouvrages  qui leur decouvriront le vrai visage de la France. S'ils tiennent  surtout a  travailler  leur  petit  coin  de  jardin,  ils  risquent   d'en   meconnaitre les aspects nouveaux. En glanant a droit  et a gauche, ils courent  le danger  de n'en  pas saisir les traits  essentiels.
Nous  n'avons pas  resolu  le  probleme,  aussi n'offrons-nous ici qu'une opinion toute  personnelle,  sujette  aux  limites  imposees  a toutes  les opinions  personnelles.
Quels  sont  pour  nous  les traits  marquants de  la  France litteraire actuelle,  et quels  rapprochements peut-on  faire  avec le Canada fran<;ais?
Une  etude  du  Syndicat  National des Editeurs  indiquait, il y a quelques  mois,
que  la "Litterature generale" progresse a elle seule de plus de 20 millions d'exem­ plaires,  grace  aux  reimpressions  de petit format. Les progres considerables  realises au  Canada depuis  quelques  annees  dans le domaine de la diffusion du livre n'ont  pas  atteint  l'ampleur des  realisations  fran<;aises meme  si  l'on  fait  cas des condi­  tions differentes  qui  determinent le developpement culturel de notre  pays. L'Edi­ tion  Fran<;aise semble  done  se  bien  porter  malgre certains  obstacles tels  que
!'augmentation  du  prix  de  production et  les efforts  de  propagande   necessaires tant  a l'interieur qu'a l'exterieur du  pays.
LE  PHENOMENE qui restera  peut-etre la caracteristique  essen­
tielle de cette annee  est le nombre imposant de romancieres qui ant  fait irruption
sur  la  scene  litteraire.  Tout   d'abord, les laureates des  grands   prix:   Edmonde

so

ECHOS  LITTERAIRES



Charles-Roux: Oublier  Palerme (Prix  Goncourt); Irene  Monesi:   Nature morte devant la  fenetre  (Prix  Femina); la  jeune Canadienne, Marie-Claire Blais:  Une saison dans la vie d'Emmanuel (Prix Medicis). A ces noms  s'ajoutent ceux d'Albertine Sarrazin  (La  Traversiere), de Catherine Paysan  (Les feux  de  la Chandeleur), et  de  Solange  Fasquelle   ( L' Air  de  Venise). Simone  de  Beauvoir nous offre Les  belles images et Simone  Schwarz-Bart et son mari,  Un plat de  pore aux  bananes vertes.
On  a ecrit  que  sous certains  aspects, par  certaines  observations et reflexions, le roman  d'Edmonde Charles-Roux denotait une intelligence  virile, un cote honnete homme  tel qu'on l'entendait au  XVIIe siecle. Aussi importante nous semble !'op­ position constante entre le passe et le present  qui fait que la poesie du souvenir et la realite  brutale s'entrelacent tout  au  long  du  recit.  Le  roman  va  de 1'Amerique, neuve,  voyante  et  dure  aux  emigres  accourus  dans  l'espoir  d'une  vie plus facile, mais  qui  se  cherchent et se  regroupent pour  vivre  un  peu  du  passe, a la Sicile pauvre,  pays inoubliable ou l'on  a connu  le grand  amour  de la  jeunesse. Ecrivain  au  lyrisme  prenant,  Edmonde Charles-Roux a  cependant  tellement  souligne  1' "a  priori"  de sa these qu'on  sent  des le debut  que  quoi  que fasse 1'Amerique, la cause est deja  entendue et la sentence  prononcee. Le beau  role ayant  ete fixe une fois pour  toutes,  l'on  chercherait en vain  un seul  personnage sympathique parmi  tous  ces New-Yorkais.  De  plus, le milieu  americain-celui  d'un  hebdomadaire consacre  aux  recettes  de beaute  et a satisfaire  les "desirs  de fuite"  ou les "appetits de culture" de ses lectrices, done  forcement superficiel-, se trouve  aujourd-hui dans  n'importe quelle grande ville, car les moyens de diffusion sont les memes par­  tout  et le culte  de la  jeunesse et  du  sex  appeal  est un  phenomene mondial. Cette reserve ne porte  nullement atteinte a la richesse du roman  et a la beaute  du chant d'amour pour  le pays  prefere.
Le titre du roman  d'Irene Monesi est particulierement bien choisi pour des personnages  qui  sont  pris au  piege de leur  personnalite, famille-prison ou le pere detache, presque  absent,  n'a  rien  d'autre a faire  que  de  disparaitre, ou la  mere se  refugie  contre   une  maternite ni  voulue  ni  acceptee   dans  l'amour des  chats tandis  que leurs deux enfants  poussent comme des plantes sauvages.  Nul ne pourra echapper a 1'autre  (on  songe a 1'enfer  de H uis-C los) . Plus grave  encore,  Agathe et  Regis,  incapables d'echapper  a  leur  destin  qui  est  precisement   celui  de  leur pere  et  mere,  se calqueront malgre  leur  revolte  sur  l'image de  leurs  parents  et revivront  les memes  actes, la meme  servitude, la meme  frustration. La narratrice, une  jeune Anglaise entree  au pair chez le docteur  Jarrett, emaille de ses reflexions le  trajet  monotone et  desespere  que  serait  sans  elle la  vie de  ces quatre  person-

ECHOS LITTERAIRES



nages.  Le style d'lrene Monesi se prete  admirablement bien a un tel11ecit malgre certaines  longueurs: style qui  coule  avec a
la frustration se traduit en revolte et qu'on veut blesser parce  qu'on  est soi-meme profondement blesse.
Qu'y  a-t-il de commun entre  ces deux  ouvrages  et celui de Marie-Claire Blais? Tout d'abord, la  trame  de chacun  de  ces romans  se devide  comme  un  chapelet entre  les doigts  d'une  narratrice. Gianna fait  le  point  entre  un  passe  riche  au coeur  d'une Sicile  materiellement pauvre  et  le faux  brillant   de  Manhattan; la jeune  Anglaise  decouvre  le fil conducteur de la famille  Jarrett et le suit dans  son cercle  vicieux;   c'est  devant   l'omnipotente Grand-mere  d'une  narratrice  jamais situee  que  passent et repassent  les membres  de la famille  canadienne. Si la narra­ trice  est  textuellement  presente  chez  Edmonde Charles-Raux et  Irene  Monesi, elle n'en  est pas mains  une entite  vivante  dans le roman  de Marie-Claire Blais.
Ce  roman  canadien est dans  le vent des idees de notre epoque  par son attaque violente  contre   le  conformisme   et  le  traditionalisme d'une societe  subordonnee aux  regles  d'une religion  de  lettre  plutot  que  d'esprit. A l'encontre d'Edmonde Charles-Raux qui  a cherche  la beaute  et l'humain au coeur meme de la pauvrere, Marie-Claire Blais a  choisi de  demontrer comment  la  misere  corrompt les etres. Une  poesie s'en  degage  qui brille comme  un diamant nair  dans les feux duquel  se fondent la  purete  de  l'enfance et  le mysticisme  de la  jeunesse, et qui  consument enfin  les uns et  les autres.  Sauf  la  Grand-mere qui  continue de  regner! Roman nair  d'une famille  comme  dans  Nature  morte  devant  une  fenetre, avec un lyrisme plus sombre  pour decrire  des etre damnes! Marie-Claire Blais a voulu tout detruire d'un seul coup. Voila sans doute  pourquoi quelques  personnages  par ailleurs sympathiques inspirent un  certain  malaise  qui  leur  enleve  la compassion  du  lec­ teur.  En  tout  cas, pour  Marie-Claire Blais, l'enfance n'est  plus un monde d'inno­ cence,  et la  jeunesse bien  autre  chose que  l'univers  fragile  des reves.
Un  autre  ouvrage  ne marque pas mains parmi les nouveautes de l'annee. Malgre
!'indication contraire, La Traversiere  n'est  pas un  roman; c'est de l'histoire  vraie. Albertine Sarrazin a vecu cette sortie de prison et les difficultes qui en resultent: solitude,  tentations de l'alcoolisme, efforts pour travailler  honnetement, et rechute. Et  surtout, le desir  de  se raconter   et  de  se voir  publier! R,ecit pittoresque avec son  argot  de  prison,  mais aussi fine analyse  de tout  ce qui  l'a  conduite de prison en prison  pour  vol et cambriolage. Le livre d'Albertine Sarrazin est a la fois pudi­ que  et  authentique, d'une authenticite qui  touche  et  qui  amene  le sourire et ce courant de sympathie qui  manque un  peu  a  Marie-Claire Blais.  La  Traversiere  aurait   pu  etre  un  autre  roman   nair; Albertine Sarrazin  echappe  a la  tentation

52

ECHOS  LITTERAIRES



par  la  tendresse  et  par  un  sens de l'humour dont  le plus grand  merite  est de ne pas trap  se prendre au serieux.  C'est  une qualite  remarquable.
Les   feux  de  Ia Chandeleur racontent  une  histoire  d'amour. Dans  ce drame situe  au sein d'une famille,  Catherine Paysan  s'est placee au  point  de vue du  fils,
de l'homme. C'est  lui,  par  son  refus de croire  a un  amour  ressuscite, qui sera la
cause  de la tragedie. L'auteur a bien  dessine la femme  de quarante-huit ans que l'on  croit  folie  parce  qu'elle  n'hesite  devant   rien  pour  retrouver l'amour perdu, tout  comme  elle  ne  craint   pas  d'afficher ses sentiments, qu'il  s'agisse  de  justice
ou  de  poesie.  D'autre part,  on  peut  reprocher a Catherine Paysan  une  certaine
sentimentalite  dans  les  propos  du  fils et  une  sensibilite  un  peu  trap  feminine. Somme  toute,  le ton est assez juste pour  rendre  plausible  et reconfortante a notre
epoque  sceptique cette  histoire  d'amour entre  un  homme  et  une femme  plus du tout  jeunes.
Le dernier  livre de Simone  de Beauvoir  frappe par la vigueur  du style:  phrases courtes  et  alertes  qui  conviennent aux  reflexions  de  l'heroi:ne ou  a ses pensees.
C'est  un style qui  convient  aussi aux propos  banals  qu'on echange  au cours d'une soiree et qui  en  disent  long sur  le snobisme  du  petit  milieu.  Il faut  noter  ici une
alternance interessante. Laurence est tour  a tour  celle qui  commente les actes et
les faits-c'est  le  ]e  d'Oublier Palerme,  de  Nature  morte  devant  la   fenetre­
et le personnage traditionnel dont  les actions sont raportees  a la troisieme personne
par  un  auteur omniscient. Laurence joue done  deux  roles:  celui de l'heroi:ne qui va  et  vient  selon  les desirs de l'auteur et  celui  d'un  etre  qui  prend  tout  a coup
conscience  de  lui-meme  et qui  vit alors d'une vie propre  ou il semble  naturel de parler  a la  premiere   personne.  Les  belles images  traitent de !'indifference et  de
l'aveuglement volontaire d'un  certain  milieu  devant  les problemes  angoissants  de la  vie:  la  miscre  des  pauvres,  le mal,  la  mort.  La  petite  fille de  Laurence  com­
mence  a poser  des  questions  auxquelles  il faut  donner   une  reponse  ou  tout  au
mains  une  explication. On  a  "insensibilise" la  mere,  mais  pour  son  enfant, elle refuse !'illusion   qui  deforme   et  rend  la  realite  impossible  a  accepter. Laurence
ouvrira  les yeux de la  petite  Catherine sur la misere du monde.




NON SEULEMENT IL  y A  eu sur la scene litteraire en France une  "arrivee en  force  des femmes", mais  aussi une  importance grandissante  ac­
cordee  a la femme  qui  n'est  plus  jeune comme  hero"ine de roman. Ce trait  ne se
retrouve   pas  chez  des  auteurs canadiens comme   Marie-Claire  Blais,  Rejean


53

ECHOS LITTERAIRES



Ducharme et Jean  Basile dont !'inspiration est centree sur I'enfance  et Ia premiere jeunesse.
L' air de V enise  appartient a  cette  categorie.  L'histoire de  deux  femmes  d'un
certain  age,  l'une  revient  a Venise  pour  retrouver les traces  d'un ancien  amour, l'autre, "vieille  fille",  s'offre  cette  premiere  et  derniere  folie qu'est  un  voyage  a Venise. Solange  Fasquelle  presente  une serie de sequences  ou se meut  tantot l'une tantot l'autre jusqu'a Ia fin du  recit alors que  Ia pauvre  Antonella, courtisee  par quelqu'un qui  lui conviendrait parfaitement, se laisse entrainer dans les bras d'un gigolo paye  par  Carla  qui se venge ainsi de ses deceptions.  Ce livre est cruel mais vrai en devoilant  les ravages  de Ia vieillesse auxquels  peuvent s'attendre les femmes qui  ne vivent  que  pour  etre  admirees  ou qui  ne savent  pas se construire  une  vie libre,  a leur  mesure.
Avec  Un   plat  de  pore aux  bananes  vertes, le theme  de  Ia vieillesse passe au premier   plan.  lei,   Andre   Schwarz-Bart  et  sa  femme  Simone  nous  ouvrent les yeux sur  Ia misere des noirs. Le monde  qu'ils evoquent leur  est familier; Simone est creole et tous les deux  connaissent  bien le monde  antillais.  C'est  Ia que  nait  Ia mulatresse  Solitude  dont  nous apercevons l'ombre dans  ce premier  volume  de Ia "Geste  des Noirs".  Schwarz-Bart reconnait que  Ia misere de l'homme noir est Ia meme  que  celle  de  l'homme  juif:   "II   y a  le meme  sentiment de  fatalite -le sentiment que  dans  cent  ans,  dans  mille ans,  un  Noir  sera  toujours  un  Noir.  Ce sentiment de fatalite me hantait, moi, !'enfant juif ..." Le theme  de Ia vieillesse l'obsede  aussi  depuis  longtemps,  "car  on  peut  y lire,  en  toutes  lettres,  le theme de Ia mort; et, en filigrane,  Ia verite  sur  Ia civilisation  occidentale qui  est fondee sur  l'holocauste quotidien  des  animaux, sur   Ia  domination de  Ia  femme,  sur
!'exploitation de  l'homme, et  sur  Ia liquidation insidieuse  des vieillards,  des  in­ firmes,  des  alienes  mentaux  et  autres   laisses-pour-compte." Paroles  dures  que celles-la, mais Andre  Schwarz-Bart n'aurait-il pas raison  beaucoup plus qu'on ne voudrait le croire?

Une   troisieme  caracteristique de  Ia  litterature franc;aise  d'aujourd'hui est  le role nouveau  echu  aux  "hommes de Ia quarantaine". Les critiques  s'accordent a croire,  en  general,   que  quatre auteurs   ont  consolide  leur  position:   Jean-Louis Curtis   (La  Quarantaine), Robert Sabatier (Le  Chinois  d'Afrique), Franc;ois Nourrissier   (Une  histoire  franfaise), et Jose Cabanis (La  Bataille de Toulouse).
La  Bataille  de Toulouse est  un  soliloque  ou !'auteur et  le  narrateur ne sont qu'un seul  et  meme  personnage parti  en  quete  de  lui-meme.  Apparait d'abord l'homme de Ia quarantaine qui  vient  de rompre  avec Gabrielle. C'est  a cause de

54

ECHOS  LITTERAIRES



cette  separation qu'il  penetre  plus  profondement dans  son arne  a lui et qu'il  en vient a sc connaitre: l'homme libre, epicurien, jouisseur et lettl'e, puis 1'adolescent sensible qu'il  a ete, et enfin, tout  au fond  de lui-meme,  l'enfant dont  le plus grand bonheur avait  ete de passer un  Noel a la Trappe. De cet enfant, il ne reste guere que  le  vague  regret  d'avoir perdu  "une certaine  presence  qui  chassait  toute in­ quietude". Les fetes de l'enfance ne durent pas.  Il se retrouve  done  seul  avec la perspective  d'une ceuvre  qu'il   ne  reussit  pas  a  ecrire,  parce  qu'ecrire  est  aussi difficile que  d'essayer   de  penetrer   dans  le  Paradis  Terrestre apres  en  avoir  ete chasse.  C'cst  l'histoire  d'un   livre  qu'on n'arrive pas  a  ecrire  et  d'un  amour  qui meurt.  Le ton  traduit une  melancolie  faite  de poesie et de nostalgic, de souvenirs et de  regrets  qu'illuminent parfois  un  rayon  d'espoir.

Qu'y  a-t-il a signaler  dans la saison theatrale de 1966-67?
Decevante en  ce qui  concerne  les nouveautes, cette  annee  est surtout marquee par  quelques  grandes reprises.  Une  exception  se  pose dans  le  premier  cas  avec les deux  pieces de  Nathalie Sarraute  ( Le  Silence  et  Le  M ensonge)   qui  ant  in­ augure  la salle du  Petit  Odeon. Ecrites  pour la radio,  ces deux  pieces ne sont  pas mains du vrai theatre sous la direction  de Jean-Louis Barrault. Le Cheval evanoui  et L'Echarde de Franc;oise Sagan  n'ont  pas ajoute  grand-chose ala renommee  de l'auteur, sinon  le  personnage de  Lord  Chesterfield qui  apporte  un  humour nouveau.
Franc;ois  Perier   a  presente,  sous la  direction   d'And!'€  Barsacq,   une  nouvelle piece de Felicien  Marceau, Un   jour  j'ai rencontre  la V bite, qui offre uncertain interet.
La  premiere   piece  de  Franc;oise Dorin, ecrite  sous le pseudonyme de Fvederic Renaud, a  obtenu   de  la  faveur   aupres   du  public.  Piece  a  rebondissements, le suspense  y  joue le role  principal. Il  y a des mots  droles,  parfois  mordants, mais peut-etre  y a-t-il  davantage d'esprit.
Il y a eu scandale au sujet des Paravents  de Jean Genet  et le public s'est trouve partage  sur  la  valeur  du  spectacle.  Cependant, il faut  admettre que  Jean  Genet sait  remuer  la  conscience  avec "une  sorte  de chant  acre  et somptueux de revolte et  de  mort  qui  prend  a la  gorge  et  au  coeur". Si le Theatre de  la  Huchette a depuis  dix  ans  a  l'affiche   La  Cantatrice  chauve et  La  Ler;on  d'Ionesco, La Comedie-Franc;aise a maintenant a son  repertoire La Soif et la Faim,  tandis  que
1'Athenee  a rem porte  le plus grand  succes de la saison avec  Le  Roi  se meurt, des reprises, certes,  mais  qui  prennent "ala gorge et au coeur".
On   continue  a  jouer  Beckett   (En   attendant  Godot, Oh!   les  beaux   jours),


55

ECHOS  LITTERAIRES



Anouilh  (Becket), Audiberti  (Le  Cavalier  seul). Jean-Louis  Barrault  et Edwige Feuillere,  les Mesa et Yse de la  premiere  representation,  ont  repris avec succes Le  Partage  de  Midi  de Claudel,  et Jean-Louis  Barrault  et Genevieve Page,  Le Soulier  de  Satin.
A la Comedie-Fran  aise,
neUe, geste  d'Antoine   Bourseiller qui  a  fait  couler  beaucoup  d'encre.  Jacques Charon  s'est vu confier la reprise du Voyage de Monsieur Perrichon, et La Reine morte  de Montherlant connait  un succes continu.
Certaines reuvres etrangeres ont ,ete particulierement  appreciees. Nous pouvons citer des auteurs  bien connus comme Pirandello  et Tchekov  dont le prestige ne fait que grandir,  le premier avec Se Trouver, piece representee pour la premiere fois en France,  et le second avec Les Trois  Soeurs, Le  Duel et La Mouette. A ces noms s'ajoutent  celui de John  Saunders  dont la piece La  prochaine   fois je vous chanterai  alterne au Theatre  Antoine avec celle de Pirandello, d'Ernst  Toller avec Hop-la, nous vivons, et, naturellement,  de Peter Weiss avec Marat-Sade. La vogue du  theatre  anglais se continue, consequence de certains succes de la saison  prece­ dente, comme Ah  Dieu!, que laguerre est  jolie.
Le poete algerien, Kateb Yacine, a remporte un premier succes au petit T.N.P. (Theatre National  Populaire)   avec Les ancetres redoublent de  ferocite, piece qui exprime !'inquietude de !'arne  algerienne. Un second sucoes est assure alors que la piece sera representee en Algerie, cette fois.

Que  conclure d'une  enquete comme celle-ci?
Tout  d'abord, que le roman se porte mieux que le theatre  en ce qui concerne son renouvellement.  Le role des femmes dans le roman  contemporain,  aussi bien que  celui des "hommes  de la quarantaine", donnent  au  roman  une orientation
particuliere,  celle d'une  sensibilite riche qui sait mettre  a profit les le ons
vie. Certes, il ne manque  pas de jeunes auteurs prets a voler de leurs propres ailes,
mais peu d'entre  eux ont attire !'attention des critiques. II n'y a pas, en France, cette  annee,  d'ouvrage  comparable  a Une  saison dans  la  vie  d'Emmanuel ni a
L'Avalee  des Avales.
Le style du roman est, en general, alerte et vigoureux. Abondent la poesie et le lyrisme, et beaucoup d'images. Le narrateur  y joue un role important,  tout comme la  psychanalyse et l'autobiographie. Les reuvres sont plutot sombres avec un penchant  marque  pour la solitude, la frustration,  et les souffrances de la vieillesse comme themes. Le desir de revolte est mains souligne que dans le roman canadien actuel, ce qui s'explique  par le fait que les auteurs marquants  de cette annee ne

ECHOS  LITTERAIRES



sont pas de la  premiere  jeunesse. L'on  sent qu'ils ont  vide leur querelle avec la vie, sauf peut-etre Simone de Beauvoir et Andve et Simone Schwarz-Bart.
Nous pouvons remarquer  une nouvelle importance  accordee  au  roman  cana­
dien, surtout  aux  jeunes auteurs, meme si l'on s'etonne  que ce qui s'ecrit  main­
tenant  au Canada  franc;ais ressemble beaucoup  a ce qui s'ecrit en France.
Si, pour sa part,  les creations du  thea.tre franc;ais actuel semblent  plutot stati­ ques en regard  du  roman, !'action  theatrale  elle-meme a pris de I'envergure. La preuve  en est le renouveau  de vie theatrale  en province avec les  Maisons de la Culture,  innovation  qui date  de quelques annees. On  pourrait  citer !'elan  donne par la Maison de la Culture  de Bourges ou des pieces comme Le Maitre de San­ tiago de Montherlant et Oh!, les beaux  jours de Beckett ont ete representees par le Theatre  de France.  A !'occasion d'un  festival du th,eatre de province qui a eu
lieu dans cette ville, une piece d'Audiberti, Coeur a cuir, cr6ee a cette occasion, a
ete si bien rec;ue par la critique qu'elle prenait la route de Paris, quelques semaines plus tard.
Par  contraste  au roman  qui beneficie d'une  grande  diffusion grace aux Livres de Poche, le theatre  a beaucoup  plus de peine a trouver son statut  economique.
La television et le cinema, pour tout dire la societe industrielle d'aujourd'hui,  lui portent  prejudice.  Peut-etre  n'y  a-t-il  pas  aussi suffisamment  de  bon  nouveau theatre  pour  un  public eclaire. Neanmoins, le theatre  franc;ais aura  toujours ses disciples et les trois coups continueront,  dans  plus de 50 theatres  parisiens et, en
province, dans les Maisons de la Culture,  a faire se lever le rideau sur un monde
disparu,  mais non oublie, ou sur notre epoque  actuelle avec ses refus, sa frustra­
tion et sa violence.




















57


review articles



A NATIONAL  STYLE?

Julian Symons



Modern Canadian Verse. Edited  by A. J. M. Smith. Oxford  University  Press. $6.50.


A CONFESSION FIRST of the reviewer's  disqualifications, one of which is  in  a  way  a  qualification, for  writing about   this   book.   I   come   to  Canadian verse with  a characteristic English  ignor­ ance  of  its  background and  nature. The  only  Canadian poets  fully  known  to  me are    those    published    in    this   country, Douglas   Le    Pan,   Malcolm   Lowry,
A.  J. M.  Smith,   David   Wevill,  George
Woodcock,   with   the   addition  of  some poems by E. J. Pratt  familiar to me from
anthologies or  magazines.  I  add  in  self­ defence   that   I  am  probably   at  least  as well-informed   as   most   English    critics about   Canadian  poetry,   which   is  diffi­ cult   to  come   by  here.  Looking  on  the shelves   of   the   London   Library,   which has  as good  a  collection  of  verse as any private   library   in  this  country,   I  found  less  than   half   a  dozen  volumes  by  the writers  represented  here.
Ignorance  is  never  a  blessing,  and   I can  understand that  admission  of it may be  an  irritant to  Canadian poets,  yet  it may  be a good  thing  in  a way that  they should realize that  their work is almost unknown   in  Britain,   as  before  the  war such  a  poet  as  Wallace  Stevens  was  al­ most  unknown. And  in  this  case  ignor­ ance  does  also mean  freshness.  It  means
 coming   to  the  whole  bulk  of  Canadian poetry without  preconceptions about schools and styles, and  there is I hope something  to   be  said   for  such   an   ap­ proach.
The second disqualification is positive. Approximately a third  of the anthology consists   of   work   by   poets   writing    in French. The  existence of this separate culture and  language is obviously signifi­ cant,   as  it  would   be  if  a   considerable body of Welsh poets wrote in their  native language rather  than   in  English,  but  I don't  feel competent to  judge this  poetry or  to  comment on  a  situation in  which "some   of  the  younger   poets  writing   in French consider themselves  poets of Que­ bec,  not  of  Canada", except  to  say  that  the  high  proportion of  poets  writing   in French  surprises  me.  But  informed  com­ ment   on  this  must   come  from  another source.
What   does  Canadian verse in  English
look like, to a foreign eye and ear? The immediate impression  is of immense con­ fidence,  a  certainty  of  approach  that   is particularly   marked    among    the   older writers.  There is nothing  parochial,  and little  that   is  regional,  about   their   work. It implies  a  confidence  that  few  British poets  have  possessed  in  this  century   to

REVIEW ARTICLES



take    the   wntmg   of   long   poems   for granted,  and   to  use  without fuss  varia­
tions  of  well-worn  forms,  as  E.  J. Pratt
uses the  Hudibrastic couplet  in his poem about  "The  Cachalot" who

Sighted  a  hammerhead  and   followed   him, Ripped him  from  jaw  to ventral, swallowed
him·
Pursued  a 'shovelnose   and   mangled him; Twisted  a   broadbill's  neck   and   strangled
him.

In a way the tone of this is heroic, and the  element  of  heroism,  in  the  battle  of men pitted against other men or against nature, is a constant  theme,  even in such recent  work  as  Peter  Miller's  "The Cap­ ture  of  Edwin   Alonzo  Boyd"  and  Peter Dale Scott's "Argenteuil County". Human heroism  as a theme  for  poetry belongs to a  civilization  still  sufficiently  unmechan­ ical  and   certain   of  its  own  strength  to feel  optimism   about   the  future. On  the evidence    of   this    anthology    Canadian poets   don't    often   write   directly   about  their  country, although there  is a power­ fully  visual  free-ranging extract  from   a long   "Poem   on   Canada"  by   Patrick Anderson, but they are prepared to face considerable themes  without hesitant self­ questioning,   and  to  say what  they  think in the assurance  that  an individual's view is of importance.
The  most interesting of the older  poets have  the  defects  of these  qualities.  F. R. Scott  and  Robert   Finch  are  good  organ­ izers of firmly  rhythmic poems,  but there  is  at   times  something  both   coarse  and derivative  about   their   forms  of  expres­ sion.   In   Finch's    "The   Collective   Por­  trait" the  couplets  are  too  near  to  their eighteenth-century models, and also some­ times  near  to forcefully-expressed cliche:

The   farther  back   his  ancestry is  thrust
The  nearer he  derives  from  Adam's dust.
 Though  with   a  gun   he   makes   his  fellows skip,
Over   himself   his  senses  wield  a  whip.

A   tendency   towards   generalization, to write  about   Man  rather than  individual men,  to  "take  the  anonymity of heroism for granted" as Northrop Frye says about Pratt,    is  noticeable.  At   times   the   big words  seem to  be coming  too easily, and the  tackling  of  major   themes  has  some­ thing  mechanical about  it  as if  the poet were  saying:  "This is a big country,  and I've  got  to  write  a  big  poem about  it."  After  reading   fifty  pages  another im­ pression  follows  the  first  one  of  poetic confidence: that   Canadian  poetry   has suffered   greatly  from   the  absence  of  a single  major  talent.   Pratt  is certainly  the most  important  of  the  older  poets,  but although his  talent  is a  fine  one  it  can­ not  be called  truly  original  like  those  of Hardy, Eliot  or  Vachel  Lindsay.  I  have chosen  these  three  disparate  names  deli­ berately  to show that  I am  not  trying  to denigrate  Pratt,   who  may  have  been  a better   poet   than   Lindsay   but   was  cer­ tainly   a  less  original   one.   At  no  time does  one  ever  feel   that   Pratt   or  Scott was influenced  by  the  "revolution of the word"  which  affected  the  best American  and   British   poets  in  the  Twenties   and Thirties.   They  adapted  existing   forms with  great skill, but  there  are times when Pratt  appears  a  lesser  Edwin   Arlington Robinson,   Scott  an  imitator working  in half  a  dozen  styles.  A  great  poet  might have    ordered    the    tone    of   Canadian poetry  for  a generation. As it was, much Canadian  verse  became   derivative and literary.    The    imitations  produced    are very much  like the real  thing, so that  one
exclaims:   "That might  almost  have  been
written by  Frost,  Masters,  Hart  Crane" ( cf.  A.  M.  Klein  on  Montreal, "0 city

59

REVIEW ARTICLES



metropole, isle  riverain"). But  they  are not  the  real  thing,  and  perhaps  basically the  poets  know  it.  A few  writers  ducked away from  the grandeur of Pratt's themes and  turned   to  European modernism, cocking a snook at the solemnity of their contemporaries. A. J. M. Smith, in poems like  "Ballade un  peu  banale", is one  of these,  John   Glassco,  Irving   Layton  with his   Audenesque   half-rhymes,   and    the much  younger  Daryl Hine  are others. Several  poets  are  quirkily  and  entertain­ ingly original, like Margaret Avison:

That Eureka of Archimedes out  of his  bath
Is  the  kind   of  story  that kills  what it  con­
veys;
Yet   the    banality  is  right  for   that   story,
since  it  is not  a  communicable one
But   just   a   particular  instance of
The kind   of  lighting up  of  the   terrain That leaves  aside  the  whole  terrain,  really, But  signalizes,   and   compels,   an  advance in
it.

Miss Avison's adroit  verse is distinctly modern, but she has a link with Pratt's narrative poems  in  her  well-told  conver­ sation  piece,  "A  Story".
I am  not  sure  how  much  the  conver­ sational   tone  of  almost   all  the  poets  is the  result  of the  editor's  personal  prefer­  ences,  but   on  the  face  of  it  Canadian poets    have    absorbed    modern   idioms easily, although it is  right to stress again that  this is not  the same  thing  as origin­  ating  an idiom.  Nothing in the book gave me  the  shock  of  encountering something new  in  the  use  of language. An outsider  must  remain  unsure  also  of  how  much the  sense  many  poets  give  of  having  all the  space  and  time  in  the  world  reflects the  editor's choice of "verse of a certain technical    distinction  that   expresses   im­ plicitly  the  special  character  imposed by geography,  climate,   history,  and   society upon  an individual poetic temperament".

6o
 History  doesn't  come into  it much,  but  it is  tempting  to  link  the  length  of  many poems with  the size and comparative emptiness  of  the  country.
There is a fairly  sharp  division  in  the book between those poets who have been influenced   by  their   Canadian  elders  or by European writers,  and  youngers  poets who  owe obvious  debts  to the  San  Fran­ cisco  beats  and   to  William  Carlos  Wil­ liams. D.  G. Jones'  "Soliloquy  to Absent Friends"   embodies   the   whole   of   Wil­ liams's   wheelbarrow   poem   ("So   much  depends  upon ...")   as a  quotation, and then  adds the  poet's  own  Williamsesque comment:

or   a   broken    basket   of  clothespins slowly  filling   with   snow

This kind of thing seems to me wholly derivative, and  so in its different  way do poems  like  Joe  Rosenblatt's  "Metamor­ pho 1":

Lately I've become  religious about atoms and    this    is   how    I've  come   to   dig    the
element man

Of  course  Mr.  Smith  is right  in saying that  instantaneous communication and "the  universal  half-education supplied  by the  mass media" have  largely  eliminated "the distinction between a native and a cosmopolitan tradition",  or  as  I  would put  it have  made  poets in different coun­ tries  write  more  like each  other,  but  too many  of the  poets under  forty seem to be sacrificing  their  individuality in the desire to  be  briskly  up  to  date.  There are  ex­ ceptions,   like  the  remarkable  autobiog­ raphical   poem   by    Phyllis   Gotlieb,   or James  Reaney  in  his poem  on  the  Avon River,  but  a  lot  of the  young  poets seem to  be  running  hard   down   the  road   to nowhere.   However  "universal"  our   art

REVIEW  ARTICLES



has  become  there  is  still  something  dis­ tinctively   British  about   poetry  like  that  of  Philip  Larkin,  distinctively  American  about   that  of  Robert   Lowell.  There are things  that  Canadian  poets  are  particu­ larly  good  at-descriptive  verse, stories, autobiographical  snatches  like  Miss Got­  lieb's-and  this  implies  that   there   are still specifically Canadian  lines for poetic development. This  collection  contains   a great  deal  of  talented verse  which,  as  I
 have  said,  cannot   be called  parochial or narrowly   nationalistic. The   reverse  may perhaps  be true: that  the poets who have naturally and  eagerly  looked outwards to Britain    and   America    might    profitably look  inwards  again,  to see what  use the experience  of  living  in  Canada  can   be to   them.   What   Canadian  poetry   most lacks  (and  what  Larkin, Lowell and some other  writers  by contrast have  been  able to use profitably)   is a truly  national  style.








Countercurrents
in the study
of English

BY PROFESSOR HARRY  LEVIN,
Irving  Babbitt  Professor of Comparative Literature, Harvard  University

This  work, delivered  originally  as a Sedgewick  Memorial Lecture
at  the  University  of British  Columbia, is a brilliant survey  of recent,  and  not so recent  developments in English  and  American
literary  criticism  and  scholarship. It concludes  with  some
trenchant comments on the significance  of studies in comparative literature, a subject  on which  Professor  Levin writes with
unquestioned authority.

SEVENTY-FIVE CENTS

Available  from:
THE PUBLICATIONS CENTRE, UNIVERSITY OF  BRITISH COLUMBIA, VANCOUVER 8, B.C.

SOMETHING OR NOTHING

Gerard Tougas



GERARD BESSETTE,   Incubation.  Macmillan. $3·95·


WHEN Not  for Every  Eye ap­ peared  in  1962, it  was clear  that  a  most unusual   literary   event   had   taken  place. Gerard  Bessette's  first  important   novel, considered  by some to be a minor master­  piece, had  been rendered into English  not so  much   by  a  proficient   translator,  as by a highly  gifted  writer.  The  collabora­ tion  of  two  artists,  each  capable  of  em­ bodying  his  vision  of  life  in  an  original  style,  is a  rare  occurrence. When  it  was known   that   Bessette's  Incubation, pub­  lished   by   the  Librairie Deom   in   1g65, was  being  translated by Glen  Shortliffe, expectations, among  those who  had  been most impressed by the first joint literary venture, naturally began  to  rise.
The  attractive volume  brought  out  by
Macmillan's  with   the   same   title   as  in the  original   French-Incubation- has confirmed    the   verdict    of   1962.   Glen Shortliffe's  translation,   while    faithful, goes much  beyond  proficiency  and  stands on  its  own  merits  as  a  creation   in  lan­ guage.  The  proper   place  for  mentioning the   translation  is  therefore   at   the   be­ ginning  of this review, instead  of leaving a   few   congratulatory   remarks   for   the last few lines, as is the custom  when  com­ menting on  the  piano accompaniment to a  great  singer's  performance.
A   brief   analysis   of   Incubation   will allow  a  glimpse  of  the  formidable  diffi­ culties  which  Shortliffe had  to  overcome  and  serve  the  purpose  at  the  same  time of explaining why Bessette's  novel consti-
 tutes  one  of the  highest  achievements of the  French-Canadian  novel.
Most  commentaries which  I have  read
on  the  style adopted by Bessette miss the point.   It is  not  really  accurate  to  refer to  the stream-of-consciousness technique, as many  critics  have done, when referring to  the  English  version.  Nor  are  the  criti­ cisms in French more  helpful, character­ ized  as they  are  by too easy  comparisons with  the anti-roman of  Nathalie Sarraute or Robbe-Grillet. (Besides, the last-named novelists  cannot  be  lumped   together   in this  way.)   The  pertinent questions  to  be asked   about   Bessette's  style  are  surely:  what   are   the  reasons  behind   the  adop­  tion  of the  individualistic prose of Incu­ bation  and  is that  prose successful?
The most striking aspect of Bessette's language lies in its rhythm. From  the first page  to  the  last  can  be heard  the  muted but  recognizable pulse of a sensitive  per­ sonality.  If the  beat,  though  regular, is dulled,  this is to be explained  by the  per­ vasive  fumes   of  alcohol   and   the   even more  numbing effect  of  the  senseless re­ petitions  of  daily  life.  For  this, in  effect, is the  burden  of the whole novel:  we are all  immersed   in  a  futile  effort  to  make sense  out  of   unrelated  and  insignificant  events,   which   unfortunately  have    the power  to  cause  pain  and  death.  In  order  to    convey   this   thought,   Bessette   has created  a language of his own, which, contrary to what  some  readers  have con­ cluded,   offers  no  real  difficulties  either

REVIEW ARTICLES



of   understanding  or   of   interpretation. The   fact   that   Bessette  makes  extensive usc of artificial  punctuation marks  to  re­ place  the  more  traditional ones  is  proof that,   having  striven   for  clarity,  he  can­ not   be  described   as  avant-garde,   even though   he  has  succeeded   in   being  ori­ ginal.
The  plot,  if such  it can  be called, is of
minor  importance. The  author has  deli­ berately   set  out   to   faire  quelque   chose de  rien.   It  is the  working  out  of a  very banal  marital  situation that  matters.
During the  war  years  in  London, Gordon,   a  Canadian, has  an  affair  with an   English   girl,   Nini.   He   returns    to Canada, marries   a  very  proper  Toronto girl,  sires  two  children   and  settles  in  a small   university   town   in  Ontario. Ten years later, Nini arrives on the scene and becomes a library assistant in the same university where Gordon teaches English literature.  Nini,  realizing  that   the  situa­ tion   is   hopeless,   seeks   refuge   in   the friendship of an  old  professor  of  linguis­ tics, Weingerter, whose  Jewish  wife  had perished  years  before  in  a  German   con­ centration  camp.   Nini  gradually  moves from  despondency to  despair  and  finally commits  suicide.
With these bare elements, Bessette has woven a narrative whose distinctive qual­ ity, as has  been  mentioned at  the  outset, finds  its  ultimate  expression  in   an   un­ mistakable  rhythm.   One   of   the   finest examples    of   this   persistent    throbbing effect,   brought   about   by   repetitions   of thought and  sentence  structure, a maca­  bre humour and  refined language,  occurs near  the  end  of   the  book,  in  a  passage which   will  no   doubt   appear   in  future anthologies   of   French   Canadian  litera­ ture:
 poor   us  poor   miserable  bipeds   who  should never   have   gone   vertical  never   have  stood erect   over   this   earth  never   have   left   this mud   never  have  abandoned this  slime  with its   aroma    of  wet   dung,  it   had   all   begun in  London in  a  blackout peopled by ghosts trampling  scampering  scurrying  like   rats, like  half-crazed  ants   seized  with   the  panic that  overtakes them   when   some  giant   foot kicks  open   and   crushes   their   ant-hill,  run­ ning   right   and   left   dashing about   helter­ skelter   in  the  blackness   cutting  across  each other's  paths  losing    each   other   bumping into   each   other  again   climbing  over   each other, all  to  the  din   of   the   howling   sirens the  spitting  guns,  seeking  an  opening look­ ing  for  any  orifice  through which  to plunge underground   to  disappear  into   the   bowels of  the  earth  with  their   pitiful  little baggage their  few  shabby portable possessions, hurry­ ing  along  in  the  night  through foggy streets racing  madly  men  and   women   alike   over­ taken   by   panic  fleeing   death  and   danger like   ants   or   rats,    two   of   them    meeting bumping  into  each  other then  fleeing  along  together   under  the   illusion    of   being   en­ gaged   in   processes   of  thought  while  being  hauled  forward driven along   by instinct by fear   by   panic,  a  male   a  female   trying  to come   together  trying  to   unite    imagining because  they  are  bipeds   because   they  stand vertical because   their  ancestors in the course of  a  biological fantasy  through  a  practical joke   of   the   evolutionary  process   little   by little  displaced their  vertebral axes  (at  least during  their   waking   hours)  by  ninety  de­ grees,  imagining that  they   think,   that  they are   masters   as  they  say  of  their   fate,  hav­  ing    deep    down    learned  but  one   thing namely   that they  will  die,  meanwhile  mov­ ing  about on  the  face  of  the  soil in  a  half­  dream a  half-sleep  a  man   a  woman  trying to  come  together  trying to  give  each  other warmth  trying   hand  in   hand    to   make  it together  back   to   that   horizontal   posture that  position they  should   never  have  aban­ doned   that   posture which   their  anthropoid ancestor  should    never   have   had   the   mad impulse  to  distort  through   that  insensible catastrophic   backward    swing   into    homo  erectus    mulier    erecta,   the  spinal    column straightening  bit  by  bit  into   the  perpendi­ cular,  the   arms   becoming  bit   by  bit   too short   the  legs  too  long,   then   the  awkward laughable gait  like  walking on  stilts  bump­ ing  back  to  earth  at  every  step  falling for­  ward   onto  a  spindly disproportionate  limb,  that constant  cranky scissors-movement belly

REVIEW ARTICLES


ballooning   shoulders   subsiding   all  the  or­ gans   liver   spleen   intestines    heart  . lungs (clinging   as   best  they  could   tth•s   ff­ balance  capsizing  structure)  bulgmg stram­  ing  sagging  toward   the  earth   they  should never  have  left,  homo  erectus  that  mons­  trous   brain   that   teratological   excrescence dandled   unsteadily  on  the  end  of  a spindly turkey-neck  starting in  to  secrete  and  de­ posit   that   epiphenomenal   mildew   called thought,   homo   sa piens   men   and   women imagining way back in  the darkness  of pre­ history that they could  control  their  destiny indeed   already   prey   to   the   illusion   that they   had   mastered    their   fate,  the   f acial mask,    shrinking    stretching   flexing    into wrinkles   of   anxiety   furrows   of   anguish, close-coupled   to   that    egg-shaped  cranial shell   hermetically   stuffed   wih   agony  and delusion


This quotation  allows us to answer the question:    why  did   Bessette  choose  to write  in  this  incantatory fashion?  Ob­ viously, because  the  theme  which  Incu­  bation  exemplifies,  namely  that   life  is repetitious and  meaningless, is well served by  an  outwardly   somnolent  style,  ren­ dered even more plausible by the state of inebriety   in   which   the   narrator    and Gordon  find themselves at  the beginning of the novel.
Some  reservations  can  be  made  con­ cerning the typographical  aids devised by Bessette to facilitate the reading of I ncu­ bation. Artistic unity being his purpose­ the  flow of  language  conforming  to the realities  described-he had  no  interest in   making  his  meaning  obscure  or  in rendering  his  novel  difficult  by leaving the  reader  to  discover  who is talking  or thinking  aloud. Having  done away with most  punctuation and  to a great  extent with   paragraphs,   Bessette  has  supplied reading  aids of  his own. These  by their very nature  are  arbitrary  and  cannot  be said to be an improvement  on traditional punctuation. For example, when dialogue is   interrupted   by   comments   on   the
 
MARGARET   ATWOOD


The Animals zn That Country

The  poems in  this  new  collection are   less  subjective   than   those  in The  Circle Game and  the range of themes  is wider,  but  they  contain the same excitement and  tension as they  reveal  compelling   poetic  in­ sights about a world that is by turns chaotic  and  rigidly ordered, giving birth  to a viable human  world that is  capable  of   containing  its  own opposites.
$5.00 cloth, $2.75 paper


OXFORD

REVIEW ARTICLES



speaker's  appearance, Bessette shows the two  levels  of  reality  by a  dash  followed by  a  vertical   stroke.   At  other   times,  a sudden  change in the flow of thought is indicated  by  a  capital   letter   appearing in  the  middle  of a line.
It is  significant   that   Shortliffe-no doubt  in consultation with  the  author­ has  seen  fit  to  disregard  some  of  these aids and  has  divided  the  English  version into  a  larger   number   of  paragraphs. In the  original   French,  Bessette's  desire  to do  away  with  paragraphs (hardly  a new idea  if  one  remembers   that   Proust   had imagined   that  he  could   write   Remem­ brance of Things Past as one single para­ graph spread  over a few thousand pages) produced an  unsatisfactory arrangement for  the  eye.  With   respect  to  this  minor point,   the   English   version  can  be  con­ sidered  an  improvement on  the  original.
More   important  is  Shortliffe's   treat­ ment   of   vocabulary.  With   a   flair   for which  there  is  no  equivalent in  French­ Canadian  literature,  Bessette  has created a  lexicon  of  his  own.  The  vagaries  of  a cultivated  mind   working  under   the  in­ fluence  of alcohol  lead  quite  naturally to the  minting  of  words.  In   all  cases,  the new  vocabulary  so  devised  stands   clear in  its  meaning,  although it  does  require  on the part  of the reader extensive knowl­ edge,  from  reference  to  Pascal's  ciron  to Marivaux  and   Rogojine.  Quite   rightly, Shortliffe  did  not  aim  at  a  comparable virtuosity  in  English,   but  h;ts  produced suitable  adaptations  instead.   To  take  a single example  among many, ombilicaliser might  have  produced in English  a rather facetious  to umbiliculate. Shortliffe  chose instead the perfectly acceptable umbilical link.
It is undeniable that  in the English version,    Bessette's    sporting  with    the
 French language does not show through. Shortliffe, who quite  properly did not at­ tempt  the  impossible,  has  achieved  com­ pensation by his masterly  use of  English, in  an  area  which,  to  be  adequately ex­ plained,  would  lead  to abstruse  consider­  ations  in comparative  stylistics. Suffice it to   say  that   the   English   language,  not having   been  severely  regularized  as  has been    the   French   language  since   the seventeenth  century,  allows Shortliffe ac­ tually   to  improve   on  those  passages  in Bessette   which   require   the   vigour,   the suggestiveness and poetry to which the limitless  vocabulary of  the  English  lan­ guage  lends  itself  so  well.  Juxtaposition of  the  original   French  and  the  English adaptation brings  this  out  in  the  follow­ mg  passage:

cette  crue  ce sommet ce deferlement, perdu emporte roule,  cet elan cette  intensite cataclysmique  qui   gagnait  emportait  aussi Nea  Ia  tordait, cette  ondulante vague  char­ neUe  oceanique  cosmique  qui   tirait   d'eux une   cataracte  de  mots  incoherents  de  bal­
butiements a Ia fois  bestiaux et  surhumains
puis  les  redeposait fremissants haletants puis
detendus aneantis comme  des  naufrages sur
Ia  greve  apres   le  colossal  roulis  salin  de  Ia
mer

now   impaled  on   that  pitiless   peak   swept off  on  that   surge   of  urgency   that   crash   of cresting  foam   rolling    relentlessly catching up  Nini  too  whirling her  writhing away  on that   tidal   wave  rising   from   the  cosmic  re­ cesses of  the  flesh,  ripping from   their  lips  a torrent  of   stuttered  syllables    half    bestial  half  celestial   then   casting  them   like  empty  shells  shattered upon  the  shore  shaking and  gasping  like   shipwrecked   survivors  borne  by  the  breakers of  the  salted  sea.

No   more   striking   example   could   be found  of the  fundamental difference  be­ tween   the  two  languages   than   in  these few  lines.  Bessette's  word  picture,  how­ ever  successful,  remains  intellectualized, because   the   French   language  tends   to g1ve an  abstract  view  of  life.  Shortliffe,

6s

REVIEW ARTICLES



by  resorting   to  onomatopreic  and   alli­ terative   devices  and   by  borrowing  from the  Anglo-Saxon  storehouse  of  the  Eng­  lish   language,  brings   us  closer   to   the scene  which  Bessette,  no matter  how  in­ ventive,  makes  us see and  hear as if from a polite distance.
The   cumulative effect  brought   about by the  narrator's gloomy appraisal of life is a powerful  one. That Bessette has writ­ ten one of the outstanding novels to have come   out   of  French   Canada  since  the last  war  is clear.  The  First  Prize  (novel section)   in  the  Concours  litteraire de  la Province   de   Quebec   was   awarded  to Incubation  in   I965.   Bessette   won   the Governor General's  award   in  Ig66.
The  year Ig66 has happened to be an exciting  one for French-Canadian writers. The   publicity  which  surrounded  Marie­ Claire    Blais'    Une   saison   dans   la   vie d' Emmanuel, winner  of the  Prix  Medicis in  Paris,  as well as the  publication there of   three   other   novelists,  all   of   whom attracted  a  considerable amount  of  fa­ vourable  comment, point  to  the  increas­  ing sophistication and quality of French­ Canadian   writing.    Marie-Claire   Blais' good  fortune has  also  been conducive  to the  perennial wringing   of  hands  among
 critics  and   writers   alike,  all  bemoaning their isolation and the stultifying effects produced  on their  abilities  by the  narrow confines of the French-Canadian reading public.  One  wonders  how  Incubation would  have fared,  had  it belonged  to the I g66  vintage.  Probably  not  too  well,  be­
cause   the   Paris   publisher   who  selected
Marie-Claire Blais was acquainted with Incubation and  did  not feel that  it would be favourably received  in France.
This  brings  us face  to face wtih  one of
the   most  crucial   problems   encountered by  writers  in  both  English  and  French­ speaking  Canada. What  Canadians con­ sider  to be their  best is  often  rejected  by New  York,   London   and   Paris-when the  "best"  attracts  their attention -and conversely,   the   choice   made   in   these centres  often  comes  as  a  surprise  to  en­ lightened  opinion  at  home.  It  is an  open secret among  publishers  in Montreal that  if  Edmund  Wilson,  and  through   his in­ fluence,  the   New  York  firm  of  Farrar, Straus  and  Giroux  had  not embarked on a  translation  of  Marie-Claire Blais,  Les Editions   Grasset   in   Paris   would   have been  less enthusiastic about   Une   saison dans la vie d'Emmanuel.  Fortunately for Marie-Claire Blais,  her  poetic  rendition





Write or Phone

THE  UNIVERSITY  BOOK   STORE
Vancouver  8,  B.C.	
 Text
Trade
Medical

whenever you need

BOOKS


66
 
Technical Hard Back Paper Back

REVIEW ARTICLES



of  vice  in  a  large  French-Canadian family was designed to strike the fancy of outsiders seeking a typically "Canadian" product, and  could  possibly have  tipped the  scales in  her  favour.
Bessette's  Incubation  reveals  the  con­
temporary  anguish   of  man   and   cannot be  localized   as  readily   as  Marie-Claire Blais' work. That Bessette has written  a mature and  compelling novel  brings  him into  the  mainstream  of  artistic   creation in  the  Western   World.   And  that  simple fact tells against Incubation, because comparisons    spring    to   mind.    On   the
 other  hand, Marie-Claire Blais'  protrac­ ted short  story lies outside  the experience of   the   average    cultivated   reader    and hence  stands  a better  chance of arresting his  attention.
Whenever  a  novelist manages  to escape the  limits of an exclusively Canadian reading  public,  many  factors,  not  all literary,   come   into   play.   Incubation  is not  likely  to  circulate significantly  out­ side  of  Canada. This  conclusion  should not   prevent    us  from   according   it   the
front   rank   among   Canadian   novels.





IF THERE'S	ANYTHING  I HATE IT'S POETRY

Lionel Kearns


B. P. NICOL, ]ourneyings and  the  Returns. Coach  House  Press. $3.50.
A.    J.  M.    sMITH,  Poems, New   and  Collected. Oxford  University   Press  (Canadian
Branch). $2.25.
DENNIS  LEE,  Kingdom of Absence. House  of Ananse.   $1.95. FLORENCE Me NEIL, A  Silent Green   Sky. Klanak   Press.  $2.50.


THE   NEXT TIME I  am  trying to dissuade one of my students from honouring  in   English   Literature I  will
give him something to read out of A. J. M.
Smith's   New   and  Collected   Poems,  for Smith's   work  seems  to  typify  what   can happen to an  art  form  when  it is domin­ ated  by an  historically  oriented  academic discipline.   After   reading   this  volume   I have  no doubt  that  Smith  knows exactly what  he is doing,  that  his skill at  playing the  versification   game  matches   his  long established  reputation, and  that  this kind of  literary   competence  is  of  very  little
 consequence to me or the world in which
I  live.
For  the  most  part  Smith  relies on  the time-worn  gimmicks of traditional rhyme and   regular   metre,   usually  heavily  iam­ bic,  to  give  his  pieces  poetic  unity  and mark  them  as verse. In  keeping with  this conventional  approach   he   delights   in figures  of speech,  abstract  and  lofty  dic­ tion,  classical  allusions,  inverted  turns  of phrase,  generalized   emotion,   and   occa­ sionally  gentlemanly wit.  It is  true  that  Smith  has  a  certain   flexibility  of  form; his  models  range  from   the  Seventeenth

REVIEW ARTICLES



Century  Metaphysicals to  Auden,  Yeats and  Eliot.  The   collection  even  contains a small section  of imagistic  nature  poems in free verse, and these I found relatively pleasant.    However,   there   is  very   little going  on  that  is new  or  original.  Every­ thing  is a kind  of pastiche:

Celestial strings might  not  surpass
Thy  morning breezes  in  long  grass;
The slow  rain   from  the  laden  tree Dropping from   heaven, brought  to  thee Sounds of  purest harmony

Here  Smith  reproduces the flavour  of Henry  Vaughan, whom  he is celebrating. It is a  clever  exercise,  but  to what  end? Even Smith's themes are run-of-the-mill literary  when  one  finally  chews  through the  reams  of metaphor that  dutifully  ob­ scure   them:  a  low-keyed  concern   with love, death, and  creation, spattered  with smug  erudition and  polite  unenthusiastic Christianity.
Perhaps  the  fact  that   I am  not  tuned in  on  A. J. M.'s  wave length  colours  my evaluation  of  these  poems.   I  am  ready
to  admit   that  others  are  sometimes  cap­ able  of  enjoying  what   I  find  inexorably  dull,  and  I  trust  that  persons  with  tastes differing   from   my   own   will   find   this collection  more  to  their  liking.  The bad humour that  it prompts in me personally  stems, I  believe, from  the conviction  that  a major  poet  should  be capable  of doing a  great   deal   more,  of  writing,   for   ex­ ample,  poems  which  are  direct  and  "un­ poetic"   enough   to  be  somehow  sympto­ matic    of   human   emotion.    "Only    the simplest  words  have  meaning"  choruses
Smith   in  a  poem  on  the  death   of  E. J.
Pratt, yet elsewhere  in the collection  he shows  himself   to  be  unconcerned  with that  kind of meaning.  Perhaps truth is irrelevant  in  contexts   where   Smith   be­ lieves poetry  should  operate. It  depends,

68
 I suppose,  on  what a person thinks poetry is, and  what  he  wants  to  do  with  it.
It  is interesting to look at Dennis  Lee's
Kingdom   of   Absence    in   the   light   of
A. J. M.  Smith,  for  both  poets  have  the same  concept  of poetic form.  Lee's  prob­
lem, however, lies in the fact that he has considerably less skill, subtlety,  and  liter­ ary  background  than   Smith,  and  conse­ quently   the  effect  of  his  effort  is  often ludicrous:

Heedless by the  pump at   Schultz's,  weekends, from   the   pontiac, we  would   explode  at   carefree  random ...

Can  you imagine that? Pow!  or:

Time  slides,   and   the   hammered  glory   of built   cities
lurches  from   ken.   They  stop   mattering.

Mr.  Lee is fond  of that  word  "ken" and rarely   misses  an   opportunity  to  stick  it into  a  poem.  In  fact,  because  he tries  to use  the   whole   bag  of  Victorian  tricks that  Ezra  Pound  advised  poets  to  aban­ don  more  than  fifty years  ago,  the  result is  quite   campish.   The  collection   might  well have  made  on  this  level, had  it  not been  so  unbearably  long.
If the  work  of  A.  J. M.  Smith   and
Dennis   Lee   spanned    the   spectrum    of present  day Canadian poetry-the grand old  man   and   the  aspiring   newcomer - I think   I  would  give  it  up  myself  and turn  to some more  significant  endeavour, such  as playing  tiddly-winks  or  counting my hair.  Fortunately, however,  there  are
a few worthwhile volumes that  have come
out   recently,   one  of  which   is  A  Silent Green  Sky  by Florence  McNeil.  It is a tastefully   produced   little  book,  designed by  the   artist   Takao  Tanabe  and   pub­ lished in Vancouver by the Klanak  Press.
Miss McNeil  writes in a form that coin­
cides with  a poetic  tradition that  has de-

REVIEW ARTICLES



veloped in the last ten years on the Cana­ dian  West Coast.  Focussing on  the  physi­ cal   world   and   relating   what   is  there  without   intellectual   exploitation  of  the experience   or   undue   interference  from the  ego, the sensitized  and  reacting  indi­  vidual  consciousness  selects  those  objects which  at  that  precise  moment  seem rele­ vant,   giving   us  the   poetry   of  personal testimony-quiet,    authentic, in   forms that derive not from the conventional formulae   dredged   up  from   the  literary past,  but  from   the  poet's  own  speaking voice as it moves in rhythms and images characteristic of  particular ways of  feel­ ing  or  states  of being  which  are  a  direct response  to  life.  Miss  McNeil  deals  with the   observed   world   about   her   and   its natural extention. Note, for  example,  the functional  consistency  of   the  metaphors in  the  opening  stanza  of   Lhe  poem  "In­ terior  August":
The day  drips   hot  and   blue into   the  lake
sleek  as  suntan  oil the   hills
 though  I   am   sceptical   whether   it  will make much impact in Canada, where Concrete  Poetry  is very little  appreciated or  even  understood.
Concrete poets assume that poetry is language distorted for  effect,  and  by  ex­ tending   this  concept   in   practice   to   its extreme  limit, they end with forms whose stylistic  features   are  so  exaggerated  that  the  component  linguistic  elements  of the works   tend   to   relinquish  the   burden of   conventional meaning that  language characteristically carries.  As might  be ex­ pected,  Concrete falls into two categories: Visual    Concrete,   which    derives   from written  language  and  sometimes  takes on the  aspects  of   graphics,   pictorial   art  or even    sculpture,    and    Sonic    Concrete, which  derives  from  spoken  language and in   some  cases  bears   a   relationship  to music. Concrete really isn't new; the advertising  industry   has   been  on  to  it for some time. In McLuhan's terms, Concrete is cool.
In  the  Nicol  package   (it  is more  of a

naked   as  buttered  clams sweat  tumbleweed into  the  wind
and   the  beach people greased with   sand
The  effect of coupling  item to item within a  closely  related   semantic  field  is  synes­ thesia,  and  for  me  at  least,  it  is  power­ fully evocative.  The  value  of this  kind  of sensuous   description  lies  merely  in   the convincing articulation  of what  it  is like to be alive.  I like the  poems.
When   I   was   living   in   London  two
years   ago   one   of   the   Canadian  poets being   talked   about   was   B.  P.   Nichol, who, at  the  age of twenty-one was  draw­ ing  attention  to  himself  in  the  field  of Concrete  Poetry.   His   present  collection now  proves  conclusively  that  his reputa­ tion  is well deserved,  and  will, I am sure, bring  him  further  international  acclaim,
 bundle   than   a  volume)    we  get  a   tri­
partite treat:  a  recorded   disc  of  Sonic Concrete called  Borders,  a  fat  envelope of Visual  Concrete called  Letters  Home, and  a fifty-six page  book of non-concrete lyrics  entitled    Journeying  and  the   Re­ turns.  You  can  listen  to Borders on  your stereo set, put  up  the  pieces from  Letters on  your  walls,  and   read  Journeying   for yourself, as the  lyrics are eminently  read­  able.   The   variety   is  amazing.   There is even   a   self-destroying   sculpture  poem that   you  assemble  yourself  in  steps  and then  burn, the words  presumably  peeling off   and   lighting   up  in  their   prescribed sequence.   I  say  "presumably" because  I still have  not  found  the  courage  to drop a lighted  match  down  the  centre  cone as specified  in  the  instructions. Each  item,

6g

REVIEW ARTICLES



I might  add,  like all the work turned  out by Stan  Bevington's  Coach  House  Press, is handsomely  produced.
Instead   of  trying   to  describe   in   the space  remaining the  wealth   of  material in   this  collection,   I   think   it  would   be more to the point to quote Nicol's own statement  of  intention  as  it  appears  on the  back of the cover  packet:

now that we have  reached the point where people   have   finally   come   to  see  that   lan­ guage means  communication and  that  com­ munication  does   not   just   mean   language, we  have  come  up  against the  problem, the actual fact,   of  diversification,  of  finding as many   exits   as  possible   from   the  self   (lan­ guage/  communication  exists)   in  order  to form  as  many  entrances  as  possible  for  the other.

the   other  is  the   loved   one   and   the   other is  the   key,  often   the   reason   for  the   need/ desire   to  communicate.  how  can   the   poet reach   out   and   touch   you  physically   as  say the  sculptor does  by caressing you  with  ob­ jects    you    caress?    only   if   he    drops    the barriers. if  his  need  is to  touch   you  physic­  ally  he  creates a  poem  I object  for  you  to touch   and   is  not   a  sculptor for  he  is  still moved   by   the   language  and   sculpts  with words.   the   poet   who   paints   or  sculpts  is different  from   the   painter  who  writes.   He
 comes  at  his  art   from   an  entirely different angle   and    brings   to   it   different  concerns and   yet   similar  ones. but   he   is  a   poet always.

this  is  not   a  barrier. there are   no  barriers in  art.   where   there   are   barriers  the   art   is made  small  by  them. but  this  is  to  say  that no  matter where  he  moves  or  which  "field" he  chooses  to  work  in,  he  is  always  a  poet and    his   creations  can    always    be   looked upon   as  poems.

there   is  a   new   humanism  afoot   that  will one   day   touch   the   world   to  its  core.  tra­ ditional poetry is only  one  of  the  means by which  to reach  out  and  touch the other. the other    is   emerging  as   the   necessary    pre­  requisite  for   dialogues   with   the   self   that clarify   the   soul  and   heart  and   deepen  the  ability   to  love.   I   place   myself   there, with them,  whoever  they  are,  wherever they  are,  who  seek  to  reach   themselves and  the  other thru   the   poem   by  as  many   exits   and   en­  trances  as  are   possible.

It would be difficult to set out a more adequate  justification   of  one's  art   than this.  B. P.  Nicol  is one of  the  truly  con­ temporary poets  writing  in  rg67,  and  it would   restore  my  faith   in  the  state   of Canadian  letters   if  he  were  to  get  the next  Governor General's Award  for  this collection  of poems.





VOICES OF POETS
 


George Robertson


Canadian  Poets I  (recorded poems  by  Phyllis  Webb, Earle Birney,  John  Newlove, Alfred   Purdy, Irving Layton, Leonard Cohen, George  Bowering, Gwendolyn MacEwen). Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. $7.50.


THESE RECORDINGS of the work   of  eight   Canadian  poets,  spoken by the  poets  themselves,  have  caused  me to abandon a long-held,  and  I think  now a  faintly  snobbish,  prejudice  against spoken   verse.  Although I  have   worked m   broadcasting  for   most   of  my  adult
 life,  I  have  always  felt  that   there   were certain   things  which  were  not  improved by  the  invasion  of  the  electronic media. "Go  deepcast,  not  broadcast,"  the Indian sage   Vinobha   Bhave    admonished    us when  we were  trying  to get an  interview with   him.   Heresy   in   the   age   of   Me-

REVIEW ARTICLES



Luhan! Vinobhaji was fighting  a losing battle.   Now  you  can  buy  the  sounds  of human beings mating  (easily getting everything  from  foreplay  to  the  lighting of  the  first  cigarette on  one  side  of  an LP).  Though my  professional  loyalty  is still  with   the   cameras   and   the   micro­ phones  and  the  tape   recorders,  my  real love  is  the   world   of  books,  magazines, newspapers,  garbage  most of  it  undoubt­ edly.   Possibly  a   childhood   fixation   on the   print   medium   was   responsible   for this, some early experience with the smell of  a  new  Christmas book  (even  now  I like  to   smell   the   shiny   covers  of  new Penguins) .  And   so  I   hope   poetry   will always  be  made  to  lie flat  on  a sheet  of paper,   black  writing   on  white  page,  so that  the eye can  voluptuously scan where it   will,   backwards,   forwards,  up   and down,   teasing   another  meaning out   of two separate images, calling a halt and staring   at   the   page   number   when   the going  gets  rough.   I  hope  this  because  I think  reading   and  writing  are  the  great arts of our civilization, no matter how electronic the future becomes, and  the reason,  Mr.  McLuhan, is this:  that  they allow  a  grave  and  proper   repose  of  the senses which  is necessary  to  the  contem­ plation  of  the  truth and  the  forming  of judgment.
There  is  also  my  memory   of  certain
poetry  readings  by firelight,  on  a  beach, or in someone's  home,  where  neither  the poet  nor his listeners  entirely  escaped  the embarrassment  of  what   seemed   like  a performance  at   odds   with   its  environ­ ment.    Many   poets   read   badly,   either  weighing   their   words   too   carefully   or relentlessly   reading    the   words   as  they come,  letting   the  expression   fall  where it may.  The  result  would  tend  to set one thinking about   the  shape   of  the  poet's
 vocal  chords,  or  his tie, or  anything but what   he  was  driving   at.  Intimate  occa­ sions like that  had  their  own  horror: the silence after,  the murmur of  approbation or wonder,  the request  for a second read­  ing,  and  the  poet's  grateful  compliance, licking  his lips for  another go. When  all the  time one  really wanted  to get hold of the  poem  on  paper,  to  study  it  and  de­ molish it at leisure.
There was  of  course  the  exception  of
Dylan  Thomas to  remind  us that  rarely, but   powerfully,   a  poet   is  such  a  good reader   of  his  own   verse  that   one  can never again  see his work in print  without hearing those rolling periods and starchy sibilants  all over  again.  Here,  the  poetry and   the  reading   of  it  seemed  joined  in one  mighty  act  of  communication. This was  art   of  a  different  level:   it  didn't make  the  poetry  greater, but  it acted  like a great  advocate, presenting the  poem in its most impressive  light.
And   there   remains   the  documentary
argument.  Though  I  would   not  choose often   to  hear  T. S.  Eliot  reading   from one   of  his   "Four  Quartets",  I   would rather hear  his  recording of  it  than   the alternative  version   by  the  actor   Robert Speight,  who is, after  all, a sensitive and honest   reader   of  verse.  One   has  docu­ mentary   value:   the  interest   for  us, and for  future  generations, in   hearing  how Eliot  heard   his  own  lines,  and  is there­ fore  a  clue  to  the  man.  The  other  is a reading    which    can   be   supplanted   by other   readings,   by  other  actors,  as  time goes on.  Both  are  useful,  but  one  has  a kind  of  necessity and  the  other  has  not.
Notwithstanding  these   arguments, or
perhaps  because  of them,  I  felt  that  any record  of Canadian poets  would  have  at best  that   same  documentary value,  and I  greeted   the   arrival   of  this  recording

REVIEW ARTICLES



with  an  agreeable,  and  patronizing, sense of a worthwhile Centennial project  hav­ ing  come  to fruition.
Well, it is a good deal  more  than  that. First  of  all,  it  is entertainment,  sublime and   otherwise.   Would   you  not   be   be­ guiled  to have  Alfred  Purdy  address  you from   your  loudspeaker in  the  following way?

I was  justly  annoyed, ten  years  ago  in Vancouver, making beer  in  a  crock,   under the  kitchen table,  when  this  next  door youngster, playing with   my  own  kid,  man­ aged   to  sit  down   in  it,  and  emerged  with one   end   malted.  With   excessive   modera­ tion,   I  yodelled at   him,   "Keep  your   ass out   of  my  beer."

Second,  on  the  level  of  performance, some  of  these  readings   are   better   than we have  a  right  to expect.  I  have  heard Earle  Birney read  his own verse before - and  have  always  considered   him  an  ex­ cellent,   if   artful,  reader-but	I   was quite  astonished  at how much his reading  adds  to the  pleasure  of his verse.  Birney, along   with  some  of  the  others,  does  in fact   create   a   performance   which  one looks forward to re-hearing. A good read­  ing,  while  not  "necessary"  to  an  under­ standing of  the  poem,  does  in  fact  help us to  a  more  accurate shading  of mean­  ing,  an  enrichment of  possibilities.  Most of  Birney's  poems  in  this selection  of six would  pose no  problems  of literal  mean­  ing to a casual listener.  In Transistor, for example,    the   form   is  loose,  conversa­  tional,   deceptively   colloquial.   Yet   it  is unmistakably poetry,  each  word  in  rela­ tion  to  its  neighbours   making  a  kind  of inevitable music,  and  it  is  Birney's  read­  ing  of that  music  that  gives the  poem  a richness  which,  I feel, it  would  not  have solely on  the  page.
Phyllis Webb  came  as another surprise
to me. Again,  I have heard  the poet  read
 her  verse on occasion,  have admired  that soft, furry  voice without feeling that  a reading was more than a pleasant way to make   the   acquaintance  of  her   poetry. But  sitting  before  a  microphone,  engag­ ing  oneself  with   posterity,  perhaps, has brought   out   the  best  in  this  and   other  poets. The  reading  is not without its irri­  tations: I  was especially  bothered  by her too-scrupulous marking   of  the   end-of­  lines, a scrupulosity  that seemed unneces­ sarily  mannered   (though on  later   hear­  ing, the  poem  which  most offends in this regard,  Alex, suits the technique since it is a dialogue between  an adult  and  a child, the adult adopting the child's simplicity). But  later  in  the  group,  whatever  qualms  I  had  were  swept  away  by her  affecting reading  of what  are,  I  think,  among  the most successful love poems written in this country,   Naked   Poems,  Suite   One   and Suite  Two. Economical, precise of image, moving and sensual at the same time, her reading   of  them   is  an  experience to treasure,  among  the  best things  on  these two records.
I  suppose   I  regret   that   my  favourite
examples  of Leonard Cohen's love poetry are  not  included  in  this  collection,   but what   is  here  is  worth   study  and   many re-hearings.    He   has   a  seducer's   voice, slow,  shy,  understated,  a  reading   style that    rivets   attention   on   the   play   of whimsy and  paradox in his lines. He is effective in all these:  I like Two went  to sleep,  in  which   the  repetition  of   three­ beat   lines  matches   the  flat-footed  pro­ gress  through  life   of   two   people   who dream   their   separate,   tedious   fantasies  night  after  night  till  they die.
I  was disappointed in  Irving  Layton's
reading, which seemed more lightweight, less involving  than  some of the poetry warranted (though The  bull  calf comes

REVffiW  ARTICLES



off  well),   but  the  only  poet  whose  con­ tribution I felt  did  nothing at  all  for  his verse, and  perhaps hindered its apprecia­ tion,   was   John    Newlove.   His   reading  tended   to  emphasize   a  didactic  quality  in  some  of  the  verse,  and elsewhere  did nothing   to  temper  the  sentimentality in Kamsack  and  For  Judith, now about  ten years old,  which  ends,  "Do  you  remem­  ber   the   prairie   town   you  were  ruined  in?"    George   Bowering,    on   the   other  hand,  is a  conscious  reader.  His  end-of­  line  breaks  are  unnecessarily   mannered, and   do  not,  in  fact,  succeed   in  giving the  rhythms   of  verse  to  what  might   as well   be   prose   in   the   long   poem   The Descent.   But  The  Descent  succeeds   in spite of this, a moving  tribute to the link of   blood   and   memory   between   father and  son.
There  remain   Gwendolyn   MacEwen and  Alfred  Purdy.  Miss MacEwen reads well, her voice is attractive, light and musical.   I   cannot  get  inside   much   of what  she is saying, but I am sure I would rather  hear   her  say  it  than   read  it  for myself:  her voice has a hypnotic, serpent­ like  calm,  in  quality   not  unlike  Phyllis Webb's,  though  lighter and thinner. "And  the  shadows   of  my  sanity   blacken   out
 your burning." Miss MacEwen is not obscure,  merely  special  and  private,  and if anything can bring  us to a generous reception  of these clever, intense and adolescent  lines it is surely her winning reading  of  them.
Alfred  Purdy  is equally  special, in  an­ other   sense.  His  rough,   hectoring  beer­ parlour voice is surely the clinching argu­  ment   in  favour   of  hearing   the  poet  as well  as  reading   him.   There  are  better poems  than   Homemade  beer,  the  one  I quoted  from  above. The interesting thing  there  is that   the  juxtaposition of falsely literary   touches   ("justly   annoyed", and "with   excessive  moderation")  with  stuff like  "Keep  your  ass out  of  my  beer"  is an old trick, favoured especially by gentle, ironic newspapermen like Damon  Runyon and   Paul   St.   Pierre;  and   it  is  also  a cliche. Somehow  Purdy's  voice makes you overlook  that: the  attitude is contained in  the  personality,  and  the  personality  is real. Effectively, that  same voice does not disguise the seriousness of purpose  behind the  clowning.
I am  proud  of the CBC for having  the wit  to  publish  these  recordings,  and  for the hope implied in the title, "Canadian Poets  One". I  would  like  to  suggest  to







RlchaRb aset & company, 1nc.


Scholarly Books in the Arts and Sciences



PORTLAND, SAN   FRANCISCO, LOS   ANGELES,  DENVER, CHICAGO, NEW YORK



73

REVIEW ARTICLES



the  CBC,  and   to  other   stations   in  the country  like Toronto's CHUM-FM,  and even   Vancouver's  queasily   middlebrow CHQM, that   they  find  a  way  of  using some  of  these  poems  occasionally  in  be­ tween   the   serious   recordings   of   music that  are  played.  Would  the  poets  them­  selves object   to  being  used  as  fillers  be­ tween  Beethoven  and  Haydn? I doubt  it. A  little   Birney  in  the  morning,  a  little Cohen  at  night,  and  a  great  deal  would be well with  the world.  Why not on tele­ vision as well for  the shorter  poems, with drawings  of the  poet or film of his birth­ place,  or  of  him  shopping at  the  super-
 market, or  whatever-during those  in­ terminable   one-minute   breaks   between programmes  when   the   air   time   hasn't  been   sold?   Instead  of   promos   for   the Centennial   (we   know   about   the   Cen­  tennial  now)  or endlessly repeated  warn­  ings  about  road  safety.  Why  not  cast  a little   beauty    about    the    world?    Soon poetry  would  replace  Muzak  in elevators  and  shopping  plazas, syllables would  fall through  the  air  like  drops  of  dew,  and young  couples,  remembering their  court­ ship,  might  turn  to  each  other  and  say:
"They're playing  our  poem."





MOD MURDERS
 


George Woodcock



GEORGE BOWERING,  Mirror on the  Floor.  McClelland  & Stewart.  $s.oo.
PAUL WEST,  Alley  Jaggers.  Ballantine Mod  Books. 6o¢.


GEORGE  BoWERING   and   Paul West   have   written    novels   which    are, without doubt, in  the contemporary  cur­ rent.   West's  Alley  Jaggers,  in  fact,  now appears,   with    appropriately    irrelevant blurb    and   cover,   alongside   Quant    by Quant    in   the   Ballantine   Mod   Books. But  in  neither   this  book  nor  in  Bower­ ing's  Mirror  on the  Floor  does one sense that  ponderous  striving  after  contempor­ ary  effect,  that   relentless   and   excessive ingenuity, which  makes Leonard  Cohen's  Beautiful  Losers- that  classic of  Cana­ dian  with-it-ness-a work  so intriguing to begin and  so boring  to read  to a finish. Cohen   is  intellectually  committed  to  a stance,   as  certain   modern   painters  are, and  shapes  his work to fit it; his link with

74
 Harold   Town, that  most  cerebral  of  ar­ tists, who  designed  the  cover  for  Beauti­ ful  Losers,  is  not  accidental.  Compared with him, Bowering  and  West speak with natural voices; the modern tone fits them because   it   is  the   tone   in   which   they think.   Neither   of  them  has  produced   a conventional  novel,   yet   neither   Mirror  on the Floor nor-for all its Rabelaisian fantasy-Alley  Jaggers  reads like a work of   elaborate   contrivance,   and   perhaps this  is  why  they  have  failed   to  receive the  praises so heavily  showered  on  Beau­ tiful  Losers  by critics  who  are  impressed by  the ingenious   and   confuse  invention with real imagination. They  are both, nevertheless,  worth  attention.
Mirror   on  the  Floor  is a  novel  about

REVIEW ARTICLES



a place. A decade  ago in France,  Alain Robbe-Grillet, Michel Butor and other clwseistes  created  a small revolution in fiction  by transferring attention from  the character  to  the  environment.  The  hu­ man  beings in  their  novels became,  as it were,  membranes  to  receive  impressions of objects  in  the outer  world; the objects and   not  the  people  were  given  solidity. The   choseistes   too  were  over-deliberate, and  it  is  hard   now  to  read  a  novel  by Robbe-Grillet  as  anything  but  an  intel­  lectual   exercise.   What   Bowering  has achieved  is a  humanization of the  chose­  iste  approach. The  principal presence  in Mirror on the  Floor  is undoubtedly Van­ couver,   a   living   growth   like   coral,   in and  out  of  whose  chambers  the  charac­ ters move like reef fish. But, like the fish, they  live  on  equal   terms  with   the  en­ vironment, not originating their  destinies, but,  as  we  all  do,  assisting  in  their  un­ folding.
Bob  Small,  a  student, is arrested   in  a
Skid  Row  cafe  on  a  trumped-up charge of obstructing the police. Let out next morning,   he  encounters on  the  doorstep of  the  police  station   a  girl  just  released on   an   equally   trumped-up  charge    of being a common  prostitute. He loses her, seeks her out,  finds her in an old wooden house  of  the  West  End,  living  above  a nest of artists  in  a  tower  room,  filled  by light in the day and  besieged by darkness at  night.
The   girl,   Andrea,  is  an   almost   too
classic   case   of   alienation,  child   of   a ruined   home,  mother-lo\ithing,  father­ obsessed, and  haunted by a gloating  guilt at  the  thought that  two  men  who  loved her  have  drowned. The  novel  develops in a structural counterpoint, the chapters  of Bob's  reminiscent and  rather  innocent narrative-the musings  of  an  educated
 hick-alternating   with chapters in which  the  author glimpses  from  outside the  obsessions that shape Andrea's actions and   build   to  climax   in  the   narcissistic title  chapter  where,  alone,  she  unscrews the  mirror   from   the  wall,  places  it  on the  floor, descends  to meet  it.  The  third who   dies   from   drowning  is  not   Bob Small,   whose   love   is  sentimental  and
£air-weather. It  is  her   father,  driving suicidally off the end of a pier in the fog. Andrea   stabs  her  mother to  death,   and ends  in  a mental   ward.  "Things happen to  the  world,  that's all,"  Bob  Small  re­ flects. "They happen to the world  that is inside  us, each  person."  Perhaps  that,  in a  way,  does  sum  up  the  philosophy  be­ hind  Mirror  on  the  Floor. But  the  per­ sons  are   still   persons,   not   mere   mem­ branes,  and  if  Bowering  implicitly  rejects "the  old-style  novels, where  a man's  fate was decided  on  the merits  of a choice he makes",  he has learnt  enough  from  them to leaven  nouvelle vague  objectivism with Old  Wave humanitarianism. We respond to   his   characters  rather   than    merely watching through the  eyes of objects,  as we do those of Robbe-Grillet.  Conversely, the   environment  ends   by  becoming   as thoroughly humanized as a Chinese land­ scape  painting. No-one  addicted  to Van­  couver  can  read  it  without  appreciating the  Whistlerian nuances  with  which  this pearly-lighted  patria  chica  is delineated.
Alley  Jaggers, like Mirror on the  Floor, ends   with   a   killing   that   completes   a pattern.  Alley  is  a  sex  murderer,  who breaks  a  girl's  neck  and  then  rapes  her dead  body;  technically he is insane,  and ends -like Andrea-in  an  institution, where   he  spins  surrealistic  verbal   fan­ tasies  to  puzzle  an  audience of   doctors  and   half-baked   medical  students.  These wordy sessions are  the last  phase of Alley

75

REVIEW ARTICLES



as an  unacknowledged wonder  of slums, and   the   novel   they   terminate  recounts the  extraordinary  things  that   may  hap­ pen   when   an   inhibited    and   unlearned mind  with  a spark of black genius catches  the  intoxication  of  words,  shapes,  ideas and  myths.  For  Alley  destroys-as Ba­ kunin  once  urged  his  followers  to  do - in  pursuance of  an  urge  to  create.
Alley  is  a  plasterer   in  a  swollen  vil­ lage -half   industrial  and   half   tied   to the  dying  mines-in  the  English  Mid­  lands from  which  Paul  West came  before he reached  Canada. A half-Irish ancestry  in   which   he  glories   distinguishes   Alley from  his fellow workers and  isolates him;  he  is  isolated   by  his  retarded  youthful­ ness, which  does  not  correspond  to  the youthfulness  of  the  really  young;   he  is isolated  also  amid  the  bickering  warfare of  his  wife  and  mother in  the  home  he dare  not  leave.  The  room  where  he was born   becomes   the  fortress   in  which   he drinks  and  feasts secretly, masturbates to show  his  defiance  of  women   (whom   he hates and fears even when he uses them), and  builds his model gliders. If the home is a prison  as well as a fortress,  class is a wider   one;   wars   and   Labour   Govern­ ments  have  not changed  the stratification of  English   society  in   which   each   class sustains-as  Orwell  long  ago  observed
-its own   culture,  and   when   Alley  is
seized  with   a  mania   for   creation    that carries  him  beyond  glider-making, the forces  of fantasy   rise  up  without any  of the  disciplines  of  a  bourgeois  education to   contain   them.    Everything   he   has heard   or  read -bits  of  folklore,  names of  racehorses,  the  terminology   of  karate
-come   together   in  insane   verbal   out­ pourings.   But  these  are  not  enough  for Alley. He  longs to escape from the world of  shams  and  time-wasting in  which  he
 lives, from  the covering-up which  his occupation as plasterer  symbolizes, to "break  out,  bust loose, and  do something grand."
He  finds  his way by reversing  the  role of the  plasterer, turning it from  work  of concealment to work of exposure, and creating a monstrous herrnaphoditic plas­ ter  statue  which   he  hides  in  his  room and    gives   a   name-Ki-ya-and      an imagined   personality. The  statue  can  do everything but move, and  to make up for that  Alley has made  an  ambitious glider,  twenty feet in span, which  bears the same name as the statue and  is its sky-storming extension.   But   the   glider   crashes,   and Alley burns  the fragments after  stamping them  to pieces in a grieving ritual  dance.  He   accepts   the  consolations   of  a  pop­ singer    (lower   middle-class)     whom   he has met  at  a  dance,  and  takes  her  off to an empty house where  he has been work­ ing.  When his  potency  deserts  him,  and the  girl  taunts, he  kills and  rapes  her  in misogyny and  class hatred. Then  he turns destruction into  creation   by covering  her in   plaster   and   making   of  her   a   com­ panion   statue  to  Ki-ya,  an  ending  that  will please  those who see in art  the static  antithesis of  life.
In  other   books  Paul   West  has  shown
his ability  to combine  and  re-combine in compelling patterns the details of English working-class    life,   and    Alley    Jaggers, once we flip into  the frenetic mind  of the protagonist,  is   a   wholly   self-consistent fantasy,   grim   and   comic   at   the   same time,  from   which   Alley  emerges  as  the quintessential anti-hero,  rising  from   the depths,   ignorant  and   illuminated,  and combining  the   wise  folly  of  a   Shake­ spearian    clown   with   the  ferocity  of  a murderous  folk  hero.   It  is  appropriate that,   at   the   end,   the   children   of   the

REVIEW ARTICLES



village make  out  of Alley's deed  a  rhym­ ing  game  whose  Jines closely  resemble  a jingle  which   in  my  childhood   Midland boys  and   girls  were  still  singing  about  that  real  life  folk-hero, Jack  the  Ripper, Everyman's  champion against  the  mons­ trous  regiment   of  women.   Alley  Jaggers
 is far,  in  any  sense, from  what  we  used to  call  proletarian writing,  but  it  makes an extraordinary use of material drawn from  the  popular  sub-culture  flourishing in  that  corner  of  the  world  which  West knows  from  experience  and  memory.




INNOCENCE CONFUSED

H. ]. Rosengarten


FRED BODSWORTH,  The  Sparrow's  Fall. Doubleday. $4-95·
TIMOTHY  FINDLEY,  The   Last  of the  Crazy  People.  General. $5-95·
SIMON  GRAY, Little  Portia. Queenswood  House.  $5.75.


THE   HERO of   Fred  Bods­ worth's  novel The  Sparrow's  Fall is Jacob Atook,  a  Canadian Indian engaged  in  a desperate   search   for   caribou   during   a particularly  harsh   winter.   The   hunt   is complicated  by  several  factors:  Jacob's wife,  Niska,  is pregnant, and  cannot   be left without food for too long;  their  mar­ riage   was   contracted  without  parental permission,  since  Niska  had  been  prom­ ised  to  another man,  and  so Jacob  can­ not  turn  for  help  to  the  other  members of his tribe.  Most  difficult  of all,  he  has come  under   the  influence   of  a  visiting missionary   who  has  told  him  of  God's love for  all  creatures, and  intensified  his natural distaste  for  killing. It  is this dual conflict -the   struggle   to  survive   in   a hostile environment, and  the inner  strug­ gle  to  reconcile   belief  and   suffering - that   forms   the  substance   of  this  book; and  the  author's attempt  to  unify  these themes   meets  with  only  partial   success.
The  story  is conveyed  largely  through the  consciousness of the  main  character; and  this limited  point of view gives added
 intensity   to  the  mental   agonies  that  in­ crease  as Jacob's  physical  strength  begins to  fail.   Where   Mr.   Bodsworth   is  con­ cerned  with  Jacob's   fight  to  survive,  he impresses   the   reader    by  his   ability   to render   the  physical  impact  of  nature  on a   sensitive   but   unsophisticated   mind; and   the  novel  succeeds  in  absorbing   us in the grim  physical realities of the "land  of  the  little  sticks."  But  in  an  effort  to give  his  story  a  deeper  significance,  the author   has  sought   to  make   his  hero  a primitive   philosopher,   engaged   in   the quest  for  truth and  understanding:

He  was  a  man   with   a  curious and   restless thrust  of  mind.   He  was  a  man   who  could gaze  with  dreaming wonder at  the burnished fire  of  the  sunset, and   ponder the  unknow­ ables   of   life   and   living   which   seemed   at that   moment  to  be  making  his  life  a  part  of  the  sunset  and   the  sunset  a  part  of  him.

The  set-piece  quality  of  such  a  descrip­ tion  prepares   us  for  the  rather  wooden nature  of   Jacob's   musings   about   life, death  and  the Christian God.  Sometimes Mr.  Bodsworth  conveys  the  abstract na-

77

REVIEW ARTICLES



ture  of  Jacob's   speculations   through clumsy platitudes, expressed m a vague, heavy-footed  prose:

It was all a great  elemental, impersonal leviathan  without  heart,  an   interweaving of  many   parts, and   the   whole   had   a  pur­ pose,   a   reason    to   be,   but   each   part   was nothing.  He   was  a   jot   of  dust   in   a  uni­  verse  of  competing matter that  reached  to the  heaven and   the  stars.

The  awkward  and inflated style of such moralizing  rings   false,   and   emphasizes the  writer's  failure  to  adapt his ideas  to the restricted  workings of his character's mind.
To  describe  the  response  of  the  naive
or  untrained  mind   to  new  areas  of  ex­ perience  requires  more  than  the  percep­  tion  of how such a response is expressed;  there   must   be  an  understanding of  the
 surrounding pressures  and  influences  by which  it  is  generated. The   writer   must present  a  vision  of  life  which  embraces both   the   naive   interpretation  and   the real   complexity   of  the   experience   pre­ sented  to the simple mind,  but  beyond its comprehension. This  is where The  Spar­  row's  Fall  is  at  its  weakest,  and   where The    Last    of	The    Crazy   People,    by Timothy  Findley,   draws   its  strength­ though  the latter  does suffer from  defects in  other   areas.  Mr.  Findley's plot  turns  on   the   mental   breakdown   of   Jessica Winslow   after   a   miscarriage,  and   ex­ amines  the  resulting  strain  on  the  other  members   of   the   family:    Nicholas,   her withdrawn and emotionally impotent hus­ band;   Gilbert,   her   frustrated  and   un­ stable  elder  son,  who  takes  refuge  from failure in  drink  and  poetry;  Rosetta,  her




david helwig /fig ures in a landscape


"In this whole collection, one feels the power and also the importance of Helwig's  basic concerns." A  "vision  of  remarkable  coher­ ence,  maturity  and   power. . . .  Though  he has  received   far   less  attention   than   some other   young  Canadian  writers,  it  seems  to me that  with  this book he takes  his place  at once  with  the  best  of  them."   (Tom   Mar­ shall, Quarry) .
"a tremendous contribution to Canadian letters." (Michael Yates, CBC  Vancouver).
 81 poems and 3 plays
227 pages four-colour  softcover
by Sarah  Gersovitz

$3

box I 245 station b ottawa 4
oberon press

REVIEW ARTICLES



joyless, fastidious  sister-in-law,  disfigured in her youth  by a stroke.
Mr.  Findley's   portrayal of  this  house­ hold  full  of emotional cripples  has,  only too   obviously,   all   the   earmarks  of   a Drama  of  the   Deep   South,   despite   its Canadian setting:  the  destruction  of  A Fine  Old   Family  from  within,   through madness,    sexual   conflict   and    physical violence erupting in the heat  of the sum­ mer.   To   complete  the   picture   there   is Iris, the coloured  maid  who is faithful to the  family  in  all  its  troubles,   and   who sits  on  the  back  porch  singing  "Frankie and  Johnny". The   novel  is saved,  how­ ever, from  becoming  a weak echo of a Tennessee  Williams'  play by the character of Hooker,  the  Winslow's  eleven-year-old son, and  by the description of his shocked response to the events he witnesses. Much of  the  story  is  told  from  Hooker's   point of view;  by conveying  the action  through the   baffied,  sensitive  consciousness  of  a child, the author heightens  the dramatic effect   and   disguises   the   cliches   of   his plot.
The  family's  collapse  is recorded  in  a series of impressions  which  Hooker  vainly struggles  to interpret: conversations half­ heard  and  dimly understood, voices raised in   anger   in   his   mother's   room,   the drunken  humour  of   his   despairing brother. He is absorbed  in an atmosphere of death, and  through  his  mind  run  the jumbled    images   of   his   dead   cats,   the dead   baby,   the   violent   death   of   Lee Harvey   Oswald   seen  on  television.  The  author's  terse  prose  and   his  control   of understatement  are   well   suited   to  sug­ gest   a   tension   growing   in   the   child's  mind,   a  tension   of   which  Hooker   him­  self is  not  always  aware  as  he  struggles to understand  what  is happening around him.  In  this  way, the  author  prepares us
 for   the   violent   resolution    of  Hooker's inner  confusion,  the murder of his parents and   Rosetta;  his  action   is  dictated  by love, by the  belief  that  death  is a  merci­ ful  release  from  pain.  The  scene  of  the sacrificial  murder  is  occasionally  marred by prosy  over-indulgence: "A  noise, like the  beating of clumsy  wings, approached Jess through the lilac leaves, and  she was struck,   she   thought,  by  a  hand   across the  heart;" but  on  the  whole it serves as a convincing and  satisfying  climax  to the action.  Despite  the  stereotyped   nature of the   situation  and   the   adult   characters, The  Last  of The  Crazy People is an interesting novel because it captures the irrational logic of a child's mind, while avoiding the pitfall of treating childhood sentimentally.
Little   Portia,  by  Simon   Gray,   is  an­ other  study  of  childhood, although  here the   central   figure   is  followed   through adolescence    into  manhood,    and    the dominant tone  is ironic.  The  novel  des­ cribes  the  growth  and  education of Gra­  hame   Thwaite,   first   at   schools  in   the South   of  England   and  then   at   Cam­ bridge.  From  his earliest years, Grahame's ambition is  to  be  Tops; and  he  quickly learns  that,  to  be Tops,  one  must  master the  art  of  the  correct   response  to  every situation.  "A  guard   against   excess,"  in­ tones  his  first  governess,  "is  a  guarantee of  success";  and  the same lesson is taught, for   somewhat   different  reasons,   by  the sexually   corrupt  master    at   Grahame's first  school:   "You   try   too  hard,  Little Portia.  But  be a little secret. Don't spread yourself  over  everything as  if  you  were a tube  of paint.  You're  at your best when you  keep  a  mystery   back."   The   result is  that   Grahame learns   to  adopt  what­ ever  role he thinks  will bring  the success and  acceptance he yearns for, whether in

79

REVIEW ARTICLES



his  academic studies  or  in  his  personal relationships.
Mr. Gray gives a witty and withering insight  into  the  darker  sides of  the  Eng­ lish   educational  system.  He  shows  the brutal  and  dehumanizing influence  of the public  school  tradition, with  its rejection
of  private  value  and  its  spurious  glorifi- · cation   of  masculinity. "It  will  make   a man  of him,"  says Colonel  Rones,  before Graharne is sent  to  Windhoven. It does; but   not  before   Graharne  has  sacrificed his closest friend,  Granton, because  their love  interferes with  the  public  image  of himself  as a masculine  sporting hero.  By the   time   he   reaches   Cambridge, Gra­ harne  is shown  to have  lost  the  capacity to  make   a  genuine   response   to  experi­ ence;   he   assumes   the   pose   of   a   dis­ illusioned   intellectual  in  order   to  gain acceptance by a self-consciously  superior clique,   and   regards   his  former   friends with  distant   condescension.  His  need  for adoring love  as well  as for  social  recog­ nition  drives  him  into  an  awkward  love affair  with  a  gauche   young  art  student from   Wimbledon; and   her  readiness  to believe in  the  image  that  Graharne pro­ jects   almost   traps   him   into   marriage, before   he  is  restrained  by  his  sense  of her  inferiority.
Mr.  Gray's  study  of Graharne's failure to achieve  his dream  is a grimly comic exposure of middle-class self love, of the righteous   belief  in  the  priority   of  one's own  needs. But  the  point  is driven  horne











8o
 rather  too   often;  there   is  a   sameness about   all  of  Grahame's experiences   and his responses to them which prevents a satisfactory  development of his character and   blunts   the  edge  of  the  satire.  The author surrounds his central  figure  with too many caricatures that  we have met before-the hearty,  cruel English school­ boy, the effete and  decadent  undergradu­ ate,  the  lower-middle-class  family  living in the suburbs  with its glass-topped  tables, floral  curtains and  television  set. But  the sexual   guilt   and   the   moral    confusion  that  underlie  all  of  Graharne's poses are sympathetically  presented; and  the  final emptiness  of his emotional life is a fitting comment  on the values of a society which has  both  inspired  his ambition and  ren­ dered  him  helpless. The  author draws  an explicit parallel with Great Expectations, which  suggests  the  nature of  the  forces that   have  corrupted  his  hero,  the  snob­ bery  and  hypocrisy  of social  convention; but,  unlike  Pip,  there  can  be  no  revised happiness  for Grahame -his simple and whole-hearted  acceptance of middle-class values  has  deprived him  of the  power  of spiritual   regeneration.  Of    the    three  novels  under   discussion,  Little  Portia is perhaps the most telling in its description of inner  confusion; for here  the crisis achieves    no    dramatic   resolution,     its causes and  effects are  rooted  firmly with­ in  the  realm  of  familiar  day-to-day ex­ perience,   and   thus   its  implications  are more  disturbing.





ODD POET OUT

RAYMOND sousTER,  As  is.  Oxford  University
Press.  $4.75.

RAYMOND SousTER is a rare bird-the antithesis  of  the  image  called  up  by the words   "Canadian  poet".  Never   at  any time  connected  with  a  university,  never a traveller  for cross-country  readings  (in­ deed,   never   travelled   further   westward  than  Fort  William), never  a  recorder  of his  poems  on  tapes  or  discs,  never  a  re­ viewer,  caustically  or  otherwise,  of other  poets'   works -he   is   instead   a   genial, quiet,  now  middle-aged  man   concerned  with  everyday living and with the com­ monplaces  of city  life  (in  Toronto) . He would like to be thought of, he remarked once, as a proletarian poet. But in  Marx­ ist terms  his  job as a  bank  official  would preclude his being  called  anything other than  petty-bourgeois. Certainly this is the outward   impression   he   gives;   but   his poetry   reveals   more.   Here   he   is  con­ stantly  vulnerable, constantly letting  him­  self  be  disturbed,  by  the  down-and-outs of our society:  the  underdogs, the under­ bitches, the holed-up animals  themselves. These  are  creatures taken  for granted by other  poets,  but  rarely  looked  at.
Souster's   latest   book,  As  Is,  does  not show  any   change  in   this  respect.   The very   titles   are   similar   to   his   titles   of the forties: "Moving Day",  "Jazzman", "Night  Raider"-an animal,  of course-

head   down  in  garbage, busy,  steam  ascend­
ing
like  a  grace from   its  breathing coat
 -a happy animal  this one, unlike the creature in  "The Cry"  which  moves  the poet  to  respond :

I closed   the   window   hard against  the   unearthly  scream, then   stood   hard-rooted  there until   the  wail  died,  freeing blood  to  run  on  again,
ears   to  re-wind quietness.

If "responsibility is response"  then Souster   is  a  committed  poet.  His   con­ cern  has  been  not  only  to  communicate through his own poems, but also to bring to the attention of the country  as a whole the  world  of other,  younger  poets  (as in his latest  collection  New  Wave Canada). If criticism  has  been  made  against  Sous­ ter  it  is not  on  the  score  of  his  being  a recluse, but with  regard  to his style. Even if it is accepted  that  the  poet may choose his  own world  and  write  from  within  its narrow   content,  the  reader-critic  some­ times yearns for greater variety of  expres­ sion. True,  in this  new collection  Souster has  tried  his hand  at  some  longer  poems
-notably   character  descriptions  as  in
"The Good Doctor" (in memory of Dr. Norman    Bethune)   and   "John   Suther­ land    I gIg- I 956"   and   "Boldt's   Castle". These   are  interesting,  but   not  dazzling or  exciting.   In   the  long  run  one  comes back with  pleasure  to the "old fashioned" Souster   poem,   as   ancient,   simple,   yet subtle  as  the  Japanese  Haiku.  And  who more  in  fashion  now  than  those  imagist poets  who  explored   the  Haiku   back  in the    Igio's  and    Ig2o's-Ezra   Pound,  F. S. Flint,  William  Carlos  Williams?  It is that  style,  clear  and  stripped  of meta­  phor,   eliminating  any   marked   musical effects  (though strongly  rhythmical) that  has  captured Souster's loyalty from  the beginning.   It has  become  his  very  own seal, stamped  on  every  page.

81

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Two  examples  will illustrate:

I Like  to Imagine
I like   to  imagine the  tip-tap-tap
of   the   blind    man's   cave down   one   side   of   the   street.
Somehow  beats   the   time for   the  young   legs  racing up  the  other.

A  Christ  on  Yonge   Street
The same   long   hair same   beard
same  gen tie  eyes
His   back   to  Yonge   Street he  is  smashing both  fists against a  wall.
But   not   hard  enough to  draw   blood,  so  of  course no  one   notices.
Although  the  voice  here  is  the  same as in  an  earlier  imagist  poem,  "The Six-
 Quart Basket", a subtle difference  has occurred    in   Souster's  technique.  No
longer merely an observer, he becomes a participant. No  longer  content   to  be,  a
la  Williams,  an  "objectivist"  concerned with   presenting  objects   seen,   he   now brings greater selectivity  to the observer data:  emotions    of   loneliness,   of    self­ deprecation. For  these reasons it is worth­ while   noting,   in   this  collection,  poems like "The Day Before Christmas" or "On the Range" or "Nobody's Told the Birds" (where  a  street  is  being  demolished   but "nobody's told the birds /so  that  the song will go on forever") . These are moments,  tested  against   time,  delicate   and  strong  as ceramics.  Put  them on your shelf and they  will insist  on  being  noticed.
DOROTHY  LIVESAY





The colourful life and tragic death of the only Canadian statesman ever to die by an assassin's bullet.
THE ASSASSINATION OF D'ARCY McGEE
byT. P. Slattery,  Q.C.
Poet,  rebel,  firebrand orator,  author  and  editor,   D'Arcy   McGee  was Canada's best-loved statesman. Had  he lived,  he  would  have  replaced incumbent John A. Macdonald as Prime Minister. In this outstanding biography, one of Canada's leading  historians traces  McGee's  colourful career. It began  as  a  leader  in  the  Irish  underground. When  he  was betrayed in 1848, he escaped to the  United  States. Ten  years  later,  he emigrated to Canada  and became  editor  of a newspaper started by influ­ ential  friends. Simultaneously, he launched the brilliant political career  that  was  ended  by an  unknown assassin's bullet  in 1868.  Mr.  Slattery is a senior  partner in one  of  Canada's most  prominent law  firms  and lives in Montreal.   $6.95.

Now at bookstores.

el Doubleday

BOOKS lN  REVIEW



NEW SHOOTS


VIOLET   ANDERSON,   In   The  Balance.  Fiddle­
head  Poetry Books.  Paper so¢.
JOY   KOGAWA,   The  Splintered Moon.  Fiddle­
head   Poetry  Books.  Paper so¢.
DOROTHY   ROBERTS,   Extended.  Fiddlehcad
Poetry Books.  Paper $1.so.
NEIL     TRACY,    Shapes  Of    Clay.    Fiddlehead
Poetry   Books.  Paper  so¢.

IN 1945 a group  of New Brunswick  poets started  a small mimeographed magazine, The  Fiddlehead, which  circulated  locally until 1953 when it opened its pages to contributors from  anywhere  in the world, growing  from  a  twelve-page  quarterly to its  present  seventy-two   page  size.  Selec­ tion   of   contributors  has   always   been made  by an editorial board and  although in  one  sense  this  policy   has  tended   to make  The   Fiddlehead   an  eclectic  publi­ cation,   it   has   also   tended  to  make   it publish  careful   and   straightforward poems   rather   than   out-and-out  experi­ mental  writing. Nonetheless,  it  has  pub­ lished  most  of  the  best  Canadian  poets of the last twenty  years, some good Amer­ ican  and   English  writers,  and  on  occa­ sions  it  has  given  a  chance   to  younger voices and  some  unconventional work.
Besides its quarterly publication, The Fiddlehead   has  published   several  chap­ books  and   a   few  full-length   books  of verse.  The   Canadian  feminine  voice  of poetry  particularly finds an outlet through this  publication:  recently,  Luella  Booth, Joan  Finnigan and  Anne  Kekes  have  all published   books  under  The   Fiddlehead imprint,  and   three   of   the   books  under review come  from  the  distaff  side.
The insistence on middle-of-the-road material,  while   displeasing   those   who wish for  complete  experimentation from
 magazines, has kept The Fiddlehead  in existence   for   twenty-two  years,  one   of the  longest  runs  for  a  magazine of  this nature in  Canada. Nor  is it  fair  to  dis­ miss its efforts by cries of  "unexciting and competent  verse"   when   we   remember that  it  encouraged two  of  the  best poets in  Canada, Al  Purdy  and   Alden  Now­ lan,   by  publishing   chapbooks   of   their work.
The   four   small   books  of  poetry   re­
viewed  here  give  a  fairly  accurate idea of  what   The   Fiddlehead   represents   in Canadian poetry.  It  finds a place for  the poet   using   traditional   forms,   such   as Neil  Tracy, whose  Shapes  Of  Clay  is a collection  of seventeen  sonnets.  The son­ net   does  not   appeal   to  many   modern poets,  probably   because  poetry  has  been working  towards   a  more  open  form  for most  of  the  twentieth  century,  and   the sonnet  with  its  restrictive  structure  and its weight  of tradition has been used with freshness  in  modern   times  only  by poets somehow  outside   the  more  vital  experi­ ments  with  form,  poets  such  as  Auden,  the  Southerners  Ransom   and  Tate, and occasionally,  Robert   Frost.  The  only  ex­ perimental   sonneteer    I   know   is  e.   e. cummings.  Tracy's   sonnets  are  formally  correct   but   too  often   the  form  has  be­ come   a   straitjacket,  forcing   him   into trite   figures,   rather  generalized    moral attitudes and  descriptive catalogues.  On occasions  the  reader  senses that  the  poet is trying  to  break  into  a  new approach: "Electra" has   an  interesting parallel structure that   both  cuts  across  and  uni­ fies  octave   and   sestet,  "Uncle  Reuben" has  a  strong  octave  with  a  sense of  the value  of  each   individual  line,  although in other  sonnets  the end-stopping of lines prevents    a   flow    of    movement    over­ emphasizing the   rigidity    of   structure.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



There  are    a   few   striking    lines   and phrases   scattered  through  the   sonnets, as  well  as  one   rather  embarrassing  at­ tempt   at  cynically  tough  colloquial  lan­ guage   in   "Social   Service".   All   in   all, Shapes  Of Clay  insists  too  much  on  the shape  of  the  sonnet,  so  that   the  poetry has feet of clay.
Joy  Kogawa   is  the  most  formally  ad­ venturous of  these  poets,  but  I  find  her use of the short  line monotonous even  in such   a  slim  volume   as  The  Splintered Moon. Her  poems generally  tease out  an idea  by a  small  alteration  of  a  line  and by  repetition  and   extension,  but   some­ times  the  poems  lose themselves  because there  is  not  enough  emphasis  placed  on significant  words.  At  times  this  kind  of writing  seems  mechanical  when  carried  on  too long, as in "I Know  Who  I Am",  yet  Miss Kogawa  does succeed  at  length  in  the closing prose poem. Sometimes the teasing  out  of an  idea  goes beyond  what can  be  really  held  within  the  poem ("Jacob-for  Wes").
I  find  Miss  Kogawa   better   when  she speaks,  as she says in  one  poem,  "softly/ And as undramatically as possible", when, in  fact,  she  lets  the  epigrammatic  neat­ ness make  its  own  point,  as she  does  in "Tongue-Tied" and  "I think  I  am  that  fabled  princess".  On  occasions  the poems suddenly  end  on  a  new  concept  after  a constant  repetition  of   another  idea   to give  the   reader   a   shock   by  a  kind   of trick ending  but too often  the trick draws attention to itself  rather than  to the  new concept   ("Jacob-for  Wes" again). Some   very  short   poems  are   given   epi­ grammatic  weight   by  the   use  of  short lines   but   under   examination  the  state­ ments  seem very ordinary. But in spite of these   drawbacks  and   the   monotony  of the short-line structure, this volume shows
 a lively if somewhat limited poetic mind with  a voice of its own.
Violet  Anderson's poetry  is based on a
general  thesis  about  the  mechanical  des­ truction of simple nature and  the snatch­ ing  of  moments   of  calm  in  closeness  to nature. But  her  verse,  apart  from  some carefully   arranged  descriptive  details  in poems   like   "The   Thinning  Air"   and "Hudson  River,  Cold", fails  to  convince  for the most part for a variety  of reasons. When   she  uses  a  regular   structure  the lines are  at  times  padded  out  or strained  for  the  sake  of  rhyme  or  rhythm.  Miss Anderson writes much  better  poems when she   allows   the    thought   to   follow    a natural movement ("This Rock"  and "Elsewhere Than") . The  parallel  struc­ ture  of "Unless  You Tell  Us" is intended to express something in simple  terms  but in  fact  it  obscures  the  statement. Occa­ sionally  the  moralizing  is too  pat   ("Per­ spectives"),   and   a   reasonable   poem   is spoilt by an inadequate word -"Truck drivers ... go/galloping past".  Yet in this small   chapbook    there   are   some  neatly turned poems, a recognition of the  value of  sound  in  poetry,  and  in  some  poems the movement  and  rhythm  are well suited to the theme. An uneven book, In The Balance offers some careful  verse and  one or  two well-wrought poems.
Many of the faults of Miss Anderson's work recur  in Extended but  Dorothy Roberts  is  the  strongest  voice  here.  The one  word   of  the   title  crops   up  in  the opening    poem -"the   mind    extended from  its  waking", and  there  is evidence of  a  mind  reaching out  to  grasp  consis­ tent   vision  of  the  universe  around it.  I use  the  word   "universe"  advisedly,  for there  is  a  constant  reference  to  stars  in these   poems,  by   means   of  which   Miss Roberts  expresses some sense of largeness

BOOKS IN REVIEW



but  at  the  same  time  she  also  sees  the universe in terms of specific localities and landscapes.   She   sees  the   endless   possi­ bilities  in   nature,  however   unrevealed, unformed and  unseen  they  may  be. Hu­  man   beings  may   be   "less   than   blown leaf",   but  they  extend  outward   into  the landscape and  into  the universe.  Humans grow  to a sense of  solidity-

Really   the   young   person   made   all  over   of what  she was doing
And  set for  life in the  elaborate skeleton
Of  all  her  routes.

In  the  same  way a  road  carved  through the  barriers   of  landscape  survives  until land  and   road  are  joined  in  "the   great surge  of movement".
Such   a  largeness  of  conception  leads Miss  Roberts   into  some  artificialities­ heavy-handed   apostrophes,  a  choice   of some   unsuitable   meters,   some   padding and   some  unnatural  word   order   to  no good   effect-but  there   is  a  wholeness about   Extended  which   rises  above   the goodness or badness  of individual poems. It is this over-all  consistency that  perhaps the  editors  of The   Fiddle head strive  for, and   in  Extended  this  policy  may  have found  some  kind  of  justification.
PETER STEVENS


STYLE AT FIRST SIGHT

ALDEN   NOWLAN,    Bread,   Wine   and  Salt.
Clark, Irwin. $3.50.

IN  THE  WINTER of   rg62  I  read   The Things Which  Are.  It   made   a  terrific impact  on  my imagination, and  I've  en­ joyed Nowlan's  poems  ever since.  It  was style,  not  love,  at  first  sight.  Now,  five years  later,   Alden   Nowlan   gives  us  his
 sixth   book  of  poems.  There  are   62  of them,  and  they  possess a puissance  as frightening  as   cancer;  once   you   read them   you're  hooked!   I would  not  even cringe  to add  that  Layton's poetry sounds like   rehearsed    rhetoric  in   comparison. I mean   these  poems  don't   whine,   they don't   implore,  they  simply  stand   under their titles and rip out. What we have in Bread, Wine  and Salt is a rollicking irony which  puts  our  little  lives on  the  rocks. I think   Nowlan   regards   people  as  acci­ dents,   but   his   sardonic   allegories   and rhythms   occur  in  a  human  universe.  If something happens, it  happens, that's  all. When  he says in  his  poem,  "I, Icarus": "There was  a  time when  I could  fly. I swear   it."   I   believe  him,  and   I'll   also swear  up  and  down,  long  and  loud  that  he is absolutely right.  His assertion is illo­ gical,  but  its  validity   as  an  aggrandize­ ment  is extremely  convincing. Nowlan's  poetry   persuades   the   reader   to  accept  words   as  the   motor   nerve   cells  where meaning  is   juiced   up   by  the  sound   of them.  Each  word  counts; the image  will always  accompany  the  act.   "The  Spy" demonstrates this  beautifully:

My  child   cries  out  in  his  sleep.
I bend   close,   try   to  make   out   the   words. Though  it   fills  me   with   shame,
I spy  on  his  dreams,
try  each   word   like  a  key
to  the   room   where   he  keeps things  too  private  to  share even   with   me.

I have  quoted  this  particular poem  in its entirety  because  it  fills  me  with  a  sad sense of wonder.  It has  purpose,  passion and  perception, and  the process it evolves is the  actual  core  of  poetry.
Many  poems  in  this  volume  poke  fun
at   history  and   politics.  The   defects  in­ herent  in slapstick  parodies  betray  Now­ lan's   intentions.  Can   we  take  him  seri-

ss

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ously?  Or  is he  playing  games?  Perhaps such subjects are solely conducive  to harlequin gestures;  this seems to be the general  consensus.  How  can  a  poet  trust a politician? Or history for that  matter? Nevertheless,  Nowlan  is at  his best when he  writes  about   childhood, love,  loneli­ ness  and   memory.   And  if  I'm  not  mis­ taken  I  also  detect  a  certain  "editorial" quality   in  some  of  the  poems.  "In Our  Time," though  poignant, is sheer  under­ ground  journalism. "Ancestral Memories  Evoked ..."  is  overloaded  with   person­ ages,  and  they  all fall  flat on  their  faces. "Verbal Transcription" is the  best of the bunch. Another point worth mentioning. Seven of his poems take their titles from books  and   movies.   Why   Nowlan   used them  I  don't know.  A lack  of  inventive­ ness?  Laziness?  I  really  don't  know.
There are  2 I   publications in  the  Ac­ knowledgments listed  at  the  front  of  his book. This  in  itself  displays  Alden  Now­ lan's  growing  popularity among the liter­ ati.   The   last  five  poems   belong   to  his hospital   confinement   where  he   under­ went   a  severe  ordeal.  These  poems  are witty,  profound,  and   the  philosophy   of human  relationship has  never  been  more subtly  expressed.  I'd  like  to  quote  all  of them,  but  perhaps they'd  be best appre­ ciated   by  readers   by  reading   them   in his  book.  Lastly,  six  hirsute  illustrations by  Mary  Cserepy  enhance   the  pages  of Bread, Wine and Salt. Nowlan's  tour de force.
LEN GASPARINI










86
 CONTROLLING THE JUNGLE


MICHAEL   ONDAATJE,   The  Dainty    Monsters.
The  Coach House   Press,  1967.  $3.50.

THIS,  IN  MY   OPINION, is the  finest  first book of poems  to appear since Margaret Avison's  Winter Sun. Michael  Ondaatje represents a healthy reaction in modern Canadian poetry. Although a completely contemporary writer,  he eschews the "simple", almost  barren, style of so many of the poets influenced  by the Black Mountain group.  He owes much of his originality   to  his  background,  I   think. The   exotic   imagery   which   crowds   the pages of  this  book  appears to stem  from his childhood  memories of Ceylon. His poems  are  jungle-lush, but, unlike  a jungle, they  are cultivated and controlled. Their   profuseness  suggest  a full  and  fer­ tile mind  always at  work.
Imagery, in itself, is not enough, of course.   Michael   Ondaatje is  also  sensi­ tive  to  poetic  form,  and   he  exercises  a firm  rhythmic control  over  his  language. There  is  also,  in  his  longer  poems,  his sense of  plot,  or  story.  In  the  poems  of the  second  part  of  the  book, he  demon­ strates   a  fine  and   subtle   understanding of  poetic  narrative. This  does  not  mean he longwindedly "tells the story." Rather, the  story  exists behind  the  poem,  always present  to focus the specific incident in a precisely  imagined   context.  This  sugges­ tion  of story  context  often  occurs  in  the shorter   poems,  too.  In  "The Moving   to Griffin",  for  example,  there  is a  gain  in density  from  the  implied  context  of  the poet's  life story.
Ondaatje's imagery  is obsessively nat­
ural:  the  book is a kind of modern  besti-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ary, with birds, predatory and domestic animals,  and  the  beast,  man,  always present, always active. Images of birds, especially, occur  again  and  again.  Yet  in the   poem,   "Song   to  Alfred   Hitchcock and \V'ilkinson", he does the unexpected, and  the  poem  fairly  leaps from  the  page as a  result:

Flif  flif flif flif  very  fast
is  the  noise  the  birds  make running over  us.
A  poet  would  say  'fluttering', or
'see-sawing with   sun  on  their   wings'. But  all  it  is
is flif  flif flif flif  very  fast.

Although  his   poems   are   filled   with
1mages  of  violence  and   terror,   his  love poems   are   able   to   stand   against   this v1s10n. Life   is  seldom   gentle   in   these poems,  but   the  love  lyrics  salvage  and savour  those moments  of deep  gentleness which  cannot   last  but  must  be accepted joyfully  in  their   passing.   "The  Diverse Causes",    "She    Carries    a    'Fat    Gold Watch'", "Christmas Poem, 1965", "Four Eyes",  as  well  as  the  poems  of  love  in the  Troy   Town   section,  all  present   the particular moments   of  communion with an intensity  sufficient  to command belief. We  accept  the  validity  of such  moments because  the poems poignantly  create  that validity.   "The  Diverse   Causes"   is  my favourite:

Three  clouds   and   a  tree reflect  themselves on  a  toaster.
The   kitchen  window   hangs   scarred, shattered  by  winter hunters.
We  are  in  a  cell  of  civilized  magic. Stravinsky  roars   at   breakfast,
our  milk  is powdered.
Outside,  a  May   god
moves  his  paws   to  alter   wind
to  sea tter   shadows   of  tree   and   cloud. The   minute  birds   walk   confident jostling   the  cold   grass.
The world  not  yet  of men.
 We  clean   buckets  of  their   sand to  fetch   water   in   the   morning, reach   for   winter  cobwebs,
sweep  up  moths  who  have  forgotten  to waken.
When   the   children sleep,   angled behind their  bottles,  you  can  hear  mice
prowl.
I turn   a  page
careful not   to  break   the  rhythms of   your  sleeping   head   on  my  hip, watch   the   moving   under  your   eyelid that  turns   like  fire,
and  we  have  love  and   the  god  outside until   ice  starts  to  limp
in  brown   hidden  waterfalls,
or  my  daughter  burns   the  lake by  reflecting  her   red  shoes  in  it.

Yet  Ondaatje's poetry  never  dissolves into  sentimentality. His sure control,  and the  precision   of  his  vision  won't   allow that.   The   ironies  of  his  animal   poems, his  use of  tone,  the  mythic  vision of the Troy   Town    poems,   the   sense   of   the power  in  others,  of our  inability  to  con­ trol    or   protect    others,    which    comes through in " 'Lovely  the Country of  Pea­ cocks'", "The Inheritors", and "Come  to the  Desert",   all  preclude  sentimentality. He  is  too  tough-minded,  too  aware   of the  complexities   of  life,  and  his  poetry offers no answers or escapes, as sentimen­ tality  always does.
"Troy Town", the second  part  of The Dainty  Monsters, is concerned  with myth and  the  creation  of myth.  This  is a diffi­ cult  term; but  it  should  be  sufficient  to suggest  that,   in  these  poems, Ondaatje tells  "stories"   which  engender   responses of awe and  admiration. The  life of these poems  is  violent,  for  they  deal  with  the permutations of human violence.  He  has used  the  well-known  myths  of Troy  and Lilith   for  some  of  these  poems,  but  he has  also  created   new  myths  out  of  his­ tory,  or,  in  "Peter", probably   the  finest poem  in  the  collection,  out  of  his  own imagination.  The   poem  on  Egypt,  and

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the   Elizabeth  poems,  where   the  fabled queen   enters   an   entirely   new  mythical life, are  fascinating for  their  sense of the person.  These   are  monologues,  and,  es­ pecially  in  "Elizabeth", he  has  achieved a   high   degree   of  dramatic   realism.   I have said  that  he has a clear imaginative understanding of  violence,  yet  this  viol­ ence   never   overwhelms   the   poet.   The  poetry  is not  voluptuous  in  its  violence;  it is chiseled  and  carefully  wrought. The  old  idea  of  decorum  applies  perfectly  to these   poems.   This   is  especially   true   of "Peter", where  the  poet deals with varie­ ties  of  physical  and   mental  violence  in an  almost  virginally  pure style and  man­  ner.  The   result  is a  tremendous gain  in imaginative   force   over   most    modern  treatments of  the  theme.
This  is a  beautiful book.  It is this  in
both   senses  of  the  word,  as  a  work  of poet's   craft   and   as  a  work  of  printer's craft.
DOUGLAS BARBOUR



LEACOCK'S MASKS

DONALD CAMERON,  Faces  of  Leacock. Ryerson
Press.  $6.so.

ANYONE WHO  SETS HIMSELF  to  write  a critical   study   of  Stephen  Leacock   as  a man  of letters  confronts immediately the question  of  how  to organize  his material effectively.  Leacock's  best work  was done in  the  first  few  years  of  a  long  career. A  graph   would   depict   initially   several high  peaks, then  a wide lower  plateau - flat or at  best hummocky-rising finally to a couple  of respectable hills. A chron­ ological  treatment,  therefore, would  ob­ viously   invite    anti-climax.  Reiteration

88
 would  also intrude, because  as Leacock's published   volumes   proliferated  he  con­ sciously  or  unconsciously   repeated  him­  self, not only in techniques and situations but  in character-types, attitudes, themes, ideas,  and   even  phraseology.
In  the  preface  to Faces of Leacock Dr.
Cameron carefully  defines his area of concern  and  his approach:

From   [Leacock's]  approximately forty  vol­ umes  of  humour,  criticism, and   the  like,  I have   chosen   to   discuss   in   detail   only   his best.  Good   books  matter, not  bad  ones.... I  chose   to  call   this   book   an   appreciation because    my   feelings  toward   Leacock  are warmly  sympathetic....

The  first of Dr.  Cameron's nine chap­ ters  is  biographical.  While   none  of  his factual  informatoon  may   be   new,   his interpretation of  Leacock's  character stresses its ba.ffiing complexity.  A reticent  man,   Leacock    rarely   allowed   into   his writing   any  genuinely  personal  glimpses of  himself.  His  many  inconsistencies­ e.g., his love of  teaching (in a university) and  his loathing of teaching  (in a school) his  mixture of  conservative and   radical social   ideas,   his   satirizing   of   the   very things he stood for (human progress, scholarship, political  economy, public lecturing,  etc.)  -are described   by  Dr. Cameron but no facile explanation  is offered.  Implicit throughout the  book  is the  conviction  that  Leacock,  "a  complex man"   (p.   rs6), remains  an  enigma  be­ hind   a  fac;ade  of  his  own  creation,  "a man  walled  within  himself"  (p.  174).
The   chapters  that   follow  discuss  the
different   "faces" of  Leacock  as  revealed by classification  of his books:  Leacock  as literary   critic,  as  theorist  of  humour,  as essayist,   traveller,   satirist,   ironist,    and potential   novelist,    with    a   concluding chapter entitled   "A  Man  to Thank  God

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



For."   Chronological  sequence   has  been displaced  by a graph  of rising excellence. Some of these chapters are much  more rewarding  than   others,  dependent  upon Dr.  Cameron's personal   response  to  the material being discussed. For instance,  in the  chapter on  Leacock  as critic  he  con­ fesses that  the  parodies   (as  in  Nonsense Novels)   have "never  given me personally much   joy"   (p.   46),  and   he   dismisses them  in  a  few  perfunctory  paragraphs. Yet  surely  the  parodies  are  important if for  no  other   reason  than  to  show  that,  whatever   dislike  Leacock   professed  for aggressive  and  destructive  humour when the  targets   were  human  beings,  he  had no  such  qualms   when  the  targets   were impersonal literary  forms.  On  the  other  hand,   when  a  book  deeply  engages  Dr. Cameron's   interest,   his   comments   and analyses  are  excellent.  Almost  the  whole of  the  "Satirist"  chapter  is  devoted   to Arcadian Adventures, and  the  "Ironist" chapter to Sunshine   Sketches; moreover, these two books are again  discussed when Dr.   Cameron  takes  up  the  question   of "Leacock  the stillborn  novelist"  (p.I 38). Indeed, at  least  a  third  of  this  study  is concerned   with   these   two   books,  Lea­ cock's   best.   Dr.   Cameron's  grasp   and appreciation of  the  complexities  of  both books in  tone,  style, structure, character­ ization,    and    implications   deserve   the highest   praise.   Particularly   rich  in  ori­ ginal  insight  is his discussion of Sunshine Sketches,  which   he  calls  "the   pinnacle of   Leacock's   achievement"   (p.    I35). One   sample   comment  may  suggest  his reason:   "Arcadian  Adventures  is  filled with  the clash of fac;ades, the armour we don  to protect  ourselves from  each other. Sunshine  Sketches  goes  behind   the  fa­ c;ades to  reach  an  awareness  of  the  real people  who  are,  in  Margaret  Laurence's
 striking   phrase,   "living   in  there   behind their  eyes"  (p. I 35).
After   arguing   persuasively   that   Lea­ cock  "had   the  talent   to  do  far  greater work  than  he did"   (p.I 55),  Dr.  Came­  ron  in his final  chapter  addresses himself to the  question  of why he failed  to do it. He  seeks for  the  answer  mainly  in  Lea­  cock's    personality,    but    he    rejects    as inadequate  such   explanations   as   that  Leacock   hungered   for  money,  security,  and  respectability.  Instead:

I would  argue that Leacock  shrank from exposure, that he  hated the  thought of  self­ revelation, and   that  his  humour  is  both   a means   of  self-expression  and   at   the   same time   a  screen   behind  which   as  far  as  pos­ sible   he   conceals  the   real   and   vulnerable Leacock.... The  novels   and   plays   he   did not   write   demanded an   intimacy  he   was afraid  to  show.   (pp. I  72,  I 74)

Furthermore, Dr.  Cameron sees in Leacock's personality and achievement something peculiarly   Canadian:

Our  humour  is  the   expression  of  a  com­ munity  which   desires   values   but   has  been unable  to   take   possession   of   them,   which  desires  and  fears  the  knowledge  and  under­ standing  of   its   own   identity.... His   ap­  proach  to  life  seems  to  me  fundamentally a  Canadian  one, and   his  failure to  develop  reveals    weaknesses  which   have    always dogged  his  nation.... He  is  afraid  he  will be  found  wanting if he  reveals  himself,  and  yet  the  prospect of  self-revelation is fascin­ ating ... painful self-criticism as opposed   to defensive  self-depreciation   has   never   been a  very  important feature of  Canadian  life.
· .. (p.   I 70  ff.)

In my opinion, Dr. Cameron does not adequately  document  this  thesis,  but   I have  little  doubt  of its validity.
A number  of typographical errors  and
clumsy sentences unfortunately mar this study.   Also,  a   major   deficiency   exists, which  is early  admitted by  the  author: "the   huge  range  of  very  funny  material

8g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



that   cannot    possibly  be  discussed   ade­ quately   even  in  a  book ... the  isolated sketches and  essays ... all the little pieces that   with   surgical   dexterity  recreate   in comic  terms  acutely  observed  behaviour"
( p.  23),   are  here  given  only  incidental treatment. But  surely  among  the  princi­ pal "faces"  of Leacock are those of funny­ man  and  comic  profilist.  Although  fully detailed    analyses   of   the   sketches   may have  to  await  the  development of a cri­ tical  methodology  for  humorous writings somewhat  comparable to  what   is  avail­ able  for  other   literary  genres,  even  now it  cannot  be  entirely  impossible  to  gen­ eralize more significantly  than  Dr. Came­ ron   does  about   the   themes   and   situa­  tions,  and  especially  the  types  of  human character  and   human  behaviour, which Leacock   delineated  so   memorably  and with  such  masterful  brevity.
Faces  of  Leacock   makes  no  claim   to be   either    comprehensive  or   definitive, but  it should  stimulate every reader to ap­ proach  our  greatest  humorist  as "a larger but  more  deeply  flawed  figure  than  Lea­  cock has  usually  been  thought  to be."
R. E. WATTERS


TRINIDAD TRAVELLER

ROBIN  BRYANS,  Trinidad and  Tobago: Isles  of the  Immortelles.  Queenswood House. $g.50.

LARGE COUNTRIES,  with  variety  in  land­ scape  and  life,  produce  few  great  world travellers    and   few   good   travel   books. Characteristically, it  is in  the  restricted  lands  of Europe, and  particularly in Bri­ tain,  that  the travel book is still a flourish­ ing   and   respected   genre.  American

go
 writers  are  good  at  surveying  other countries   economically  and   politically: they have little social instinct and rarely develop  that  sharp  sense of  the  nuances of local life which is one of the good inheritances among   the   British   from their  imperial  past.  Consequently one rarely   comes  across  a  really  interesting travel  book written  by an American, and, conversely,  the  market   for  travel   books is much  narrower in North  America  than in  England, Germany or even  Italy.  The same applies  to Canada. There are amaz­ ingly few  good  travel  books  written  here even  about  our  own  country,  and  when I  came   across  Trinidad  and  Tobago I was   surprised   to   find   that   its   author, Robin  Bryans,  lived  in  Canada, and   by no  means  astonished   to  discover  a  little later   that  he  had   come  originally  from Ulster.
Trinidad is a small country, but the interests  of  Mr.  Bryan  are  so wide  that he presents  it on a vast screen. He  knows the rich history of the islands, he is a knowledgeable amateur  in  botany,  con­ chology  and  ornithology, he is  interested in  sects  and  steel  bands,  in  people  and  peoples.  Out   of  his interest  he  creates  a picture  as  crowded   and  as  gaudy  as  the great   Port   of  Spain  carnival   which,  in its  various  stages  of   preparation and  in its final achievement, provides a dazzling, continuous   background  to  Mr.   Bryans' dramatically   described   human   encoun­ ters.  For  those  who  mean  to  visit Trini­ dad  and Tobago it is full of indispensable incitement; for those who prefer  to travel in another way it is the food of fantasy.
L. T. CORNELIUS

BOOKS IN REVIEW



AFTER LEVITY


SHEILA  EGOFF, The Republic of Childhood: A Critical  Guide  to Canadian Children's Literature   in   English.   Oxford   University Press.  $5.00.

foR   ENGLISH-SPEAKING   CHILDREN,   the Age   of	Levity    in    literature-which turned   out  to  be the  age  of artistry  and genuinely   interesting  content   as  well­ dawned   in  I865  with  the  publication of Alice  in  Wonderland.  But  Lewis Carroll set a brilliant  precedent, and for each  ar­ tist since  who  has  rivalled  his brightness  there  have  been  platoons  of earnest  ped­ ants  and  uninspired hacks  to  darken  the day.   The   quaintly   paradoxical   conse­ quence  has  been  a handful of books and carloads  of articles  taking  adult  writers  to task, often  in stern, schoolmasterish tones, for misdemeanours against young readers. Some  thirty-five   years  ago  Paul  Hazard took  up  the  cudgels  in  his  Books, Chil­ dren  and  Men. In  response  to  children's requests for  books, he said, well-meaning adults   are  still  composing  textbooks   in disguise:   planting  schoolrooms   in  fairy palaces    and   vegetables    in   the   palace  flower   gardens,   and   introducing  jovial old  uncles who turn  into dryasdust  maths  and   physics  teachers   at  the  drop   of  a question.   Since  Hazard's time  the  good fight  has  been  fought  by such  people  as C.  S.  Lewis  and   Naomi   Lewis  in  Eng­ land  and  Lillian  H.  Smith   (The  Unre­ luctant   Years)   in  Canada.  Now  Sheila Egoff  has  joined  them  with  The  Repub­ lic  of  Childhood:  A   Critical   Guide   to Canadian Children's  Literature  in  Eng­ lish, a book commissioned  as a centennial project   by   the   Children's  Recreational Reading  Council   of Ontario.
Although  children  would    no   doubt
 find an unholy  glee in seeing Miss Egoff's finely balanced  ferule applied  to the large collection  of grown-up knuckles  that  get rapped  in it, The Republic of Childhood is a  thoroughly adult   book.  Concentrat­ ing  chiefly  upon   works  published   since I950, and  including a few not written  ex­
pressly for children but annexed  by them,
Miss Egoff makes consciously rigorous assessments of the kind her Introduction prom1ses:

Canadian  children's  literature  now  consti­ tutes  a body  of writing that  deserves  recog­ nition  and  evaluation, and  not  merely  from  Canadians.

If the  scope  of my  books  is exclusively national,  my   standards  of   judgement  are not  so.  I have   endeavoured  to  apply,  first of  all,  general literary standards, those  that would  be accepted in  judging writing for adults.... Secondly, I  have   tried   to  judge Canadian  writing  in   comparison  with   the best    modern   writing,   particularly    from Great Britain and  the  United States.

In  her first six chapters Miss Egoff considers  Indian legends,  realistic  animal stories,  histories  and  biographies,  histori­ cal  fiction,   fantasy   and   folk   and   fairy tales,  and   a  grab-bag  of   miscellaneous  stories.  Chapter Seven  deals  briefly with book  designs  and  illustrations for  youth­  ful  consumers,  and   Chapter  Eight   sur­ veys the history of children's literature in Canada.  In  each  chapter, standards are set  by  the  world's  finest:   such  artists  as
Carroll, J. R.  R.  Tolkien, T. H.  White,
Kenneth   Grahame,   E.   Nesbit,    E.   B. White,  and  Richard Hughes.
Not  surprisingly, Canadian  contenders don't  win many  gold medals in this tough international competition. Our  teams  are small and  all but the most independently­ minded   performers are  still  haunted  by the  pioneer   Puritanism  that   has  helped delay the  naturalization of fantasy  in this

gr

BOOKS IN REVIEW



country.  Yet we achieve  some respectable marks, according to Miss Egoff-notably in outdoor adventure stories and  realistic animal  tales. In both of these genres, she deems Roderick  Haig-Brown and  Farley Mowat   the   outstanding  modern   Cana­ dian    authors.  Among    the   "small  but vigorous    group    of    successful    writers"  who  have  re-shaped  and   re-told  Indian legends, she singles out Kay Hill, Dorothy  Reid,  and  Robert  Ayre as the gifted  suc­ cessors  of  Cyrus   Macmillan  and   Hilda Hooke.  And  if  the  norm  in  histories  and biographies   is   a   rather  pedestrian  one, especially  in   the  commissioned   "series" books,   there   are   Pierre    Berton's    The  Golden   Trail:  A  Story   of the  Klondike Gold  Rush, R.  S. Lambert's Franklin  of the  Arctic,  and  William  Toye's  The St.  Lawrence    to   show   the   way   to   better  things.  But in other  classes, the Canadian child    is   sadly   short-changed  by   his countrymen, says Miss  Egoff  dispassion­ ately  but  definitely:

By  and   large, Canadian  historical fiction for    children   has    been    a    succession     of failures. Its  virtues have  been  in  the  report­ ing  of history, its failings have  been  literary.
... the    plots    are    manipulated   and     the characters   invented   and    papier   mache. Even     the    historical   personages   have    a rubbed-out appearance.

She finds most Canadian stories of urban life   "rather  drab",  most   career   stories thinly  fictionalized   aids  to  school  coun­ sellors, and  most mystery stories implaus­ ible  hack  jobs:  "A  passably  good  detec­  tive  story  or  mystery  story  for  children  has  yet  to  be  written   by  a  Canadian." But  our  most conspicuous national failure  has   been  in   the  realm  of   Faerie.   Miss Egoff   acknowledges  that   this  failure   is understandable,   since   the   rarified    yet sophisticated  kingdom   of  fantasy   is  ac­ cessible  to   genius   alone.   However, the

92
 shortage   of   even   near-misses,   like   the poet  Anne  Wilkinson's  Swann  & Daphne, is dismaying.  Miss Egoff concludes that Catherine  Anthony Clark  is, "in  respect of  purpose   and   volume   of  work,  Can­ ada's   one  serious  writer   of   fantasy   for children." On  the  whole-

With    fairy   tales,   myths,   folk   stories,   and tall    tales,    as   with    legends,  fantasy,  and poetry, the output has been small and  the achievement meagre.

Miss Egoff's  own style is clear, flexible, and  unaffected. She  does  not  indulge  in critic-ese,  although  she  must  sometimes have been tempted  to in a work that necessitated   continual reference   to  cate­ gories  for   which   there   are   only  a  few standard names:   plot,  setting, character­ ization,   atmosphere,  etc.   Nor   does  she despise the  book whose  aims, apart from the   intention  to  entertain,  are   modest. She  sounds  like  a  born  reader,   ready  to yield  herself  to  a  book  as far  as she can do   so   with    intellectual   and    spiritual honour.
My only quibble  with her as I read  her book, and  that  was a nonrational one, concerned    her    high-minded   insistence that   children   should   be  exposed  princi­ pally, if not  exclusively, to literary excel­ lence. Having swallowed at least a peck of published  slop  during a  catholic  reading childhood, and  remembering some  of  it with fond mirth, I wanted  to argue. But I was quenched by more  recent  experience. From informal surveys of three  large classes of young  teachers  and  prospective teachers,  I have inferred that  Alice in Wonderland has become anathema to youngsters whose elders force it into their otherwise   unrelieved    diet   of   pap,   and Miss Egoff  struck  home  when  she  said:

A  child's opinion of  Alice  in  Wonderland,
say,  will  greatly depend  upon   his  previous

BOOKS IN REVIEW



reading experience. If  a   child    has   read and  enjoyed   the  nonsense  of  Edward Lear, the wonders of the fairy tale, and  the sophistication of Richard Hughes in Don't Blame   Me   or  The  Spider's Palace,  his  re­ action   to  Alice  is likely  to  be different  from  that   of  a  child   who   has   read   only  comic  books and  The Bobbsey  Twins. Deliberately building  in  children an  acquaintance with good  books  makes   as  much   sense  as  taking them  step   by  step  through arithmetic.

In  a  year  of  some  proper   pride  and much  Yainglory about  Canada, Sheila Egoff   has   produced    an   honest   report card  on this country's  literature for its young.  It is an  unostentatious,  informa­ tive, topical  book, describing many works in  detail   and  covering  each  of  its  cate­ gories   pretty    comprehensively   in   the selective  bibliographies  at  chapter  ends. It  is also a book that  may well transcend its  apparent topicality  by spurring Cana­ dian  writers  to try harder in the interna­ tional   context   in  which   Miss  Egoff  has paid  them  the  tribute of  viewing  them.
FRANCES FRAZER


HOW NOT TO DO IT

CHRISTIE  HARRis,  Raven's Cry.  With  illustra­
tions  by Bill Reid. McClelland and  Stewart.
$4·50.

THERE WOULD SEEM TO  BE  little  justifica­ tion  in  reviewing  this  book  in  Canadian Literature. That  is the  tragedy  of it.
Mrs.  Harris' book  is  the  story  of  the
Edenshaw family,  one of the  noble fami­ lies of the Queen  Charlotte Islands, from the  time  of  the  white  discovery  of  the islands in the 18th  century  to the  present  day.   It  includes   the   story   of   Charles  Edenshaw   (Tahayghen), who  lived  be­ tween  1835 and  1920, and  was arguably
 one   of   Canada's  greatest   sculptors.   It ends  with  a  few  perceptive  remarks  on Haida art  by Bill Reid,  who is related  to the Edenshaw  family.
I am sorry that  I can  only  praise  Mrs. Harris' intentions, not  her  performance. While  much  of her material on the Eden­ shaws  is  not  new   ( cf.  Barbeau's  H aida Carvers), she  has  thoroughly  researched  I-faida culture, she has visited  the Queen  Charlottes, and  she has  a  proper  respect for   the   pre-Christian    cultures    of   our province.  But while the facts are right  on the  whole,  the  tone  is  hopelessly wrong. Her   book  is  a  virtual  anthology of  the faults   which  mar  most  Canadian books about  Indians, and  its  chief  value  is as a horrid  example.
What    exciting   material  she   had   to work   with,   after   all!   There  is  enough beauty   and   horror   in  the  bare  facts  of the  extirpation  of  Haida  culture:  they shine   and   glower   through  the   dullest prose of anthropologists, sea-captains, missionaries   and   government  men.  She need  only  have   put   her   story  together with intelligence, taste and professional competence, and  the  colour  would  have burst forth  of itself. Instead, we find our­ selves in  the  same  mythological  Disney­ land  in which  all Canada's  pre-Christian history   seems  to   be   set.   The   Indians emerge  as marvellous  clean-thewed chil­ dren,  who tell the most super  stories, and whose  art  is  simply  fab.  (Raven's Cry  is pre-fab.)   We  are  continually being  told how  really  wise  and   kind  and  cultured they  were, but  since they tend  to act like Wolf   Cubs  on  an   outing,   we  have   to accept this on faith. Mrs. Harris' style, straight  out  of  the  latest   pop-up  fairy­ tale  book,  turns  everything into  papier­  mache.  Perhaps  this, rather than gold, or some other  archaic standard of  value,  is

93

BOOKS IN REVIEW



the  appropriate material for Canada's hundredth anniversary.
Bill Reid  is an  excellent  sculptor and
craftsman. But,  alas,  the  illustrations are unsatisfactory, simply because they  are illustrations. I have  never  yet come across a  successful  attempt  to  adapt the  West Coast style to our own idiom of book illustration, with its figures set against landscapes, sea-scapes  or  interiors. Mr. Reid  was  bound   to  fail  in  this  attempt, as  Edenshaw himself  failed  in  many  of his drawings. It would  have  been  much better had the book been decorated with abstract designs.
In  short,   Raven's Cry  is  a  waste-a waste  by Mrs.  Harris of a valuable story and much useful research, and a waste, presumably    by   the   publishers,    of   the talents  of a fine artist.
NORMAN NEWTON



HOOD'S MONTREAL

HUGH   HOOD,  Around    the   Mountain:   scenes from    Montreal  Life.   Peter  Martin   Asso­ ciates.  $s.oo.

KEEP  A   NOTEBOOK   and  one  day  it  will keep   you.   Or,   as  Hood   remarks   to  a friend    in   the    Montreal   Forum,   "All around me; there's a story in everybody around us ... Work  for  a lifetime,  I said smugly.   You   should   see  my   notebook. I'll   never   write   them   all."   Montreal's rich  canvas  has enabled  Hood  to present here twelve seasonal "happenings" from Christmas  to  Christmas. It  was  a  very Hood  year  since  the  author himself  acts as  observer   and   participant  in  most  of the  stories.  Personal  anecdotes,  often  in­ volving  just  Hood   and  his friends,  new and  old,  are  combined  with  a  course  in

94
 Montrealogy. Narrative  and   exposition are  juxtaposed  coherently and  naturally. In   the   first  selection   Hood   recounts how   a   fellow   amateur  league   hockey player  is  ostracized   for  pre-game  drink­ ing,  in  a city  where  hockey is  the  "chief social  cement". The   second  takes  place in   "the   country  of  the   ruelles"   where Hood  meets  a shipbuilding  hobbyist  who is   preparing,    of   all   things,    the    first scientific  lexicon  of Romany. The  room­  ful   of   models   transfixes   Hood    so  in­  tensely   that    "the   remembrance  of   the sight  long  after   retains   the  capacity   to direct and  strengthen all my ways of feel­ ing."  Similar   epiphanies occur  through­ out the book. The  third  story, "Bicultural Angela", recollects  the  process  by which Angela   Mary   is  metamorphosed to  be­ come  Marie-Ange. But, to apply  a  popu­ lar   blonde   commercial,  she  is   not   the bi-bi  she  became  a  bi-bi  to be,  and  gets an   upsetting  bye-bye  from   her   French
lover.
Scenes  five and  six are  among  Hood's best. In the former, the matter-of-fact statement that  "A lease in Montreal ends on  April  3oth",  Hood's birthday,  coin­ cidentally,  is sufficient  to unleash  a chain of   comic   events,   terminating   with   the adventure of a sink! "Fourmillante cite:  bet  your  sweet  life",  writes  Hood,   who obviously   enjoys   Montreal  much   more than  Baudelaire  enjoyed  Paris.  Scene  six follows  nosy  Hood  as he sketches  in  the unusual  lives of the concierge of his apart­ ment  building   and   her  industrious  hus­ band.  By now  the  reader  is accustomed to  Hood's  engaging first  person   travel­ ogue  point-of-view;  exit  Hood   tempor­ arily    as   a   Victoria   Day    separatiste skirmish   in   Pare   Lafontaine  brings   to­ gether   a  riotous   automobile  apprentice and  a  mature university  girl.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



He  found  his next  pen  and  pencil portrait by bicycling along Sainte-Croix where  old  Victor   Latourelle, a  diminu­ tive Goriot-Lear figure,  is stripped  of his land   by  his  daughter  to  spend  his  final years isolated  by "asphalt  seas".
I  have  to  quote  Bennett  Cerf,  "I'm  a
dreamer, Montweall", apropos  the  ninth tale, "A Green  Child", a twilight-zone, Antonioni-like hallucination, with  all the chill  of  a  good  Spanish   fantasy.   Hood plays this key only once in this collection, unfortunately;  he  jumps  to  the  Forum, the  docks, and  to Riviere  des Prairies  for his  final  three  settings.
"Landscape has  no special  grace  in  it­
self." This  paradoxical observation in the last  story  reminds  the  reader  of the characters who  have  animated the  city­ scape  thus  far.  Hood's  Comedic Humaine includes  himself  as central  citizen,  ready with   cztndid   camera    and   notebook    to record   the   trivia,   travesty   and   tragedy  all  around him.  Along  with  that  lady  at Expo  who  introduced herself  to me  as a neighbour   of  Mr.   Hugh   Hood,   I  look forward   to  his  forthcoming  novel,  The Camera   Always  Lies, and  to more  Mon­  treal  memories.
TONY KILGALLIN


PYTHAGOREANS


J.   A.     PHILIP,    Pythagoras  and    the  Early
Pythagoreans.  University  of  Toronto  Press.
$6.so.

THE   EARLY  PHILOSOPHERS    of  Greece, who are  lumped  together  under  the com­ mon  label  of  "pre-Socratics" in  histories of  philosophy,   have  retreated  into  myth and   legend   to  a  distressing  extent,   and none  have  retreated farther  than   Pytha-
 goras.  Most  of the  others  have  left  frag­ ments   of  their   own   works;   Pythagoras wrote  nothing.  Aristotle  had  a good  deal to  report; indeed   without  him,  the  pre­ Socratics  would  be  hard  to  comprehend at  all,  but  he  picked  and  chose  his  in­ formation  as  it   pleased   him.   The   bio­ graphical  traditions for  most  of  the  pre­ Socratics  end   with   the  compendium  of ancient  philosophy  put  together   by Dio­ genes   Laertius  in   the   third   century   of our  era. In  the  case of Pythagoras, there is  more: two  lives, one  by Porphyry  and the other  by his pupil  Iamblichus, both products of the conflict of religions in the later  Roman Empire, and  hence coloured with   nco-Platonism  and   perhaps    some anti-Christian  bias.
The   legend  of   Pythagoras  has   de­ voured  the  man,  and  the  process  started  early.   Even    Aristotle    referred    not   to Pythagoras by  name,  but  to  the  "Pytha­ goreans"; in  the  Metaphysics  he  intro­ duced  them  as the "people who are called Pythagoreans,"  as  if   the   Pythagoreans were  a  religious  brotherhood, living  ac­ tording to  a  common   rule  and  holding  certain  unique  doctrines.   After  Aristotle, the   legend   emerged   full-blown. Pytha­ goras  became  a religious  teacher; for  the neo-Platonists, he was an intellectual rival to Christ  and  for  at  least  one  modern, a prototype of Him.  He  became  a  pioneer in  mathematics, and  certainly,  if he  was not  responsible  for  the  Pythagorean theorem,   one   of   his  disciples  was.  He taught   the  transmigration of souls;  cen­ turies   later   the   nco-Pythagorean   Apol­ lonius  of  Tyana  claimed   to  be  his  re­ incarnation. The  mathematical  principles  which  have  been  fathered  on  him  have been  used to analyse  ancient  architecture and   even   literature;  only   a   few  years ago,  a  ranking  classical  scholar  dissected

95

BOOKS IN REVIEW



the  structure of  Virgil's  Aeneid   and claimed to discover that Virgil had used Pythagorean  number   theory  throughout.
J. A.  Philip   approaches  all  this  with
scepticism.  He  will  accept  only  Aristotle as   a   reliable   source   for   early   Pytha­ goreanism,  and   with   this  it  is  hard   to disagree.   This   means   that   the  evidence  for  Pythagoras as  the  founder  of  a  reli­ gious brotherhood pretty  well evaporates, although there  is no  reason  to  disbelieve that  he founded   a  political  group  which ruled   Croton  in  south  Italy  until   a  re­ action   against   them   forced   them   out. Rather   more   questionably,  Philip   tries to show that when  Aristotle  refers certain  doctrines   to   "the   Pythagoreans",  these can   be  ascribed   to  Pythagoras  himself. The  argument  here  is  a  trifle  devious. When  Aristotle   referred   to  "the  Pytha­ goreans," he meant,  as Philip  has argued in an  earlier  article  (Phoenix, I963,  25I-
265)   a   nearly   contemporary  group   of
Pythagoreans  who    had    gathered at Tarentum  in   south    Italy    around  the mathematician Archytas,  whose  position at  Tarentum  paralleled that   of  Pericles earlier  in  Athens.  However, we know  of no  great   Pythagorean  thinkers   between the   time   of   Pythagoras  and   Archytas. Therefore  the   Pythagoreanism  which Aristotle   received  from  his   "Pytha­ goreans"   must   be  the  teachings of  the master,   more  or   less   uncontaminated. This   assumes   that   great   intellects   con­ taminate a   tradition  more   than    lesser ones,   which   may   be   true.    On   firmer ground,  however,  Professor  Philip  insists that  early  Pythagoreanism is still  primi­  tive  thought, and  he is rightly  suspicious of  the more  sophisticated elements  in the Pythagorean  tradition.  Professor   Philip proceeds   with   the  same  caution   to  ex­ amme  the  Pythagorean view  of  the  cos-

g6
 mos, and Pythagorean astronomy  and number   theory.   The   Pythagorean   sym­ bola   (rules   of  conduct  for   the   Pytha­ gorean    order)   are    necessarily    viewed with   scepticism,   since   Philip   does   not think   there   was   an   early   Pythagorean religious  order.   In  discussing  the  trans­  migration of souls, Philip  draws  parallels  from  shamanism,  and  rightly  so;  this  is perhaps  one  of   the most  primitive   ele­ ments  in  the  Pythagorean tradition.
Professor   Philip   teaches   in  a  college at the  University  of Toronto which  has a tradition of careful  classical scholarship, particularly in ancient philosophy,  and Pythagoras    and   Early   Pythagoreanism is a significant  contribution in its field. However,  it  would   be  hard   to  say  any­ thing   flattering  about   the  technical  as­ pects of this book's production. Misprints are   too   numerous  to  mention, and   ex­ traneous  lines   of   type   have   a  way  of straying  around  the page and  turning up in  odd  places.  Fortunately, the  scholar­  ship  has  been  careful   even  if  the  proof­  reading  was  not,  and  the  footnotes   and appendices   are  almost   more   valuable than  the  text.
J. A. S. EVANS



PREJUDICES
AND CONVICTIONS


Salvation! 0 The  Joyful Sound. The Selected Writing of  fohn   Carroll. Edited by John Webster  Grant.   Oxford  University  Press.
$6.oo   cloth;  $3.25   paper.

ALTHOUGH   BORN  IN New  Brunswick  of Irish  parentage, John  Carroll  spent  most of  his  life  in  Toronto and  various  parts of   Southern  Ontario   as   a   methodist

BOOKS IN REVIEW



minister.  Out  of his observations emerged several   books,  which   were  published   in Toronto  during  the   latter   half   of  the nineteenth  century   and   which  exist,  no doubt, today  in a forgotten state  in many old   libraries.   John   Webster   Grant  has delved  into  these  reminiscences  and  col­ lected   (complete with  an  admirable  in­ troduction,  bibliography,  and  footnotes)  what  he considers  to be the most interest­ ing  to  modern  readers  of  what   Carroll has written.
Salvation! 0  the   Joyful  Sound  is  a
noteworthy  book  for   three   reasons.   In the   first   place,   it   gave   a   memorable glimpse   of   the   protestant  ethical   con­ sciousness of nineteenth century Ontario, a  world  underlying our  own  and  form­  ing  a  curious  amalgam with  it.  In  these pages,  one   can   see  the  moral   map   of protestant   Ontario   as   it    was   before change  and  urbanization  has  blurred  the lines. It is crystal clear, both in its narrow  prejudices  and   in  its   complete   convic­ tion  of  universal  truth.  As one  measures the  beliefs of  contemporary Canada, one can   see  that   quite   as  much   has   been gained   as  has  been  lost  by  the  changes  that  have  taken  place.
Secondly,  the  book  provides  an  enter­
taining   account  of  the  habits   of  living, the  topography, the  means  of travel  and communication of Ontario (and  Toronto in  particular) in the old days. It is there­ fore    of   considerable   antiquarian    and sociological  interest.
Thirdly, it is an  unselfconscious  tribute to the  riders  of the methodist circuit  and to the civilizing  leaven that they provided as they  brought sweetness and  light  to  a rough   and   crude   frontier. The   style  of writing   is  as  artless  and   transparent  as the  character  of  the  author  and   recalls to  us,  when   Carroll  is  at  his  best,  the

g8
 fictional  narrator of The Vicar of Wake­
field, Dr.  Primrose.
Oxford  Press and  John  Webster  Grant are  to  be  congratulated in  this  very  de­ serving  "find". What  is surprising  is  that  the  book was  not  a  project  of the  Ryer­ son  Press.  It is  concerned   with  the  de­ velopment    of   the    Methodist   church through a long  and  important  period  of its history,  the  Ryersons  figure  very  pro­ minently    in   its   pages,   and   its   editor,  John   Webster   Grant,  was  at  one  time editor-in-chief  of  the  Ryerson  Press.
FRED COGSWELL


CANDID PIONEER

JOHN  HOWISON, Sketches of Upper Canada, Domestic, Local  and  Characteristic. Johnson Reprint  Corporation and   S.  R.   Publishers.
$14-50.

Blackwood's, December I82I, printed  an eight  page  review  of  the  first  edition  of this  work-a  review  probably   written, according  to  Professor  A.  L. Strout, of Texas   Technological  College,   by  John Galt-which  began:   "We  have  no hesi­ tation   in  saying,  that   this  is  by far  the best  book  which   has  ever  been  written by any  British  traveller  on  the subject  of North   America." The   reviewer  was  not far  wrong.  Between  I820  and  I83o  more than  thirty  books of description and travel were  published   which  included   some­ thing  about  Upper Canada (the  present Ontario) .  Yet  if  we  possessed  only  the Howison  volume  and    the   works  of Robert   Fleming  Gourlay,  Edward  Allen Talbot, Basil Hall  and  John Mactaggart we  should   not   lack   much   information about   pioneer   days  in  the  colony.  The

BOOKS IN REVIEW



30's saw another spate of works of this character.
The   publishers,   Oliver   &  Boyd,  in  a
subsequent  book   by  Howison,   included two pages of extracts from reviews of Sketches.  Naturally,  only  flattering   ex­ tracts  were included, but the British Critic said about  as much  in  a few lines as any reviewer  could.  "The  principal  value  of this   book   arises  from   the  interior   and  domestic  views  given  in  it  of the  life  of an  emigrant, when  once  fairly  set  down among  the  woods of  Upper Canada. We see here  more  of the  manners, the  occu­ pations,  the  hardships, and  the  comforts  of  that  class  of  men,  than  we  have  ever met with any where  else; set forth  too, in plain   agreeable   language,  and   without any  perceptible bias ..."
The reviewer might have added that Howison  did  not  mince  matters. He  de­ picted  the life of the  pioneer  as hard and glamourless,  and  as uncultured as it really was:  "Indeed," he wrote, "The peasantry evince the utmost indifference about every thing  that  is  not  absolutely  necessary  to support  existence." (p.  68). A page later he wrote  "I saw every thing in a state  of primitive   rudeness   and  barbarism."
Other contemporary reviews appeared
in  New  Monthly  Magazine, New  Edin­ burgh  Review,  Monthly   Magazine, Literary Gazette,  Scotsman,  Literary Chronicle, Examiner, Edinburgh Review, Edinburgh   Magazine, and   additionally, according  to  Allibone,   Eclectic   Review  and  Monthly Review. The  review in  the Edinburgh Review, June   I822, ran  to nineteen  pages and  was generally favour­ able.
As  Howison   spent   two  and   one  half years  in  Upper Canada,  travelling from the eastern  boundary to the Detroit river, he must  have  seen  practically  all  the  in-
 habited   parts   of  the   province.   He   left the  colony  in  the  middle  of  June   r82o. When   his  book  came  out,  it  supplied   a timely  and   useful  treatise   on  the  prob­ lems and  advantages of  emigration  from the  British  Isles.  It was  popular enough  to go through three editions  ( I 82 I,  I 82 2, I825). The  second  edition  was reset and  the  third   appears  to  have  been  printed from  the second edition  type. These  early editions  have  long  been  collectors'  items.
Important  as   the   work   is,   little   is known  of the  author. No cataloguer, for example,  has  recorded  his birth  or death dates.  His other  descriptive volumes  and short  stories,  of  which  he  wrote  several, give little autobiographical information. The   title  page  of  an   I 834  work  tells  us that  he was of the Honourable East India Company's  Bombay   service.  His  stories seem  to  show  a  preoccupation with  the sea, the West Indies and the subject of medicine.   The   Blackwood's  review  says that  he was a young man,  when  the  book was  published,  and  also suggests  that  he had  a competence in medicine.  The  same review tells us, as do Professor Strout  and Allibone, that  John  Howison was   a brother  of William  Howison  of whom  Sir Walter   Scott  wrote:  "His  father luckily is a man of substance though  of low penurious habits  I believe so that  poor Howison   is  secure  of  a  competent  por­ tion   of  the  goods  of  this  world."  The  statement  should   apply   equally  well   to John.
As  to  the  family,   the  Scots  Ancestry
Research   Society  reports   that   the  name Howison   was  common   in  Edinburgh at the  end  of  the  eighteenth century.  Only one   family,   however,   that   of  William Howison,   Writer, and   his  spouse,  Janet Boyle, had  sons named  William  (born  in I794)   and  John   (born   in  I797)· These

99

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



dates  are  not  inconsistent with  what  we know   of  John    and   William   Howison. No death  date  for  John  has  been  found.
Mr.  Douglas  Grant, Managing  Direc­
tor  of  Oliver   &  Boyd,  has  found   some John Howison correspondence which shows that  Sketches of Upper Canada appeared  in   mid-November I 82I  ;  that Howison  was of an  irascible  nature; that  the  publisher  had  saved him from several inconsistencies; that  a certain  Dr.  Howi-
 son was given a complimentary copy; and that John  Howison was disturbed lest Blackwood   should   not   receive   a  copy. The fact that Galt's  (?) most favourable review   appeared  in   the   December I 5 issue of Blackwood's, only a  month  after publication, suggests that  Howison  was a member  of the Blackwood  group.  As Pro­ fessor  Strout  says,  John   Howison   is  a subject  "deserving future  treatment."
J· J. TALMAN











CANADIAN LITERATURE PUBLICATIONS


A CHOICE  OF CRITICS

Selections  from  Canadian Literature, edited  with a criti­ cal  introduction  by  George   Woodcock.   Essays  on  the Canadian literary   landscape and  on  individual  writers,  including Margaret  Avison,  Earle   Birney,  Morley  Cal­ laghan,  Robertson  Davies,   A.   M.   Klein,   Hugh   Mac­
Lennan, Jay   Macpherson,  E.  J. Pratt,  Gabrielle Roy,
A. J. M. Smith,  Raymond Souster,  Anne  Wilkinson. Published   by  Oxford   University   Press  in  co-operation with  Canadian Literature. Cloth  $5.00, paper  $2.50.

CANADIAN LITERATURE I LITTERATURE CANADIENNE
Edited  by Inglis F. Bell and Susan W. Port. A listing of Canadian creative   and  critical   writings  in  English  and French   for   the   period   1959-I963.  Cloth   $5.50,  paper
$2.50.

Obtainable  from
PUBLICATIONS  CENTRE, UNIVERSITY  OF  BRITISH  COLUMBIA
VANCOUVER 8, BRITISH  COLUMBIA




IOO


ENGLISH-CANADIAN

LITERATURE

Compiled by Rita Butterfield



COLLECTIONS

GIL LESE, JOHN  PATRICK   ( ed.).  Chinook arch.
Edmonton,  Queen's  Printer,  1967.   350   p. GREEN,  H. GORDON and  SYLVESTRE, GUY (eds.).
A  century of Canadian literature. Toronto,
Ryerson Press;  Montreal,  Edition  HMH [1967]. 599   p.
KITIMAT  WRITERS' CLUB. The voices  of   Kiti­ mat, I967. Kitimat, Kitimat Writers'  Club, I967.   I52  p.
MCNICHOL, VERA   LUELLA. Reveries  of   a pioneer, Hibbert and  Fullarton. [Kitchener, Ont.,  Dixon   Press]    1967.   220  p.
 EPPs,  BERNARD.  Pilgarlic   the   death. Toronto, Macmillan  of  Canada,  1967.   r66   p.
EVANS,  CICELY  LOUISE. The newel   post. Gar­
den  City,  Doubleday [1967].  199  p. FINDLEY, TIMOTHY. The  last   of   the    crazy
people. Toronto, General Publishing [ r 967].
282  p.
FRIESEN, PAUL A.  The   burning  stone.  Lon­
don,   Heinemann [I967].  296   p.
GODFREY,  DAVE.  Death   goes  better   with  Coca­
cola.  Toronto, Anansi, 1967.   I 15  p.
GREEN, HENRY GORDON.   Professor   go   home.
Introduction by Harry J. Boyle.  [Montreal]
Harvest House [cr967].  146  p.

MCNICHOL,   VERA
pioneer,   Elma.
280  p.

FICTION
 LUELLA.  Reveries
[Millbank, Ont.]
 of    a
1967.
 HOOD, HUGH.  Around  the   mountain;  sceneJ from  Montreal  life.    [Toronto]  Peter  Mar­ tin  Associates   [cr967]. 175  p.
HOOD, HUGH.  The  camera   always   lies.  New
York,   Harcourt,  Brace  and   World,  I967.
246  p.

BODSWORTH,  FRED. The  sparrow's fall. Garden
City,   N.Y.,   Doubleday;  Toronto,   Double­
day   Canada,  1967.   255  p.
BOWEN-JUDD, SARA    (HUTTON).   The  case  is altered by Sara Woods (pseud.) London, Published  for   the   Crime  Club   by  Collins [ci967] 255  P·
BOWERING, GEORGE    HARRY. Mirror    on   the floor.	[Toronto,   McClelland  &    Stewart, cr967]  I6o  p.
CLARKE,  AUSTIN CHESTERFIELD.  The  meeting point.     Toronto,    Macmillan   of    Canada [ I967] 249  p.  Also:   London, Heinemann,
1967.
CHAMPAGNE, PAUL M. A  fair affair.  Winnipeg, Greywood  Pub.   Co.   [ I967]  (A  Greywood paperback original, 102.)    I90  p.
CRAVEN,  MARGARET.  I  heard   the   owl  call  my name. Toronto, Clarke, Irwin, 1967.  138  p.

102
 LENDON, KENNETH. It  must   be  the   climate, by  Leo   Vaughan  (pseud.).  London,  Eyre and   Spottiswood, 1966.   222  p.
MACLENNAN, HUGH.  Return  of   the   sphinx.
Toronto,   Macmillan   of   Canada   [ 1967].
303   p.
MILLAR, MARGARET.    Fire    will    freeze.     [To­ ronto]  New   American  Library  of   Canada [r967].  I58   p.   (First  published   1944).
OGNALL,  LEOPOLD  HORACE.  Murder by  proxy, by   Harry   Carmichael   ( pseud.) .  London, Published  for   the   Crime  Club   by  Collins [cr967]  (A  Crime Club   novel). 191  p.
PETER,  JOHN.   Take  hands  at   winter.   New
York,   Doubleday,  1967.   299   p.
PORTER, JOHN.   Winterkill.  London, Sydney, Toronto, The Bodley  Head  [1967]. 191  p. RICHARDSON,    JOHN.   Wacousta,  or   the   pro­
phecy.  An  abridged  edition  with   introduc-

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



tion   by  C:: rl  F.  Klinck.  Toronto,  McClel­ land    &    Stewart,   I967.     (New    Canadian Library  no.   58).  298   p.   (First   published
!832).
ROSS, WILLIAM   EDWARD  DANIEL. Assignment: danger,  by   Marilyn  Ross    (pseud.).   New York,   Paperback  Library,  I g67.   I go  p.
Ross,   WILLL\ I    EDWARD    DAI'i!EL. Cameron Castle,  by   Marilyn   Ross    (pseud.).   New York,   Paperback  Library   [ c I 967].  I 57   p.
ROSS, WILLIAM EDWARD   DANIEL. Victoria Winters, by   Marilyn  Ross    (pseud.).   New York,   Paperback Library  [cig67].   I6o   p.
STEIX,  DAVID    LEWIS.  Scratch   one   dreamer.
Toronto,  Montreal,  McClelland &  Stewart
r I g67l-  200  p.  Also:   Indianapolis,  Bobbs­
Mcrrill  Co.   [crg67].
SY IO'IS,   scOTT.   Combat  journal    for   Place d' armei;   a   personal     narrative.  Toronto, McClelland  &  Stewart  [Cig67]-  279  p.
TAYLOR, PETER.  Watcha  gonna    do   boy . ..
Watcha gonna  be?  Toronto, Montreal,  Mc­ Clelland &  Stewart [crg67]. 98  p.
TROOP, ROBERT. The   hammering. Toronto, Macmillan of  Canada,  rg67.   269  p.
VAN    DER    MARK, CHRISTINE. Honey    in   the rock.  Toronto, McClelland & Stewart, Ig66.
224  p.
WILSON, ETHEL. Hetty  Dorval.   Vancouver, Alcuin   Society,  Ig67.    (375   copies)    I69   p. (First  published  Toronto,  I94-7).

POETRY
ANDERSON,  VIOLET.  In  the  balance.  [Frederic­ ton,   N.B.]   Fiddlehead  Poetry  Books,   I967.  (5oo   copies)  r6  p.
BALL, NELSON. Beaufort's  scale.  Kitchener, Ont.,  Weed/i1ower Press,   I967.   3I   p.
BROWN, WILLIAM JAMES If   there   are   any Noahs;  poems   by  Jim   Brown.   Etchings   by Sandra  Cruickshank.  [Vancouver,  Very Stone   House,  I 967]. 55  P-
BURI, s. G. Elephant  girl.  Kitchener, Ont., Weed/i1ower Press,  rg67.  47  p.
CARLSON,  CHUCK. Strange  movies   (ive   seen).
Vancouver,   Very    Stone House  [ci967].
32  p.
CANDELARIA,  FREDERICK   H.  Dimensions.  Vic­ toria,  B.C.,    Morriss  Printing   Co.,    1967.  (goo   copies)    58  p.
 COLOMBO,   JOHN  ROBERT. Abracadabra.   To­ ronto,  Montreal,  McClelland  &    Stewart [rg67].  127  p.
COLLIE, MICHAEL.  The  house.  Toronto, Mac­
millan of  Canada,  rg67.   37  p.
DAY,  STACEY   BISWAS. American  lines.   [Mon­
treal, cig67].  174  p.
FARKAS,  GEORGE.  At  the   foot  of Sinai.  [Mon­ treal, B'nai Brith  Hillel  Foundation,  McGill University,  rg67].   (Hillel  poetry  series   1)
47  p.
FRASER, RAYMOND JOSEPH. Waiting for God's ange[.   Montreal,   Poverty  Press    [c I 967].
48  p.
GRIER, ELDON. Pictures   on   the   skin;   poems. Drawings   and    collages    by    Sylvia    Tait. Photos  by Eldon Grier. [Montreal]. Delta Canada  [CI967J- 61  p.
GUSTAFSON,  RALPH ( ed.).  The  Penguin book of   Canadian  verse.   Revised    edition.   Har­ mondsworth, Penguin,  I967.  282  p.   (First published 1958).
HOWITH, HARRY  Total war.  Toronto, Contact
Press  [CI966]. 97  p.
JONAS,  GEORGE. The  absolute    smile.    [The author, 1967]. 61  p.
JONEs,  D. G. Phrases   from  Orpheus. Toronto, Oxford  University  Press   [I 967]. 88  p.
KEARNEs, LIONEL. Pointing.  Toronto,  Ryer­
son  Press  [ 1967). 58  p.
KIRN, ARTHUR   G.  By  the  circus  sands;   poems. Illustrated  by  William  McElcheran.  Wind­ sor,   University   of   Windsor    Press,    1967.
42  p.
KOGAWA,  JOY. The splintered moon. [Frederic­ ton,  N.B.,  Fiddlehead Poetry  Books, ci967). (soo copies)    12  p.
KOLBER, sANDRA. Bitter    sweet    lemons   and love.  Montreal, Toronto, McClelland & Stewart, 1967.  84  p.
LAYTON, IRVING. Periods of the moon, poems. Toronto, Montreal, McClelland & Stewart [rg67]-  127  p.
LEE, DENNIS. Kingdom  of  absence.   Toronto, House    of   Anansi  (cr967].   (goo    copies)
6o  p.
LIVESAY,   DOROTHY. The  unquiet  bed.   Illus­ trated  by  Roy   Kiyooka. [Toronto]   Ryer­ son  Press  [1967). 65  p.


103

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



LORD,    BARRY.    Subject/object;   poems.    Kit­
chener,   Ont.,   Weed/flower  Press,    1967.
39  p.
MCFADDEN,    DAVID.      The    poem   poem.    Kit­
chener,   Ont.,   Weed/flower  Press,     1967.
36  p.
MACKENZIE,   WILLIAM   LYON.   William Lyon Mackenzie  rides again! By William Lyon Mackenzie   and     John    Robert   Colombo. [Don Mills,  Ont., Guild   of  Hand  Printers,
1967].  (Published  in   1966   as  "The   Mac­
kenzie   poems") .
MCKINNON,    BARRY  BENJAMIN.    The    golden daybreak hair; poems. [Toronto, Aliquando Press,  1967]. (150   copies)   44  p.
MCNEIL,   FLORENCE. A  silent  green  sky. Van­
couver, Klanak  Press  [ 1 g67]. 28  p.
MANDEL, ELI.  An  idiot   joy. Edmonton, M.  G. Hurtig Ltd.,  1967.  85  p.
MANTZ,  DOUGLAS  KART.  Four perspectives; poems  by  John Ramsden [and others.] Whitby, Ont.,  Carlyle Press   [ 1 g67]. 6o  p.
MRKITCH,   DAN.  Death  in  the  city.   Toronto. [F.  Vedrina  Printing, 1967]. 47  p.
NAPORA,  PAUL   EDWARD.  Auschwitz. San  An­ tonio,   Texas, Naylor Co.   [c1g67]. 22  p. NAPORA,  PAUL  EDWARD. Death  at  Belsen. San
Antonio, Texas, Naylor Co.  [c1g67]. 26  p.
NEWLOVE, JOHN.   What   they  say. Kitchener, Ont.,  Weed/flower  Press,   1967.   23   p.
NOWLAN,   ALDEN.  Bread,  wine  and  salt.  To­
ronto,  Clarke,  Irwin,  1967.
o'BROIN.    PADRAIG. No   casual  trespass.   [To­
ronto]  Cl6   Chluain  Tairbh,  1967.   112   p.
PAGE, P.  K.  Cry Ararat!  poems  new  and selected. Toronto, Montreal, McClelland & Stewart [1g67].  111  p.
PARKER,  SIDNEY  MANSFIELD.  The   anvil's  ring.
[Truro, N.S.,   1967?].  128  p.
PURDY, ALFRED. North  of summer,  poems  from Baffin   Island.    With    oil   sketches  of   the Arctic    by   A.   Y.   Jackson.  Toronto,   Mon­ treal, McClelland & Stewart  [1 g67].  87  p.
ROBB,    WALLACE    HAVELOCK.    Hail    Canada! seven  poems  for the Centennial  1967. Kings­ ston,  Ont., Abbey  Dawn Press,  1966.  31 I.
ROBERTS,  DOROTHY.  Extended. [Fredericton, Fiddlehead  Books,   c1g67].  (soo   copies).
43  p.

104
 The   Saskatchewan  poetry  book,  1966-67. Re­
gina,  Saskatchewan Poetry Society   [c1 g67].
46  p.
SCOTT, F.  R.   and   SMITH, A.   J. M.    ( ed.). The blasted  pine,  an  anthology  of satire, invec­ tive  and  disrespectful   verse,  chiefly  by Canadian  writers.  Revised   and  enlarged edition.  Toronto,  Macmillan  of   Canada,
1967.   192   p.   (First  published 1957).
sHTERN,    ISRAEL   H.    Fables,   by    Ish    Yair (pseud.)   Haywards  Heath,   Eng.,   Break­ thru   Publications, 1967.  35  p.
SMITH,   A.     J.  M.      (ed.).  Modern    Canadian verse in  English  and  French.  Toronto,  Ox­ ford  University Press,  1967.  426  p.
SMITH,  A.    J.  M.    Poems:  new  and  collected.
Toronto,   Oxford   University  Press,    1967.
160   p.   Also   published   as   an   Oxford  in
Canada  paperback no.   10.
sousTER,  RAYMOND.   As  is.  Toronto,  Oxford
University  Press,  1967.   102  p.
SPEARS,    HEATHER.    Danish    portraits.     [To­
ronto)  Ryerson Press  [1967]. 26  p.
TRACY,   NEIL.    Shapes   of   clay   [Fredericton, N.B.,    Fiddlehead   Poetry   Books,    c1g67]. ( soo copies) 1 2 p.
WILSON,    MILTON  THOMAS    (ed.).  Poets   be­ tween   the   wars;  E.  ].  Pratt,  F.  R.  Scott, A.  ].  M.   Smith, Dorothy   Livesay,  A. M.  Klein,  edited  and   with   an  introduction by Milton   Wilson.     Toronto,    McClelland   & Stewart   [c1g67].   (New   Canadian  library original  no.   5 ; Poets   of   Canada  vol.   2)
194   p.
WOODCOCK,    GEORGE.   Selected    poems.    Illus­ trated  by   Pat   Gangnon.  Toronto,   Clarke, Irwin,  1967.  57  p.
YATES, J. MICHAEL.  Canticle  for electronic music.   Victoria,  Morriss  Printing   [ 1967].
59  p.
YATES, J. MICHAEL. Hunt  in an unmapped interior    and    other    poems.    Francestown, New  Hampshire, the  Golden Quill Press [1g67]. So  p.

DRAMA
DAY,    STACEY BISWAS.  By  the  waters  of Baby­
lon.  Montreal,  1965.   137   p.
WATMOUGH, DAVID.  Names  for the numbered years,   three   plays.   Illustrated  by   Claude

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



Breeze.    Vancouver  Bau-xi    Gallery,   1967.
123  p.

ESSAYS
ALLEN, RALPH.  The  man    from   Oxbow,  the best of Ralph Allen.  Edited by Christina Newman.  Toronto,   Montreal,  McClelland
&  Stewart,  I967.   184  p.
DAVIES, ROBERTSON.   Marchbank's  a/manack. Toronto, Montreal, McClelland & Stewart [I967]. 205  p.
HUTCHISON, BRUCE.  Western  windows.  Illus­ trated by Pat  Gangnon. Toronto,  Longmans Canada  [1967].  164  p.
l\IC ARTHUR, PETER.  The  best   of  Peter   Mc­ Arthur,  selected    with    an   introduction   by Alec  Lucas. Toronto,  Clarke,  Irwin,   1967.

HUMOUR
ALLEN, ROBERT  THOMAS (ed.).  A  treasury   of Canadian humour. Toronto, Montreal,  Mc­ Clelland &  Stewart [ 1967]. (The  Canadian illustrated library).  128  p.
HIEBERT, PAUL. Willows revisted. Toronto, Montreal,  McClelland  &   Stewart  [ 1967]. I76  p.
LEACOCK, STEPHEN  BUTLER. Short    circuits.
Introduction  by  D.   J. Dooley.    [Toronto]
McClelland &  Stewart [1967]. (New  Cana­ dian   Library  no.   57)    221   p.   (First   pub­  lished   1928).
MCKAY,  w.   A.     The  great    Canadian   skin game.  Illustrated by Leo  Rampen. Toronto, Macmillan of  Canada,  I 967.  88  p.
SMITH,   DOUG. Bless    'em  all.    [Vancouver, Doug   Smith   &  Co.,  1967]. 152  p.
WILLIAMS,  VICTOR W. 1967 and all this; or Diversified pillage; a Canadian centennial satire.  Illustrated by Robert M. Bierman. [Victoria, B.C.,  Satire Publications, c1966].
101  p.

BIOGRAPHY

BANFILL,  B. J.  Pioneer   nurse.  Toronto,  Ryer­
son  Press,  1967.   184  p.
BANNERMAN,   JEAN.  Leading ladies,  Canada,
1639-1967.  Dundas,  Ont.,   Carrswood
[CI967l· 332   p.
 BERRY, GERALD LLOYD. Samuel de Champlain, father    of  New   France. Richmond, Ont., Simon  and  Schuster of Canada [1967]. (A pocket   book  edition)  128  p.
CARROLL,  JOHN. Salvation! o the   joyful  sound, the  selected  writings of John  Carroll, edited by John Webster Grant. Toronto, Oxford University  Press,   1967.   270   p.
COPELAND,  ALFRED.  Livingstone  of the  Arctic, by  Dudley  Copland.  With   a  foreword   by A.  Y.  Jackson. Ottawa  [c1967].  I83  p.
DAVIES,  BLODWEN.   Tom  Thomson, the   story of  a  man   who   looked    for  beauty   and   for truth in  the  wilderness. Foreword  by A.  Y. Jackson.  Sketches  by  Arthur  Lismer.  Van­ couver,   Mitchell  Press   [1967].   102   p.
FERGUssoN,  MAX.  And   now ... here's  Max,  a funny    kind   of  autobiography.   Pictures  by Doug  Wright.  New   York,    Toronto,   Mc­ Graw-Hill,  1967.   167  p.
FRENCH, MAIDA  PARLOW.    Kathleen  Parlow, a portrait.  [Toronto]  Ryerson   Press   [ 1967].
!67   p.
HEWITT,   FOSTER.  Foster    Hewitt,  his    own story.  Toronto, Ryerson   Press,  1967.  120  p.
HUTCHISON, BRUCE. Macdonald  to   Pearson, the    Prime    Ministers   of    Canada.   [Don Mills]. Longmans Canada   [I 967].  2 33  p. (Condensed  edition  of  "Mr.  Prime  Minis­ ter").
KEDDELL,  GEORGINA.  The   newspapering  Mur­
rays. Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart, 1967.
224  p.
KUPER, JACK. Child  of the  holocaust. London, Routledge  and   Kegan  Paul,  I967.   283   p.
LARSEN, HENRY A.  The  big   ship,   an   auto­ biography by  Henry A.  Larsen in  co-opera­ tion    with    Frank   R.    Sheer   and    Edvard Omholdt-Jensen. Toronto,   Montreal,  Mc­  Clelland &  Stewart  [1967].  223  p.
MCCOURT, EDWARD. Remember   Butler,  the story  of Sir  William Butler. Toronto,  Mon­ treal,   McClelland  &  Stewart,  I967.  276  p.
MITCHELL,  DOROTHEA. Lady  lumberjack. Van­
couver, Mitchell  Press   [I 967]. 135  p. MORLEY,  ALAN.  Roar   of  the  breakers, a  biog­
raphy   of Peter  Kelly. Foreword by Guy  R.
Williams. Toronto,  Ryerson    Press   [I 967]. I64   p.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



OSLER, EDMUND  BOYD.  La  Salle.   [Don  Mills] Longmans Canada  [cr967].  266  p.
PHILLIPS,  NATHAN.  Mayor  of  all  the   people.
Toronto,   McClelland  &   Stewart   [ 1 967].
207   p.
SLUMAN, NORMAN. Poundmaker. Toronto, Ryerson   Press,  1967.  301  p.
THOMSON, DALE  c.  Louis   St.  Laurent,  Cana­
dian.  Toronto, Macmillan of Canada, 1967.
56s p.
WILGRESS,  L.  DANA. Dana   Wilgress memoirs.
[Toronto]  Ryerson   Press  [1967]. 190  p. WILSON, HELEN DACEY.  More   tales   from  Bar­
rett's   Landing, a childhood  in  Nova  Scotia.
Drawings  by  Fred   Oakley.  Toronto,   Mon­
treal,   McClelland  &  Stewart, 1967.   r 27  p. WINDSOR,  JOHN.  The  mouth of the  wolf.  In­
troduction  by  Field   Marshall  the  Viscount
Montgomery   of    Alamein.   Sidney,   B.C., Gray's Publishing [1967].  224  p.
YOUNG,  SCOTT and   YOUNG,  ASTRID. O'Brien.
Toronto,  Ryerson Press   [ 1967]. 249  p.


JUVENILE

ACIAND,  ERIC. Adventure Westward.  Drawings by  Merle Smith. Toronto, T. Nelson  [I967].
263  p.
ACIAND,   ERIC. Drums   of  Niagara;  an   adven­ ture   story   of  early   Canada.   Illustrated  by J.   Merle  Smith.  [2nd   edition].  Toronto,
T.  Nelson   (Canada)  [1967]. 226  p.  (First published 1953).
ALLABY,   EDITH. Sumbera, son  of  a  Shaman.
Illustrated  by  Eric   Allaby.   Toronto, G.  R. Welch   [cr967]. 56  p.
ANDERSEN,  DORIS. Blood   brothers. Illustrated by   David    Craig.  Toronto,  Macmillan  of Canada  [1967].  136   p.
CAMERON, MARGARET     SUSAN.  Secret     trails.
Halifax,   Knowlton   Supply   Co.     [ 1967].
74  p.
CLEMSON, DONOVAN. Lost  mine. Illustrated  by David   Craig.  Toronto,  Macmillan of   Can­ ada,   1967.   192  p.
CLUTEsr, GEORGE.  Son  of Raven, son  of Deer, fable   of   the   Tse-shaht   people.   Illustrated by  the  author. Sidney, B.C.,  Gray's  Publish­ ing   [1967].  126  p.

I06
 COSGROVE,  EDMUND  C.  Windigo  wings.  Illus­ trated by  the  author. [Toronto]  Burns and  MacEachern [1967].  140  p.
DICKIE, FRANCIS. Husky of the  Mounties. Illus­
trated  by   Victor  Ambrus.  London,  J.   M.
Dent   [1967].  124  p.
FAULKNOR,  CHAUNCEY  CLIFFORD VERNON. The in-betweener. Illustrated  by  Leonard  Short­ all.  Boston,  Toronto, Little, Brown  [cr967]. r66  p.
HARRINGTON,  LYN. The luck   of the  LaVeren­ dryes.    [Toronto,  Camden,   N.J.]    Thomas Nelson   [1967].  I57  p.
HARRIS,  CHRISTIE. Confessions of a toe-hanger. Drawings by Moira Johnston. New York, Atheneum  [ I967]. 209  p.
HAYES, JOHN FRANCIS. The steel ribbon. Van­
couver, Copp Clark,  1967.   2II  p.
HAYES,  JOHN   FRANCIS.  Treason   at    York.
Vancouver, Copp Clark, [r967].  314  p. HORWOOD, HAROLD. The  foxes    of   Beachy
Cove. Illustrated  by   the   author.  Toronto,
New   York,   Doubleday,  1967.   190  p.
HOUSTON, JAMES. The white  archer; an  Eski­ mo  legend, written and  illustrated  by  James Houston.  New   York,   Harcourt,  Brace   and  World    [cr967]. 95  p.
MCLAUGHLIN, LORRIE. The   Cinnamon  Hill mystery.  Illustrated   by   Leonard  Shortall. New   York,   Crowell,  1967.   234  p.
MELZACK,   RONALD.   The  day   Tuk    became  a hunter and other Eskimo stories. Retold by Ronald  Malzack. [Toronto,  Montreal]  Mc­ Clelland &  Stewart [1967]. 95  p.
o'BRIEN,  ANDY.    Hockey   wingman,  a   novel.
Toronto,  George  McLeod  [1967].   175  p.
PFEIFER, LILLIAN E.  The  wolfers.   Illustrated by David  Craig. [Toronto] Burns and MacEachern [ci967].  r67  p.
PHELAN,  JOSEPHINE.  The  ballad   of  D' Arcy McGee, rebel  in  exile.  Illustrated by  David Craig.  Toronto,  Macmillan  of  Canada [I967].  (Great stories   of  Canada)  132   p.
READ,  ELFRIEDA.   Magic  for Granny. Toronto, Burns   and   MacEachern,  1967.   103  p.
REDMAYNE,  JOHN  (pseud.). The night   riders.
Illustrated   by   John   Lawrence.  Toronto, Macmillan  of  Canada,  1967.   r6o   p.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



ROBERTS,   CHARLES   G.  D. King   of  beasts   and other   stories.  Edited and  with  an  introduc­ tion   by   Joseph    Gold.    [Toronto]   Ryerson  Press   [1967].  240  p.
ROLFE, sHEILA. Amulets  and   arrowheads. Decoration by  Joan Greenwood. [Toronto] Burns   and    MacEachern  [c1967].  109   p.
STEPHENSON, WILLIAM. The great  river  hunt. Illustrated by Maria Jursic and Louise Sheppard.	[Toronto,   Burns     and     Mac­ Eachern,  CI967].  138  p.
STIRLING, LILLA.  Gretchen   of    Grand    Pre.
[Don  Mills]     Longmans  Canada   [1 967].
33  p.
WALLACE,  CLARKE.  Montreal adventure.  (To­
ronto]   Burns    and    MacEachern   [ 1 967].
123  p.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

"The last  five years  of Canadian  poetry, a  list of  what's available." Quill   and  Quire 33:
16-18,  February/March  1967.

BOOKS AND  READING

BACQUES, JAMES.  "Canadian  publishing:
through  the   hoop?"  Canadian F arum   4 7 :
96-99,   August   1967.
BARRETT,   FRANK. "Looking  back:  the   Copp Clark     Publishing   Company."   Quill     and Quire   33:10-12,  February/March   1967.
BEVINGTON, STAN and  GODFREY,  DAVE. "Small presses:     an    interview."   Canadian  Forum
47: 107-8,   August   1967.
"Canadian  publishing, answers   to  a  question­ naire."  Canadian Literature  33:5-15, Sum­ mer  1967.
COLOMBO,   JOHN  ROBERT. "Inside  the   trade, an  editor's notes." Canadian Literature 33:
44-45,   Summer   1967.
DUTHIE, w. I. "The  other side   of  the   cash register, a bookseller's view."  Canadian Literature  33: 37-43,   Summer  I 967.
FRANCIS,  WYNNE. "The little   presses."  Cana­
dian   Literature  33:56-62,  Summer  I967. GONSALVES, JAMES.   "CBC  publications."
Canadian  Forum  47: 102-3,   August    I967.
GOULD,  I AN.   "Gray   Campbell."   Canadian
Author and  Bookman 42: IO, Summer 1967.
 GRAY,    JOHN   MORGAN. "Canadian  books,   a publisher's  view." Canadian  Literature  33:
25-36,   Summer  I967.
MARTIN, PETER.  "Room at  the  bottom." Cana­
dian   Forum   47:  IOI-2,   August    1967. MELVILLE-NEss,  T. R. "Modern Press."  Cana.
dian   Author  and  Bookman 42:  1 1.
OWEN,  1.  M. "Looking back:  the  Oxford  Uni­ versity   Press."   Quill  and   Quire   33:16-18, April/May   1967.
SEARY, VICTOR. "The  Ryerson    Press."    Quill and  Quire   33: 14-I6, January  I967.

PERIODICALS

NEW TITLES
Cronk. No.  1, January 1967.  Edited by D.  W. Harris  Fleye   Press   { 73  Bernard  Avenue), Toronto.
Form.  No.  1, February I967.  Pons  Press,  4133
West   I Ith   Avenue,  Vancouver,  B.C.
Iron.   No.    I. Edited  by   Brian    Fawcett  and Kenk  Suijs.  c/o  English Department, Simon Fraser   University,  Burnaby, B.C.
The  M alahat   review, an  international   quar­ terly    of   life   and   letters.  No.    I,   January I967.    Edited   by   John  Peter   and   Robin  Skelton,  University  of    Victoria,   Victoria, B.C.
1\1osaic,  a  journal   for  the   comparative  study of  literature  and   ideas.   Vol.    1: 1,  October
1967.   Edited  by  Kenneth  McRobbie and R.  P. Hoople. University of Manitoba Press, Winnipeg.

HISTORY AND CRITICISM
FRANCis, WYNNE. "Literary underground, Little  Magazines in  Canada."  Canadian Literature  34: 63-70,   Autumn  I 967.
KESTERTON,  WILFRED  H.  A  history  of  journal­
ism  in  Canada. With  a  foreword by Wilfrid Eggleston.   [TorontoJ   McClelland   &   Ste­ wart    [c1967].  (The  Carleton   Library   no.
36)   304  p.

LANGUAGE
DAVIES,   DAVID  LLEWELYN (camp.).  Glossary and  handbook of Canadian-British  words. Vancouver, 1967.  31  p.
A Dictionary of Canadianisms on historical principles    by   the    Lexicographical Centre


107

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



for    Canadian   English.  Walter   S.    Avis, Editor-in-chief. Toronto, W.  J. Gage,   1967.
927  p.
Dictionary of Canadian English: the senior dictionary   by   W.    S.   Avis    [and   others] based on the work of E. L. Thorndike and Clarence   L.   Barnhart.   Toronto,   W.    J. Gage   [CI967].  1284   p.

LITERARY HISTORY  AND CRITICISM

GENERAL
HAYNE,   DAVID M. (ed.). "Letters in  Canada:
1966."   University   of    Toronto   Quarterly
36:353-362, July   1967.
LOWER,  ARTHUR  R.  M. "Canadian values   and Canadian  writing." Mosaic   1:79-93,  Octo­ ber   1967.
PACEY,  DESMOND.  "Canadian  literature,  I966 a    good-to-middling  year."   Commentator I I: 22-25,  January  I967.
STORY, NORAH. The  Oxford  companion to Canadian history   and  literature. Toronto, London,   New    York,     Oxford   University Press,  1967.  935  p.
SUTHERLAND, RONALD. "Twin  solitudes."
Canadian Literature 31:5-24, Winter  I967. THOMAS, CLARA.   "Happily  ever   after,  Cana­
dian   women  in  fiction   and  fact." Canadian
Literature  34:43-53,  Autumn  I967. TWEEDIE, R.  A., COGSWELL, FRED and   MAC­
NUTT, W. STEWART  (ed.). The arts  in  New
Brunswick.   [Fredericton]   Brunswick  Press
[I967].  (2,000 copies)   280  p.

FICTION
RUBINGER, CATHERINE.  "Two   related    soli­ tudes:   Canadian   novels    in   French    and  English."  Journal    of   Commonwealth   Lit­ erature   3:49-57, July   I967.

POETRY
GUSTAFSON,  RALPH. "New wave  in  Canadian poetry." Canadian  Literature   32:6- I 4, Spring  1967.
HAAS, MYRA.  "Ioo years  of poetry." Canadian
Author and  Bookman 42:6-7, Spring  I967. PACEY, DESMOND. Ten   Canadian poets:     a
group    of   biographical  and   critical    essays.
Toronto,  Ryerson    Press   [I 966].  (Ryerson paperbacks  5)   350   p.

108
 POVEY, JOHN.  "Poor waifs   upon   creation's skirts." Dalhousie Review 47: 2 I 3-22 I, Sum­ mer   I967.
PURDY, A.  w.   "Canadian   poetry  in   English since  I867." Journal  of Commonwealth Literature 3: I9-33, July   I 967.
REANEY, JAMES.  "Poetry  worth  shouting about."  Quill    and    Quire    33:I4-15,   Feb­ ruary/March  I967.

JUVENILE
EGOFF, SHEILA. The  republic of childhood, a critical   guide  to  Canadian children's  litera­ ture   in   English. Toronto,   Oxford   Univer­ sity   Press,   I967.  272   p.  Also  published  as Oxford  in  Canada  paperback  no.   I3.

INDIVIDUAL AUTHORS

AVISON, MARGARET
SMITH,  A.    J.    M.   "Margaret Avison's    new book."  Canadian Forum 46: I32-4.  Septem­ ber   I966.

BUCKLER, ERNEST
SPETTIGUE, D.  0.   "The  way   it   was:   Ernest Buckler." Canadian Literature 32:40-56, Spring  I967.

CALLAGHAN, MORLEY
CONRON,   BRANDON.   "Morley  Callaghan  as  a short   story   writer."  journal   of    Common­ wealth   Literature 3:58-75,  July   I967.

COHEN, LEONARD
DJWA,  SANDRA.   "Leonard  Cohen:  black   ro­ mantic."    Canadian  Literature    34:32-42, Autumn  I967.
PACEY,  DESMOND. "The   phenomenon  of
Leonard  Cohen." Canadian Literature 34:
5-23,  Autumn  I967.

CONNOR, RALPH
DANIELLS,  ROY. "Glengarry  revisited."  Cana­
dian   Literature  3I :45-53,  Winter  I967.

CRAWFORD, ISABELLA VALANCY OWER, JOHN  B. "Isabella  Valancy Crawford,
the  cause." Canadian Literature 34:54-62,
Autumn  I967.

EDEL,LEON
GROSSKURTH, PHYLLIS.  "The  smile   on   the face   of  the   tiger,   a  profile   of  Leon   Edel."

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



Canadian   Literature    34:24-31,   Autumn
1967.

JAMESON, ANNA
THOMAS,     CLARA   EILEEN.     Love     and    work enough,  the    life    of   Anna    Jameson.   To­ ronto,  University  of   Toronto   Press    1967.  (University   of    Toronto    Department     of English Studies and  texts,  14)   252  p.  Also: London, Macdonald,  1967.

LAMPMAN,  ARCHIBALD
NESBITT,    BRUCE.   "Matthew Arnold m   Can­ ada: a dialogue begun?" Culture 28: 53-54,  Mars    1967.

LAYTON, IRVING
FRANCIS,   WYNNE.   "Irving  Layton."  Journal of Commonwealth Literature 3:34-48, July
1967.
 EDMONDS,   DALE.   "The  short   fiction   of   Mal­
colm    Lowry."  Tulane   studies    in   English
15:59-80,  1967.

MACLENNAN, HUGH
CHAMBERS, ROBERT D.  "The novels of Hugh MacLennan." Journal   of Canadian Studies, Revue  d'etudes canadiennes 2:3-11, August
1967.
NEW,   WILLIAM  H.   "The storm   and   after; imagery   and    symbolism   in    Hugh    Mac­ Lennan's 'Barometer  rising'."    Queen's Quarterly  74:302-313,  Summer   1967.

NIVEN, FREDERICK JOHN
NEW,   WILLIAM  H.    "A   life   and    four   land­ scapes:  Frederick  John  Niven."   Canadian Literature  32: 15-28,  Spring  1967.

PRATT, E.  J.


LUND,    K.    A.       "Satyric   Layton."    Canadian
Author  and   Bookman  42: 8,   Spring  1967.

LEACOCK, STEPHEN  BUTLER
 GUSTAFSON,    RALPH.
Queen's   Quarterly
1967.

SCOTT, F. R.
 "Portrait  of    Ned."
7 4: 437-45 1,    Autumn

CAMERON, DONALD A.  Faces of Leacock, an appreciation. Toronto, Ryerson Press [1967]. 176  p.
CAMERON,  DONALD  A.    "Stephen  Leacock:  the boy   behind    the   arras."  Journal  of    Com­ monwealth  Literature  3:3-18,  July    1967.
 BOURINOT,  ARTHUR   s. "Satiric Scott."  Cana­ dian   Author  and   Bookman 42:9,  1967. SKELTON,    ROBIN.    "A    poet    of   the    middle
slopes."     Canadian   Literature 	31 :40-44,
Winter  1967.
SMITH, A.    J.  M. "F.  R. Scott   and  some  of  his


LOWRY, MALCOLM
COSTA,   RICHARD   HAUER.    "'Ulysses', Lowry's
'Volcano'  and    the    'Voyage'   between:    a
 poems."    Canadian
Winter  1967.

WEBB, PHYLLIS
 Literature    31 : 25-35,

study   of   an   unacknowledged  literary   kin­
ship." University of Toronto Quarterly 36:
335-352, July   1967.
 HULCOOP,   JOHN.    "Phyllis   Webb    and    the priestess   of   motion."  Canadian  Literature
32:29-39,  Spring  1967.

















109

LITTERATURE

CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE

liste etablie  par Susan Port


ANTHOLOGIES

Ecrits   du  Canada  franfais, no  23.  Montreal,
1967.
Poetry    Australia.  Canadian   issue.    No.    16, June 1967.   p.  33-50.
SYLVESTRE,  GUY et   GORDON,   H.  GREEN. Un siecle   de   litterature   canadienne/   A    cen­ tury     of    Canadian   literature.    Montreal­ Toronto,  HMH-Ryerson,  1967.  595   p.
La  tourmente; recueil   Iitteraire des  etudiants de   Ia   Faculte  des   Iettres    de   l'Universite Laval. 3e  livre,  1967.  Quebec, 1967.  115  p.

ROMANS ET NOUVELLES

ANNE-MARIE.  Maintenant  et   toujours.   Mont­
real,    Cercle  du    Livre    de   France,   1967.
212  p.
AUBERT DE  GASPE,  PHILLIPPE.  Les    anciens Canadiens. Precede d'une chronologie, d'une bibliographie et de jugements critiques. Montreal, Fides.   1967.   359  p.
BARBEAU,   MARIUS. Le   Saguenay  Ugendaire.
Montreal,  Beauchemain,  1967.   147  p.
BASILE, JEAN voir BEZROUDNOFF, JEAN-BASILE. BELLEMARE,   PIERRETTE (ROULEAU). Piege   a la  chair,  par   Claude Leclerc, pseud.   Mont­
real,   Editions  Ia  Quebecoise,   1966.   95   p. (Dans  Ia   Iiste   pour    1966,   cite   en   erreur dans   Ia  section   "Poesie") .
BENOIT, JACQUEs. ]os   Carbone. Montreal, Editions du  Jour, 1967.  120  p.
BERNARD,  ANNE. Cancer. Montreal, Cercle du
Livre   de  France, 1967.   142  p.
-. Le  soleil  sur  la   fafade. Montreal,  Cercle du  Livre   de  France, 1966.  158  p.
BEZROUDNOFF, JEAN-BASILE.  Le  Grand   Khan, par   Jean  Basile,   pseud.  Montreal,  Esterel, I967.   283  p.   (Les   Mongols,  2).
BLAIS, MARIE-CLAIRE. David  Sterne. Montreal, Editions du  Jour,  I967. I27   p.

I I 0
 CATTA, RENE SALVATOR. Le  grand  tournant. Montreal, Cercle du  Livre  de  France, 1967. T.  I-III.
CHARBONNEAU,   ROBERT. Chronique  de   l'age amer.  Montreal,  Editions du  Sablier, I967. I44  p.
CHICOINE, RENE.  Un  homme, rue   Beaubien.
Montreal, Cercle du  Livre  de  France, I967.
223  p.
DESROSIERS,  LEO-PAUL. L'ampoule  d'or.  Pre­ cede  d'une chronologie, d'une  bibliographie et  de  jugements critiques.  Montreal, Fides,  I967.   2I2   p.
DUBE, RODOLPHE. jeremie     et   Barabbas, par Franc;ois  Hertel,  pseud. Montreal,  Editions du   Jour,  I966.  I95   p.   (Ed.  orig.:  Paris, Editions  de   la   Diaspora  franc;aise,   I959).
DUCHARME,  REJEAN. Le  nez  qui  vogue. Paris, Gallimard,  1967.   275   p.
FOURNIER,   ROGER.  Journal d'un  jeune   marie.
Montreal, Cercle du  Livre  de  France, 1967.
198  p.
GAGNE, ANDRE GIL.  Desormais comme  hier, par  Andre Gil,  pseud. Montreal, Cercle du Livre   de  France, 1967.   149  p.
GAUTHIER,  LOUIS. Anna. Montreal, Cercle du
Livre   de   France,  1967.   I 70  p. GIL, ANDRE  voir  GAGNE, ANDRE GIL.
GIRoux,   ANDRE. Le   gouffre    a   toujours  soif.
Precede  d'une  chronologie, d'une   bibliog­ raphie et  de  jugements critiques.  Montreal, Fides,   1967.   188  p.
GODBOUT,   JACQUES. S alut   Galarneau!  Paris, Editions du  Seuil, 1967.  155  p.
GRANDMONT,   ELOI DE.  Coeur  de   pierre   pre­
cieuse; nouvelle. Ecrits  du  Canada  franfais
22:2I]-242,   I966.
HAMELIN, JEAN.  Un  dos   pour   la   pluie ....
Montreal, Deom, I967. 2 I I  p.
HARVEY, JEAN-CHARLES.   L'homme qui  va....

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



Montreal,   Editions   de    !'Homme,    1967.
158  p.
HERTEL,   FRANCOIS  voir   DUBE,  RODOLPHE. JASMIN,   CLAUDE. Les  coeurs  em pail/h.  Mont­
real,  Parti Pris,   1967.   135  p.
LABROSSE,  GERARD. Les  ombres  et  /es [umieres de !'amour. l\1ontreal, Cercle du Livre  de France,  1967.   160  p.
LAMARCHE,  JACQUES   A.   La   pe/ouse  des  /ions.
Montreal,  Editions du  Belier,  1967.   167  p.
LANDRY,  LOUIS.   P/acide   Beaupar/ant,  revo/u­ tionnaire  tranquille.  Montreal,   Cercle  du Livre  de  France, 1967.  142  p.
LECLERC, CLAUDE voir BELLEMARE, PIERRETTE (ROULEAU)
LECLERC, FELIX.  Le  fou de l'!le.  Precede d'une chronologie d'une bibliographie et  de  juge­
ments     critiques.   Montreal,   Fides,     1967.
 TETREAU, JEAN.  Les  nomades. Montreal, Edi­
tions  du  Jour, I967.   260  p.
THERIAULT,  YVES. L'appelante. Montreal, Edi­
tions  du  Jour,  1967.   125  p.

POESIE

ALLAIRE, AURELIEN  D'.  Evocations. Montreal, Editions d'Orphee,  I967.   82  p.
BEAULIEU,   MICHEL.   Erosions.    Montreal,   Es­
terel,   1967.  51  p.
-. Mere. Neuf  bois  graves  de  Roland Pichet. Montreal,  Esterel,  1966.   13  f.
BERARD,   PIERRE.    Alabama. LongueuiJ. Que., Image et  Verbe, 1967.   28  p.
-. Eltfmentaires;  poemes   et   proces   allegor­
iques.   Longueuil,  Image  et   Verbe,  I967.
35  p.


215  p.
-. Pieds    nus    dans    l'aube.  Precede d'une chronologie, d'une  bibliographie et  de  juge­
 
BELANGER, MARCEL. Montreal, Deom, canadienne,  16) .
 Prelude     a   Ia   parole.
1967.    73    p.     (Poesie

ments     critiques.   Montreal,   Fides,     1967.
215  p.
MAILHOT, MICHELE. Le  portique. Montreal, Cercle du  Livre   de  France, 1967.   133  p.
MALOIN, REINE. Princesse  de nuit. Quebec, R. Maloin.  172  p.
NAUBERT,     YVETTE.     Contes  de    /a   solitude.
Montreal, Cercle du  Livre  de  France, 1967.
146  p.
o'NEILL,   JEAN.  Je  voulais   te   parler  de   Jere­ miah,   d'O:uflina    et    de    taus    les    autres.  Montreal, HMH,  1967.   210  p.
OUVRARD, HELENE.   Le   coeur   sauvage.  Mont­
real,  Editions du  Jour. 1967.  167  p.
PARADis, suzANNE.  Franr.;ois-les-oiseaux.  Que­
bec,  Garneau,  1967.   161   p.
J'ARIZEAU,  ALICE.  Rue  Sherbrooke ouest. Mont­
real,    Cercle    du    Livre    de   France,   I967.
!88  p.
PERRAULT,   PIERRE.   Toutes isles.  Nouv.   ed. Montreal,  Fides,    1967.   230   p.
POULIN,   JACQUES.   Mon cheval  pour   un royaume. Montreal, Editions du  Jour, 1967.
130  p.
SIMARD, JEAN.   Felix.   Ed.  rev.  et  carr.  Mont­
real,   Estcrcl,  I 966.   14 I p.
soMCYNSKY, JEAN F. Les rapides.  Montreal, Cercle du  Livre   de  France, 1966.  222  p.
 BERTRAND,  PIERRE.   Un   point  tot  surgi  du  sac
de   Ia  memoire  bailie.   Montreal, !'auteur,
1967.   49  p.
BLAIS,   MARIE-CLAIRE.  Pays   voi/tfs.  Existences. Montreal, Editions de !'Homme, 1967. 87 p. DUREAU, JEAN.  Devant  toi.  Montreal,  Fomal­
haut, 1967.  34 7 p.
CASAVANT,   RICHARD.    Le    matin   de    ['infini.
Ottawa,  Editions du  Coin   du  Livre,   1967.
49  p.
CAZELAIS,   CLEMENT.   Les   Tlfve/ations.   Mont­
real,   Cite   des  Livres, I96s.  109  p.
CHAMBERLAND,    PAUL.    L'inavouab/e.    Mont­
real,   Parti  Pris,   !967.  I 18  p.
CHOQUETTE,    ROBERT.     Oeuvres   poetiques.
Nouv.   ed.,   rev.  et  augm.  Montreal,  Fides,
1967.  T. 1-11.
COULOMBE,   ALPHONSE.     Poemes     de    ['evei/.
Quebec, 1966.  84  p.
couTURE, ANDRE.  Memoires pour l'exil;  des souvenances. Maquette  de  !'auteur,  quatre hors-texte de  Pierre  Beaudry. Ottawa, Coin du  Livre,   1967.  40  p.
DESROCHERS,   ALFRED.   Eltfgies   pour   ['epouse en-a/lee. Montreal,  Parti  Pris,   1967.   94  p.
DUBE, RODOLPHE.  Poemes  d'hier  et  d'aujourd'­ hui,    1927-1967.   Reed.    rev.     et     augm. d'Anthologie  1934-1964. Paris,  Editions de

I I I

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



Ia  Diaspora franc;aise,  Montreal, Parti  Pris.
1967.   r8o   p.
-. Poi!mes   perdus    et   retrouves,  anciens  et nouveaux, revus  et  corriges,  par  Franc;ois Hertel,  pseud.  Paris,   Editions  de   Ia   Dias­ pora   franc;aise,   rg66.   23  p.
DUGUAY,   RAOUL. Or   le   cycle   du   sang   dure done. Montreal, Esterel, 1967.  94  p.
GAGNON, MICHELINE.   Le  mal  de  mer  et  Para­ graphes    futile.   Quebec, Editions de  I'Arc, rg66.   46  p.
GARCIA, JUAN. Alchimie du corps. Montreal, Editions de  J'Hexagone, 1967.  29  p.
GRANDBOIS,   ALAIN. Alain    Grandbois.  Textes choisis    et   presentes   par    Jacques   Brault. Nouv.    ed.   rev.   et   corr.   Montreal,   Fides,
1967.  g6  p.
HEBERT, LOUIS-PHILIPPE. Les episodes de l'ceil.
Montreal, Esterel, 1967.  97  p.
HERTEL, FRANCOIS  voir  DUBE, RODOLPHE. LACROIX, GEORGETTE.  Mortes saisons.  Quebec,
Garneau, 1967.  64  p.
LALONDE, MICHELE.  Terre  des    hommes; poeme   pour   deux   recitants. Montreal,  Edi­ tions  du  Jour, 1967.  59  p.
LANGEVIN, GILBERT. Noctuaire.  Montreal, Esterel,  1967.   36  p.
-. Pour   une   aube.   Montreal,  Esterel,  1967.
72  p.
LAPOINTE, GATIEN. Le   premier   mot,  precede de  Le  pari  de  ne  pas mourir. Montreal, Editions du  Jour, 1967.  99  p.
LEGAGNEUR,   SERGE. Textes   interdits.   Mont­
real,  Esterel,  Ig66. 136  p.
LEGER, PIERRE. La    supplique   de   ti-cul    La
Motte. Montreal, Editions Miniatures, 1967.
91   p.
MAILLET, ANDREE. Le    chant    de   l'Jroquoise.
Montreal, Editions du  Jour, 1967.  75  p. MALOUIN, REINE.  Mes    racines    sont    la ....
Quebec, Garneau, 1967.  92  p.
 reel.   Premier   cahier:  le   reel,   la   solitude, Dieu. Montreal, Bellarmin, 1965.  192  p.
OUELLETTE,  FERNAND.  Dans  le  sombre.  Mont­
real,   Editions de  J'Hexagone,  I g67.  9 I  p. PALLASCIO-MORIN, ERNEST.  Demain tu  n'auras
plus un  instant. Montreal, Holt, Rinehart et
Winston,  1967.   6o  p.
PHELPS,  ANTHONY. Points   cardinaux.  Mont­
real,  Holt, Rinehart et  Winston, rg66.  6o  p. PREFONTAINE,  YVES. Boreal.  Nouv.  ed.  Mont­
real,   Esterel,  1967.  43  p.
RABY,   RAYMOND.    Tangara.  Editions  du   Cri, rg66.   n.p.
ROBERGE, ZENON.  Par   de/a    mots    et   rimes.
Sherbrooke, Que.,  rg66.   72  p.
SAINT-PIERRE,  MADELEINE. Intermittence. Trois
Rivieres,  Editions  du   Bien   Public,   1967.
53  p.
TARDIEU-DEHOUX, CHARLES.  Cabanons.  Mont­ treaJ,   Editions  de  J'Albatros,  1967.  175   p. VIGNEAULT,   GILLES. Les   gens   de   mon   pays.
Quebec, Editions de  !'Arc, 1967.  115  p.
-. Tam ti  delam. Quebec, Editions de  !'Arc,
1967.  go  p.

THEATRE
DUBE,  MARCEL. Un    simple    soldat.    Version nouv.  Montreal, Editions de  l'homme, 1967.
142  p.
GRECO, MICHEL.  Les  pigeons  d'Arlequin. Ecrits du  Canada  franfais 22:gg-161,  rg66.
HEBERT,  ANNE. Le temps sauvage: La mercii!re assassinee:   Les    invites  au   proci!s.    Mont­ real,  HMH,  rg67.    187  p.
LANGUIRAND,    JACQUEs.  Les   cloisons.    Ecrits du  Canada  franfais 22:6g-g8,  rg66.
LECLERC, FELIX.  Theo.tre    de   village.   Mont­
real,   Fides,   rg67.   rgo  p.
LORANGER, FRANCOISE. Encore     5    minutes; suivi  de  Un  cri  qui  vient  de  loin.  Montreal, Cercle du  Livre  de  France, 1967.  131  p.

MARSOLAIS, GILLES. Montreal, Deom. canadienne, 15).
 La    mort
1967.    77
 d'un   arbre.
p.     (Poesie
 PELLETIER,  ALEC. Festin des  morts.   Ecrits   du
Canada /ranfais  22: g-67,   rg66.
PINSONNEAULT,  JEAN-PAUL.  Terre   d'aube.

MONGEAU, YVES.  Les    naissances. Montreal, Deom, 1967.  8g  p.  (Poesie canadienne, 17). MORAND, FLORETTE.  Feu  de  brousse.  Montreal,
Editions du   Jour, 1967.  66  p.
MULLER, EMILE.  Redoutable   et   merveilleux


112
 Montreal, Fides,   1967.   165  p.
ROBILLARD,  PERE EDMOND.  L'unicorne.  Mont­ real,  Cercle du  Livre  de  France, 1967. 93  p. TOUCHETTE, KATY. Le   don   de   Montezuma.
Editions  des  Jonchets,  1967.   127   p.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



LETTRES

GARNEAU,   SAINT-DENYS.    Lettres a  ses   amis.
Montreal, HMH,  rg67.   489  p.

ESSAIS

BLAIN,   MAURICE.   Approximations.  Montreal, HMH,  rg67.   246  p.

LITTERATURE  DE JEUNESSE

DAVELUY,  PAULE.   Get   hiver-la.  Quebec,  Edi­
tions  Jeunesse,  rg67.   148  p.
GAGNON,   MAURICE.    Operation Tanga.  Mont­
real,   Lidec,  rg66.    147  p.
HOLLIER,   ROBERT.  L'homme aux   gants  noirs; une   aventure  du   Capitaine  Jolicoeur  des services  secrets  canadiens. Montreal   Lidec tg66. 109  p. 	'	'
LALONDE,   ROBERT.   Ailleurs est  en  ce  monde; conte   a   l'he   nucleaire. Quebec,  Editions de !'Arc, Ig66.  144  p.
THERIAULT,   YVES.   Le   dernier    rayon.   Mont­
real,   Lidec,  Ig66.   I39   p.


BIBLIOGRAPHIES
 franc;:aises,  Universite  de   Montreal.   v.r­ Ig66-
HAYNE,    DAVID  M.,    ed.   Letters  in   Canada: Ig66.   Livres   en  franc;:ais. University of  To­ ronto   quarterly 36:524-544, July  1967.
Livres   et  auteurs  canadiens  rg66:   panorama de l'annee litteraire. Montreal, Editions Jumonville,  r g67.  2 I o  p.
PORT, susAN.  Canadian  literature  Ig66.  Lit­ terature  canadienne-franc;:aise.   Canadian literature  32:gs-ro4, Spring   Ig67.

OUVRAGES CONSACRES A L'EDITION
KATTAN,   NAIM.  L'edition au  Canada franc;:ais. Canadian  literature   33: r6-24,    Summer rg67.
SAINT-GERMAIN, CLEMENT.   La  production  Jit­ teraire et  Ia  diffusion du  livre  au  Quebec. Culture  vivante  s: 17-23,   rg67.

LINGUISTIQUE
ANJOU,   JOSEPH   D'.   Au   service   du   franc;:ais. Voir   chaque  numero de  Relations.
CERCLE   LINQUISTIQUE    DE      MONTREAL.     jean­ Paul    Vinay;   bibliographie    chronologique,
1936-rg62. Montreal,  rg63.   IS  p.
Colloque  international   sur   Ia  description et

Bibliographie   des    lettres c;:aises. Etudes   franfaises
254,  fev.,  mai   Ig67.
 canadiennes-fran-
3: I24-I26,  2SI-
 mesure  du  bilinguisme, Universite de  Monc­ ton,    I g67.   Documents   preliminaires.   s. I., I967.    159  f.

CERCLE   LI:-!GU!STIQUE    DE      MONTREAL.     jean• Paul    Vinay;   bibliographie  chronologique,
1936-rg62. Montreal,  rg63.   IS  p.

CHALIFOUX, JEAN-PIERRE. Liste de SOUrces bibliographiques   relatives  a  Ia   !itterature
dienne  des   bibliothecaires  de   langue  fran­
<;aise. Bulletin  13: 137-14I, sept.   rg67.
-. La   Bibliotheque, Centre  d'Etudcs  Cana­
diennes-Franc;aises, McGill   University, I g67.
!2  p.
DIONNE,   RENE.  Etudes sur  le  roman  canadien­
franc;ais;    essai    bibliographique.   Relations
320:278-279,  oct.   Ig67.
GAR!GUE, PHILIPPE.   Bibliographie  du  Quebec (1955-I965}.  Montreal,  Presses   de   l'Uni­ versite   de  Montreal,  I967.   227  p.
HAMEL,    REGINALD.   Cahiers   bibJiographiques des  lettres quebecoises. Montreal, Centre de documentation  des   lettres  canadiennes-
 DAGENAIS,  GERARD. Dictionnaire des  difficultes de  la  langue   franfaise   au  Canada. Quebec, Editions  Pedagogia,  r g66.
-. Nos   ecrivains  et   le   fran(ais.    Montreal, Editions du  Jour,  rg67.   rog  p.
DARBELNET,    JEAN.     Petite  chronique de    Ia langue franc;:aise. Voir  chaque numero de L'Enseignement    secondaire.
GENDRON,   JEAN-DENIS    et   GEORGES   STRAKA, eds.   Etudes   de    linguistique   franco-cana­ dienne. Paris,   K!incksieck,  Quebec,  Presses le  l'Universite Laval,  rg67.  174  p.  (Biblio­ theque franc;:aise et  romane.  Ser.  E.  Langue et  litterature  franc;:aises au  Canada, 3).
-. La   methode  radiographique  applique  a
Ia  comparaison  des  articulations  vocaliques en  fran<;ais canadien et  en  franc;:ais parisien. Proceedings of the Fourth International Congress  of Phonetic Sciences.  The  Hague, Mouton,  Ig62.   p.   I55-r66.


113

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



LEON,  PIERRE et   MONIQUE NEMNI.   Franco­ canadien  et   franc;ais   standard;   problemes de   perception  des  oppositions  vocales.   Re­
 MITCHELL, ESTELLE. M essire  Pierre   Boucher ( ecuyer), seigneur    de   Boucherville,   r6::n­ I7I7.  Montreal, Beauchemin, I967.  389  p.

vue   canadienne  de  linguistique  I 2: 97-I I 2,
printemps  I967.
I.ORRAIN, ROLAND.   La    mort    de   mon    joua/;
l'histoire incroyable d'un  Canadien  fran!iais
 ROQUEBRUNE, d'autrefois. I87  p.
 ROBERT  DE.   Les     canadiens
2e  ser.   Montreal,  Fides.    I966.

decide   a parler  bien.  Montreal, Editions du
Jour,  I966.  I27   p.


REVUES

Mosaic; a  journal   for  the   comparative  study of literature  and  ideas.  v. I,  no  I-oct.   1967- Winnipeg,  University  of  Manitoba   Press.
Quoi. v.I, no  I- 	janv.-fev. I967- Montreal, Esterel, I967.

SATIRE ET HUMOUR
BRILI.ANT,  JACQUES.  Soeur   Jeanne   a  l'abbaye par    Jabry,  pseud.  Montreal,  Editions  du Jour,  I967. 88   p.
FALARDEAU,    CLAUDE. Le    dictionnaire  d'un Quebecois. Montreal, Editions de !'Homme, I966.  I43   p.
J ABRY  voir  BRII.LANT,  JACQUES.
LANDRY,  LOUIS. Placide   Beauparlant;  revolu­ tionnaire  tranquille.  Montreal,   Cercle  du Livre   de   France,  I967.    I42   p.
NADEAU, MAURICE. L'homme   des    tavernes. Montreal, Mouvement la!que  de langue franc;aise,   I967. 35  p.
PELLETIER, AIME. M es   pensees    "profondes" par  Bertrand Vac,  pseud. Montreal,  Cercle du  Livre   de  France,  I 967.   I 24  p.
VAC,  BERTRAND   voir  PEI.I.ETIER, AIME.


BIOGRAPHIES

BECHARD,  HENRI. L'heroique indienne  Kateri
Tekakwitha. Montreal, Fides,   I967. 200  p. DESROSIERS, LEO-PAUl.. Paul   de   Chomedey,
sieur    de    Maisonneuve.   Montreal,   Fides,
I967. 322   p.
LECLERC, FELIX. Moi,  mes   souliers;   journal d'un  lii!vre   a  deux   pattes.    Pre£.   de   Jean Giono,    precc! de   d'une  chronologie, d'une bibliographie et de jugements critiques. Montreal, Fides,   I967. 2I4   p.

rq
 
HISTOIRE ET  CRITIQUE LITTERAIRES

OUVRAGES ET   ARTICLES GENERAUX
AURY, DOMINIQUE.  Vive  le  Canada  [des  livres
de   Blais,   Aquin,  Basile,   Ducharme]   Nou­ velle   revue   franfaise     I68: Io66-I07o,  dec. I966.
BARBERIS,   ROBERT. La   fin   du   mepris.  Main­
tenant 70: 3I 6-3I 8,  oct.I 967.
BOUFFARD, ODORIC. Le canadien-franc;ais entre deux    mondes.   Culture   28: 347-356,  dec. I967.
DAGENAIS,  GERARD. Nos ecrivains et  [e fran!iais.
Montreal, Editions du  Jour, I967. I09  p. DEBIEN, LEON.  Place    de    Mauriac   dans    le
milieu   canadien-franc;ais (I 930- I 940).  Cul­
ture   28: 236-249, sept.   I 967.
Le    Devoir.   Supplement   litteraire.    Devoir
58(23I), 3I   oct.   I967.   24  p.
DUBE, RODOI.PHE. Du   miserabilisme   inte!lec­ tuel,     du    besoin     de    se    renier ... et    de quelques "chefs-d'a:uvre",   par    Franc;ois Hertel.  Action  nationale  56:828-835, avril I967.
ETHIER-BLAis, JEAN. Signet II  [litterature canadienne-franc;aise] Montreal,  Cercle du Livre   de  France,  I967. 247  p.
GARON, YVES.  Qui    etait  "Pierre-Andre'',  Je premier critique de notre  premier roman? [Romuald  Cherrier?]   Revue  d'histoire  de
/'Amerique   fran,aise    2o:s66-57I,  mars
I967.
GAY,    PAUL.  Survol    sur   Ia   litterature   cana­
dienne-franc;aise.  Enseignement    secondaire
46: I 73-268,   sept.-oct.  I 967.
HAMELIN, JEAN et  ANDRE  BEAULIEU.   Aperc;u du  journalisme  quebecois d'expression  fran­ c;aise.   Recherches   sociographiques    7:305-
348,  sept.   dec.   I 966.
HERTEL, FRANCOIS  voir  DUBE, RODOI.PHE. LEGARE,  ROMAIN.  Prix  Jitteraires. Culture  28:
407-409, dk I 967.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



LEGRAND,   ALBERT. Lettres   quebecoises;  une parole   enfin   liberee.  M aintenant 68/69:
267-272, aout-sept.   1967.   (Cahier  special: Un   Quebec libre  a inventer).
LEVESQUE, CLAUDE. La    region    de   l'attrait. Liberti!    54: 8-29,   nov.-dec.   r 967.   Littt!ra­ ture   quebecoise;  voix   et   images   du   pays. Montreal, Editions de  Sainte-Marie,  r g67.
131  p.  (Cahiers de  Sainte-Marie, 4).
LOWER, ARTHUR R.  M. Canadian  values   and
Canadian   writing.  Mosaic     1:79-93,  Oct.
1967.
MAJOR, ANDRE. Pour   une   pensee   quebecoise. Cahiers   de  Sainte-Marie  4:125-131,   1967. PARIZEAU,  ALICE.  L'erotisme a Ja canadienne.
Liberti!   54: 94- roo,   nov.-dec.    r 967.
Les    prix     litteraires    1966-1967.   Vient    de paraltre  3: 19,  mai   1967.
RACINE, LUC. et   a!.  Production  culturelle  et classes  sociales  au  Quebec. Parti   pris  4:43-
75,  mai-aout   1967.
SYLVESTRE,  GUY. Les   lettres,  dans   Esquisses du    Canada  franyais.    Montreal,   ACELF, I967.    p.    ro9-140.
Tendances  et  orientation  de  la  nouvelle litterature; sept  jeunes  auteurs temoignent. Culture  vivante  5:58-69,  1967.
TOUGAS, GERARD.    Histoire    de   /a   /itterature canadienne-/ranyaise. 3e ed. Paris,  Presses universitaires de  France,  r 966.  312   p.
WALLOT, JEAN-PIERRE.  Le  Bas-Canada  et  les imprimes (r8o9-r8ro).  Revue  d'histoire de
/'Amerique   franyaise 	20:556-565,   mars
1967.

LE  ROMAN
DIONNE, RENE. Etudes sur  le  roman  canadien­
fran<;ais;    essai    bibliographique.   Relations
320:278-279, oct.   1967.
FALARDEAU,  JEAN-CHARLES.    Notre   societe   et son  roman. Montreal, HMH,  1967.   234  p.
RUBINGER, CATHERINE. Two  related solitudes; Canadian novels  in  French and  English. Journal  of Commonwealth  literature  3:49-
57,  July    1967.
SUTHERLAND,   RONALD. Twin  solitudes.  Cana­
dian  literature 3 r : 5-24,  Winter  1967.
 LA  POESIE
CHAMBERLAND, PAUL. Fondation du  territoire; avant-propos methodologique. Parti   pris 4: r r-42,   mai-aoO.t  1967.
LAROCHE,  MAXIMILIEN.  La   conscience  ameri­ caine    de    la    nouvelle   poesie    quebecoise. Cahiers  de  Sainte-Marie 1:71-    ,mai, 1966.
-. Le  pays;  un  theme et  une  forme.  Cahiers de  Sainte  Marie   4:103-124,   1967.
SYLVESTRE,   GUY. Letters  in   Canada:   1966. Livres   en  fran<;ais.  La  poesie.  University of Toronto  Quarterly 36:524-530, July   1967.

LE  THEATRE
DESROSIERS, PIERRE-R. La    nouvelle   drama­
turgie quebecoise. Culture  vivante 5:7 r-77,
1967.
SABOURIN, JEAN-GUY. Quelques reflexions  sur notre  theatre.  Cahiers de  Sainte-Marie  r:
79-    , mai   I966.

OUVRAGES  CONSACRES  AUX ECRIVAINS

ANGERS, FELICITE
FRECHETTE, JEAN.  Angeline   de   Montbrun. Action  nationale 56:696-699,  mars    1967. Laure Conan; sources  a consulter, r-2.  Fiches
bibliographiques  de   littt!rature  canadienne
237,  305,  sept.,  dec.  1967.

AQUIN, HUBERT
LEGRIS, RENEE. Les  structures  d'un  nouveau roman, Prochain  episode. Cahiers  de  Sainte­ Marie    1-23-    , mai  1966.

AUBERT DE  GASPE, PHILIPPE
Sources a consulter, I-II.  Fiches  bibliographi­
ques  de  littt!rature canadienne 254-255, oct.
1967.

BESSETTE, GERARD
ALLARD, JACQUES.   Le  libraire  de  Gerard  Bes­ sette   ou  comment  la  parole  vient   au   pays du   silence.   Cahiers   de  Sainte-Marie   4:5 r-
63,  1967.
SHORTLIFFE, GLEN. Evolution  of  a   novelist: Gerard  Bessette.   Queen's quarterly 74:36-
6o,  Spring  r 967.

I I 5

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



BLAIS, MARIE-CLAIRE
GREFFARD, MADELEINE. Une  saison dans /a vie d'Emmanuel, kaleidoscope de  Ia n!alite quebecoise. Cahiers  de  Sainte-Marie 1:17-
, mai   1966.
Sources  a  consulter.  Fiches    bibliographiques
de   litterature  canadienne  164,   avril   1967. CONAN,  LAURE  voir  ANGERS,  FELICITE.

CREMAZIE, OCTAVIE
VACHON,  G.-ANDRE.  L'ere  du   silence   et   J'age de  Ia  parole. Etudes  franfaises   3:309-32 I, aofit   1967.

DESROSIERS, LEO-PAUL
MAJOR, ANDRE. Redicouverte  de   Leo-Paul Desrosiers.  Action   nationale  56:62 I -623, fev.  1967.

DUBE, MARCEL
VANASSE, JEAN-PAUL. Le   sort   de   J'ecrivain autour  de   declarations  de   Marcel Dube). Liberti  50:52-58,  mars-avril 1967.

DUBE, RODOLPHE
Les  ceuvres  de  Franfois Hertel. Douglas  Lib­ rary,    Queen's   University,  Kingston,   Ont. [6  p.]   depliant.
TETREAU,  JEAN. Fran<;ois  Hertel; une  pensee, un  style,  un  art  de  vivre.   Livres   et  auteurs
1966:   204-209.

DUCHARME, REJEAN
VAN SCHENDEL,   MICHEL. Ducharme, /'inquiit­ ant.  Montreal, Faculte des  Iettres  de  l'Uni­ versite   de   Montreal,  1967.   24  p.  (Confer­
ences  J.  A.  de  Seve,  8).

FAUCHER,  CLAIRE (MONTREUIL) PELLETIER-BAILLARGEON,  HELENE. Les  bonnes
soeurs   de   Claire  Martin.  M aintenant  62 :
64-65,  fev.  1967.
RIVARD,   YVON. Claire  Martin,   notre   theori­
cienne du   coeur   humain.  Action  nationale
56:1041-1046,  juin    1967.

FERRON, JACQUES

LAVOIE, MICHELLE.  Jacques Ferron; de !'amour du  pays  a Ia definition de  Ia patrie. Cahiers
de  Sainte-Mraie 4:87-IOI,  1967.

rr6
 FRECHETTE, LOUIS
Sources a consulter, 1-11. Fiches  bibliographi­ ques    de    litterature    canadienne   263-264, oct.   1967.

GAGNON, MICHELINE
MORICE, LOUIS. Un  nouveau poete  canadien, Micheline Gagnon. Enseignement secondaire
46: 134-I4o,  mai-juin   I967.

GARNEAU, FRANCOIS-XAVIER HATHORN, RAMON J.   Garneau,   disciple  de
Thierry. Mosaic    I :66-78, Oct.   I967.

GARNEAU, SAINT-DENYS
BOURNEUF, ROLAND.   La   publication  de   Re­ gards   et   jeux   dans   l'espace.  Enseignement secondaire 46:5-11,  jan.-fev.   1967.
FOLCH, JACQUES. Reponse a une  question [en
oubliant   le    personnage   Garneau ... que
penser   de   sa   poesie,   et   d'elle  seule ?]  sur Saint-Denys  Garneau.   Liberti    5 I:30-32, mai-juin  I967.
KUSHNER, EVA.   Saint-Denys-Garneau.  Choix de   textes,   inedits,  bibliographie, portraits, fac-simile. Montreal,  Fides,  1967.   I9I   p.
MORA, EDITH.  Saint-Denys Garneau. Liberti
51:23-29,  mai-juin  I967.

VANASSE, JEAN-PAUL. Les   lettres  de   Saint­ Denys   Garneau  a  ses  amis.   Liberti  51-16-
22,  mai-juin  1967.

GIGUERE, ROLAND
LAROCHE, MAXIMILIEN. Sur    un    poeme    de Roland    Giguere    ["Rosace   Ies    roses"]. Action nationale 56:920-925,  mai   I 967.

GIROUX, ANDRE
BLAis,   JACQUES.  Fraternel   Andre   Giroux.
Revue  de  l'Universite  de  Sherbrooke  2:7-
14,  oct.   196 r.

GODBOUT, JACQUES
CLUNY, CLAUDE MICHEL.  Sacrement de  Galar­ neau;   rencontre  avec    Jacques    Godbout. Lettres  franfaises no  I203:5,  11  oct.  1967.
Entretien  avec   Jacques  Godbout.  Incidences
12:25-35,  printemps 1967.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



GODIN, GERALD
DUGUAY, RAOUL. Gerald Godin  ou du Jangage alicne    bourgeois  au   langage  aliene   prole­ taire.    Parti   pris   4:95-99,   jan.-fev.    1967.
GRIGNON, GERMAINE
Germaine  Guevremont.  Sources   a  consulter. Le   survenant;  sources   a  consulter.   Marie­ Didace; sources   a consulter.  Fiches  bibliog­
raphiques  de   litterature   canadienne   3 14,
315,   316,  dec.   1967.
GUEVRE::UONT,  GERMAINE   voir   GRIGNON)   GER­
MAINE.

HEBERT, ANNE
AYLWIN,  ULRIC. Au  pays  deJa fille maigre; Jes Chambres  de  bois  d'Anne  Hebert.  Cahiers de  Sainte-Marie 4:37-50,  1967.
BARBERIS, ROBERT. De    l'exil    au    royaume.
Maintenant 64:122-124, avril  1967.
LE GRAND,  ALBERT.   Anne   Hebert; de   f'exil  au royaume. Montreal, Faculte des  lettres de l'Universite de  Montreal, 1967.  37 p.  (Con­
ferences J. A.  de  Seve,  7) .
HERTEL, FRANCOIS  voir  DUBE, RODOLPHE.

LANGEVIN, ANDRE
BERUBE, RENALD. L'hiver dans  Le temps des hommes  d'Andre  Langevin.  Cahiers de Sainte-Marie 1:9-   ,  mai  1966.
GODBOUT,  ROGER.  Personnage symbolique dans l'ceuvre  d'Andre Langevin. Livres  et auteurs
1966:198-203.

LANGEVIN, GILBERT
PAGEAU,   RENE.  Poesie   de   Gilbert  Langevin.
Culture  28:32-37,  mars   1967.

LASNIER, RINA
AUDET, NOEL. L'arbre,  Ia   mer   et   Ia   neige; instruments  de   poesie   et  de   transcendance chez  Rina Lasnier. Cahiers  de  Sainte-Marie
4:65-73,  1967.
VALOIS, CHARLES.  L'arbre   blanc  de  Rina  Las­
mer.    Action   nationale   56:489-502,   jan.
1967.

LECLERC, FELIX
LE PENNEC, JEAN-CLAUDE.  L'univers  poetique de   Felix    Leclerc.  Montreal,  Fides,    1967.
267  p.
sAMsoN,  JEAN-NOEL.  Felix  Leclerc. Montreal, Fides,  1967.  87  p.  (Dossiers de  documenta-
 tion  sur  Ia litterature  Canadienne-franc;aise,
2).
Sources  a  consulter  sur   l'ceuvre   en   general,
1-2.  Fiches   bibliographiques  de   litterature canadienne  219-220,  juin   1967.

LEMELIN,  ROGER
Sources a consulter,  I -2.  Fiches  bibliographi­
ques    de    litterature    canadienne   242-243, sept.  1967.
TURCOTTE,  RAYMOND. Etudes sur  Jes classes sociales  dans   Au   pied  de  la  pente  douce   et Au   milieu, la  montage. Cahiers   de  Sainte­ Marie   1:31-  , mai  1966.
MARTIN,  CLAIRE  voir  FAUCHER, CLAIRE   (MON­ TREUIL).

NELLIGAN, EMILE
BONENFANT, JEAN-CHARLES.  Le  Canada fran­
c;ais a Ia  fin  du   XIXe siecle.  Etudes  fran­
faises  3:263-274,  aout    1967.
GATTA,   RENE-SALVATOR.    A   Ia   recherche  des mots [a propos des poemes de Nelligan]. Enseignement  secondaire 44:230-234,   249-
25 r,   sep./oct,  nov./dec.  1965; 45:35-38,
81-84,   140-144,  202-205,   1158-1!6I,  jan./
fev.-nov./dec.  1966.
GAGNON, LYSIANE. Emile    Nelligan.  Quebec
4:73-81, fev.  1967.
PONTAUT, EMILE. Un   devoir   de   "sagesse patriotique".  Qw!bec 4:81-83,  fev.   1967.
Sources a consulter,  1-2.  Fiches   bibliographi­
ques  de  litterature canadienne 195-196, mai
1967.
Temoignages d'ecrivains. Etudes  fran aises
303-307, aout   1967.
VACHoN, G.-ANDRE.  L'ere  du   silence   et   l'age de   Ia  parole.  Etudes  fran aises
aout   1967.
WYCZYNSKI,  PAUL et  B. BURGER. Bibliographie d'Emile  Nelligan.  Etudes  fran aises
298,  aofrt  I 967.

PANNETON, PHILIPPE
COTNAM, JACQUES. En    guise   de   preface   a
Trente   arpents.  Enseignement   secondaire
46:20-31,   jan.-fev.  1967.
TURCOTTE, RAYMOND.    Ringuet  OU    "Je   pays incertain".  Cahiers de   Sainte-Marie  4:17-
117,  1967.


117

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE




POTVIN, DAMASE
RACINE, CLAUDE.  La  "petite patrie" de Damase
Potvin.   Cahiers  de   Sainte-Marie  4: 7-15,
1967.
RINGUET  voir   PANNETON, PHILIPPE.

ROY,  GABRIELLE
ALLARD,  JACQUES.   Le  chemin qui  m(me  a La
petite   poule  d'eau. Cahiers de  Sainte-Marie
1:55-  ,mai  rg66.
BROCHU,  ANDRE. Themes et structures de  Bon­
heur   d'occasion. Ecrits   du  Canada  frant;ais
22: r63-2o8,  rg66.
CHARLAND, ROLAND-M. et JEAN-NOEL SAMSON. Gabrielle Roy. Montreal, Fides,   rg67.  go  p. (Dossiers  de   documentation  sur   Ia   littera­ ture   canadienne-fran<;aise,  1).
Sources  a  consulter  sur   l'ceuvre   en   general,
1-2. Sources a consulter sur  Bonheur  d'occa­
sion,  1-2.  Fiches  bibliographiques de  littera­
ture   canadienne  202-205,  mai   1967.

SAVARD, FELIX-ANTOINE
LAVOIE, GILLES.  Analyse  rythmique de "Visions du  soir"  dans  Etudes de  linquistique   franco-
 canadienne, Jean-Denis Gendron et  Georges Straka, eds.  Paris,   Klincksieck, Quebec, Presses  de  l'Universite  Laval,  rg67.   p.  8g­
I05.
MAJOR,    ANDRE.   La    Dalle-des-Morts   ou    Ia liberte  maudite.   Cahiers    de   Sainte-Marie
4: 29-35,   1967.
Sources  a  consulter  sur   l'ceuvre   en   general,
1-2.    Sources   a   consulter   sur    Menaud,
ma1tre-draveur, 1-2.  Fiches  bibliographiques
de    litterature   canadienne   226-229,  juin rg67.
THERESE-DU-CARMEL,  Soeur. (Lucienne Blais). Bibliographie   analytique   de    l'reuvre     de Felix- Antoine    Savard.   Montreal,    Fides, rg67.   229  p.

THERIAULT, YVES
BERUBE,   RENALD.   La   fuite   et   le  retour  aux sources  dans  Agaguk  d'Yves  Theriault. Cahiers   de  Sainte-Marie  4:75-85,  1967.
RACINE,    CLAUDE.    La    critique   sociale    dans Ashini  d'Yves  Theriault. Cahiers   de  Sainte­ Marie    1:47-  , mai   rg66.
VIAU,  ROGER  voir   LEMELIN,   ROGER.





THESES

Compiled by Carl F. Klinck



IN  ENGLISH

ARTHUR, CONSTANCE  J. A  Comparative Study of  the   Short  Stories  of  Morley  Callaghan and  Hugh Garner. M.A.,  University of New Brunswick.  (Professor D.  Pacey) .
BELL,   MERIROSE.  The  Image of  French  Can­ ada  in  the  Poetry  of William Henry  Drum­ mond,  Emile  Coderre, and   A.   M.   Klein. M.A.,   McGill.   (Professor  L.  Dudek).
BUSTON,   BARRY CURTIS.  Structural  Organiza­ tion   in  "Under  the   Volcano."  M.A.,   Uni­ versity     of    Western     Ontario.     (Professor R.  G.  N.  Bates).
CAMPBELL,  (MRS.)    BARBARA.  The  Fiction  of
Ethel     Wilson:  A    Study   of   Theme  and

I I 8
 Technique.  M.A.,    University  of   Toronto. (Professor  Gordon  Roper).
CAMPBELL, ROBERT L.   Imagery and  Symbolism in  the  Fiction   of Ethel   Wilson. M.A.,  Uni­ versity   of   New   Brunswick.    (Professor   D. Pacey).
COOK, GREGORY MORTON. Ernest  Buckler: His Creed   and   His  Craft. M.A.   Acadia.   (Pro­ fessor  Jack   Sheriff).
GILL,  MYRNA LAKSHMI.   During   Rain, I  Plant Chrysanthemums (Original poems). M.A., University of British  Columbia. (Professor Jacob Zilber).
GILLEY,  ROBERT  KEITH.   Myth  and   Meaning in    Three  N6vels     of   Hugh   MacLennan.

THESES



M.A.,  University of British  Columbia.  (Pro­
fessor  W.  H.  New).
GNAROWSKI,  MICHAEL.  A  Reference and  Bibli­ ographical  Guide   to  the   Study  of   English Canadian  Literature.  Being   an   Annotated Guide   to    Bibliographies  and    Reference Materials  Pertaining  to   English   Canadian Letters with  a Check  List  of  Selected Titles in    English     Canadian    Literature.    Ph.D., University  of   Ottawa.    (Professor  Emmett O'Grady).
KITAEl'F,  RICHARD JACOB. Blue Book in Steel (Original    novel).    M.A.,     University    of British    Columbia.   (Professor  Robert   Har­ low).
LLOYD,  RODNEY  OSTEN.   Mexico and  "Under the Volcano." M.A.,  University of Western Ontario.  (Professor C.  F.  Klinck).
MARTIN, JANE.  F.  R. Scott. M.A.,  Carleton. (Professor S.  R.  Mealing) .
MC  BRINE,   RONALD  W.    The   Development   of the Familiar Essay in English-Canadian Literature   from   1900-1920. M.A.,  Univer­ sity    of    New     Brunswick.     (Professor   D. Pacey).
MCGREGOR,  ROBERT  G.    A  Comparative Study of  the   Short   Stories   of  Morley  Callaghan and  Ernest  Hemingway. M.A.,  University of New  Brunswick.  (Professor D.  Pacey).
MCLEOD,   GORDON DUNCAN.  The Primeval  Ele­ ment    in   the   Prairie   Novels    of    Frederick Philip    Graue.   M.A.,    University   of   Mani­ toba.    (Professor  Doris   B.   Saunders).
MORLEY, (MRS.)   PATRICIA A.   Puritanism in  the Novels   of Hugh  MacLennan. M.A.,  Carle­ ton.   (Professor Robert  L.  McDougall).

NYLAND, AGNES  CECILIA  (SISTER   MARY   ROSA­ LINDA).  The  Luminous Wheel:  A  Study of Malcolm  Lowry.  Ph.D.,   University   of  Ot­
tawa.   (Professor Michael J. O'Neill).
OLAND,  SIDNEY  c.  M.  Mate rials   for  a  History of the  Theatre in  Early  Halifax. M.A.,  Dal­ housie.   (ProfessorS. E.  Sprott).
THOMAS,   PATRICK   HALLMAN.   The Layers   of
Earth  (Original  poems).  M.A.,   University of  British   Columbia.  (Professor J. Michael Yates).
URSELL,   GEOFFREY  BARRY.  A   Triple  Mirror: The   Plays  of Merrill  Denison, Owen  Pharis Ringwood,  and    Robertson   Davies.    M.A.,
 University  of  Manitoba.  (Professor Marion
B.  Smith).
VAN TONGERLOO,  R. R.  Thomas Chandler  Hali­ burton, Political   Satirist.  M.A.,  University of   Manitoba   (St.   John's   College).   (Pro­ fessor  G.  L.  Brodersen).

IN FRENCH
ALLAN, PETER.   The Baron  de  Lahontan. M.A., University  of  British   Columbia.  (Professor L. L. Bongie).
BLANCHET,   URBAIN.  Etienne Parent, ses opinions pedagogiques et  religieuses.  D.E.S., Laval. (Professor Leopold Lamontagne).
BONIN,    ANDRE.    Biographie et   bibliographie descriptive de Louis-Joseph Doucet. M.A., University de  Montreal. (Professor Reginald Hamel).
BURGER, BAUDOUIN. L'experience poetique d'Emile Nelligan. D.E.S., Universite de Montreal.  (Professor  Nicole   Deschamps).
CHEVRIER,  SR.  PAULETTE.  Le   monde   de  l'en­ fance    dans    le   roman    de   Claire   France.  M.A.,   Universite  de   Montreal.   (Professor Andre  Brochu).
DAIGNEAULT,   YVON.   Etude de  [a technique  et de   !'art   romanesque  de   Menaud,  maitre, roman  de Mgr  Felix-Antoine Savard. M.A., Universite d'Ottawa.  (Professor Rejean Mailhot).
DION,   ROBERT.   Les   structures  du   theme   de la  trere  dans  "Trente  Arpents". M.A.  Uni­ versite    de    Montreal.    (Professor    Laurent Mailhot).
DOSTALER,   YVES.   L'opinion   canadienne-fran­ faise    devant   le   roman    au   XIX•   siecle. D.E.S.,   Laval.     (Professor    Henri   Tuch­ maler).
DUPONT, JEAN-CLAUDE. Le forgeron  et ses traditions. D.E.S., Laval.  (Professor Luc Lacourciere) .
FUENTES, JOSEPH-ANTOINE. Les cantiques de saint   Alexis. D.E.S., Laval.  (Professor Luc Lacourciere) .
GOSSELIN,  ANNETTE.  La   decouverte  de   Ver­ laine  au  Canada  franr;ais. M.A.,  Universite d'Ottawa.   (Professor  Paul   Wyczynski).

LAFLEUR,    NORMAND.   La   drave   en   Mauricie des   origines   a   1950.  D.E.S.,  Laval.   (Pro­
fessor  Luc   Lacourciere).

II9

THESES



LANDRY, GILLES.  Analyse   d'une enquete enth­
nographique  a  Sept-Iles  et  dans   la  region
circonvoisine. D.E.S., Laval.  (Professor Luc
Lacourciere) .
LEMIRE,  MAURICE. Les  grands  themes  national­ istes  du  roman  historique  canadien-franfais. Doctorat  es  lettres,  Laval.   (Professor  Yves Garon).
MAGNY,   SR.   CLAUDIA.  P.-j.-0.   Chaveau, sa vie,  ses  muvres. M.A.,   Universite de  Mont­ real.   (Professor Reginald  Hamel).
MOUSSALLI,  LUCIENNE.  Les  personnages du theatre  d' Andre  Laurendeau. M.A.,   Laval. (Professor Henri  Tuchma1er).
MOUSSALLI,    MIREILLE.   L'muvre   romanesque d' Anne    Hebert.  M.A.,    Laval.   (Professor Henri Tuchma1er).
NADEAU, VINCENT.   Le  nair  et  le  tendre: "Une saison dans la vie d'Emmanuel." D.E.S., Universite de Montreal.  (Professor Albert LeGrand).
PAPEN,    JEAN.    Georges Bugnet,  l'homme  et






























120
 l'muvre. Doctorat d'universite, Laval. (Pro­
fessor   Felix-Antoine  Savard).
POIRIER,    LORETTE.    L'Jmage   de    l'eau    dans "le  Ru   d'Ikoue"  et   "Amour  au   gout    de mer"   de  Yves Theriault.  M.A.,   Universite de  Montreal.  (Professor Laurent Mailhot).
PLANTE-CHARRON,  C.    La   theme  des   passions dans  les  Romans d' Andre  Langevin.  M.A., McGill.  (Professor  J.  Ethier-Blais).
RUBINGER,  c.  Germaine  Guevremont   portrait de    la   femme     dans    le   roman    canadien­ franfais. M.A.,   McGill.  (Professor  J. Ethier­ Blais).
SCHMITZ,   NANCY.  Le   conte-type 710   dans  la tradition orale du Canada et de l'lrlande. Doctorat d'universite, Laval. (Professor Luc Lacourciere) .
TANGUAY, CAROLINE. Ashini OU  le passage du "demoniaque." M.A.,   Universite d'Ottawa. (Professor Jean-Louis  Major).
TREMBLAY, JEAN-PAUL.  Aime-Nicolas dit Napoleon  Aubin,   sa    vie    et   son    wuvre. D.E.S.,  Laval.  (Professor Marcel  Trudel).
