$3.00  per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·80



THE MOR]IL NOVEL

Articles

BY  CATHERINE SHELDRICK ROSS, JUDITH  KENDLE, MICHAEL GREENSTEIN, GAIL  BOWEN, THEO QUAYLE DOMBROWSKI, ROSMARIN HEIDENREICH

Poems

BY CYRIL DABYDEEN, ALEXANDRE L.  AMPRIMOZ, J.D. CARPENTER, RICHARD HORNSEY

Reviews, Opinions,  and Notes

BY  J. W. ROBINSON, ALEXANDRE L.  AMPRIMOZ, ANTHONY APPENZELL, DAVID WATMOUGH, RONALD SUTHERLAND, BRUCE BAILEY, PATRICIA MORLEY, LINDA ROGERS, DAVID EVANS, LORRAINE WEIR, ADRIAN MITCHELL, RUSSELL BROWN, JOHN  FERNS, ROSS LABRIE, KENNETH SHERMAN, MYRIAM RECURT, DAVID CARPENTER, WARREN STEVENSON,  BERNARD
SAINT- JACQUES, JANE FLICK, DAVID WEST,  NANCY I. BAILEY, DAVID  J. BOND, MARILYN CHAPMAN,  JAMES  R. GILES


A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW







ART MARKETEERS





I  WANT  TO   APPLAUD  MORDECAI RICHLER.   Not for  his fiction, which wins plenty of critical praise; nor for his acid essays, which are praiseworthy even if they are often off the mark:  Canada  is too short of shrewd political satirists these days to be altogether  unhappy  about  its one effective cultural  satirist  being sometimes irritating. (Aren't satirists supposed  to irritate?)  I want to applaud  the way he has championed  openness in the shuttered houses of Art Awards. Two years ago, as head  of the  jury recommending  the winners for the  Governor-General's Prize, he released the names of the finalists: he tried to stir up a little enthusiasm; he tried  to  make  the  award  a  Public  Event  that  would  have  some  impact  on authors'  sales and  reputations. For he knows, as Jack McClelland  knows, and  as other  publicity-minded  people know, that  with no Hoopla  there is no Coverage. And no Coverage means no impact: despite the fact that the Governor-General's Prize remains the most prestigious literary award this country has to offer.
We all acknowledge  this "prestige"   (some with a certain  disparagement   that
doesn't conceal their recognition of it), yet somehow we don't  pay attention to the award  as it happens.  We look back at the historical event, and  tut-tut  over why the committee of year X couldn't  recognize the talent of writer Y. And with  justi­ fication. But why don't  we demand  the openness? Why is it that  the Vancouver Sun, for example, despite Mordecai Richler, didn't ever report the 1976 Governor­ General's  winners,  reported  only some of those for 1977, and  spent  most of its column inch announcing that  one Quebec  writer refused one award?  Why? Be­ cause that's  what  it thought newsworthy. The award itself was not news; art was not news; the flamboyant  gesture was news. The  hoopla got the coverage, and  a cultural  confrontation was what  the  notice of the award  communicated to  the public at large. The art of the writers, and the perspicacity of the judges, and the cultural  contributions  of creativity  were all ignored, and  were thereby  made  to seem irrelevant.  Without   the  attention   that  literary  debate  in  a  public  forum attracts,  art  will still survive. But the importance  that  people could be attaching  to literary endeavour  in their culture  won't be realized.

2

EDITORIAL

Unfortunately other   things  may  be happening. When   a  hoopla  machine  gets going,  it sometimes claims  that  publicity  gimmicks  are "public debate." A great many  authors -opening themselves in their  books but  unwilling to sacrifice  their daily  privacy,  too-are  wary  of publicity,  and  this  wariness  may  be one  of the reasons  that  Governor-General's and  other  prizes are  kept  subdued. The dignity of State  ceremony is another value  many  would  be  unhappy to see  pass. And  a third  argument runs  something like this:  aspiring  young  writers  are  delighted  by reaching the  finals of an  awards competition, but  mature and  established writers are somehow  diminished if they come out looking second-best. This  interpretation undoubtedly relates  to  the  anti-publicity argument; it  particularly applies  in  a second-rate competition; and  it  derives  both  from  a  humane reaction to  the  in­ determinables of personality and  from an understandable abhorrence of  notions of "competitiveness" in art. How does one, after all, "compare" Cohen  with Kroetsch, or a historical  treatise with  a popular autobiography? But if as a literary commu­ nity we actually do  value  the Governor-General's Award, then  being  a "finalist" is surely  an  honour in  itself, to  be  repeatedly, perhaps, enjoyed. And  repeatedly recognized  as an achievement, both  by the literary community and  by the  public  at large.
Such  openness  does  not  have  to  mean  empty  rhetoric or  scandalmongering. Some magazines, in an endeavour I suppose  to be "newsworthy," choose deliber­ ately  to  embark on  anonymous gossip columns,  or  on  a  heavily  slanted-con­ trived,  postured-mixture of vendettas and  vitriol. Such enterprises have  neither objectivity nor satiric  wit to give them  merit. They  begin by being  corporate gim­  micks;  they  end  by  being  personally  hurtful. And  they  serve  neither "openness" nor art,  for they  justify instead  only those who find art peripheral and  petty.
Moreover, if openness  need  not live on rumour, nor  need  it suffer  under  a false
democracy. It was openness, for example,  that  Malcolm Ross praiseworthily sought at the ill-fated  but loudly-touted Calgary  Novel Conference of a year ago. A year's distance   has  not  made his enterprise any  the  less praiseworthy, nor  the  hoopla of  the  conference Vote  for  the  Best Canadian Novels  any  the  less indefensible. Academy Awards that  do not  require  voters  to know  all the  works  they  vote on, or to share  their  understanding of the criteria  they bring  to bear  in their  judgment, or  to ascertain whether dates  of publication alter  cases, or  whether the  shape  of any  voter's  own  training or  own  course  might  alter  cases, or  whether they  are affected  by biases of region, sex, and  subject,  or whether the quality of translation might   affect  the  judgment of  any  of the  few  French-language works  that   did manage to get on the  list:  awards like these are  the same  in Calgary as in  Holly­ wood. Because  good  intentions are sometimes subverted by other  kinds of  interest  is no reason  to condemn the  initial  aspiration, but  it  is reason  to  resist  accepting whatever accidental decisions  result  as either  serious  judgments or  binding truths.

3

EDITORIAL

In fact we can go on from what  that  conference "decided," and  it is here that the false vote serves openness after all. If we reject the limiting, hierarchical  order that the Calgary list of Greatest  Books contrived, and examine instead the reasons why a particular hierarchy  resulted from that  particular  vote, we might  be closer to understanding more about  the  uneasy connection  between reader  and  writer, between society and  art. Why is it, for example, that so few Quebec  writers were on the list? Why is it that  contemporary Quebec  writers are so ill-known outside Quebec, and Anglophone  writers so little understood in it? Why has there been no concerted effort to produce better translations of badly translated  works? To what extent is the General  Reader  in Canada  still lodged inI gsa's realism andI gsa's expectations?  To  what  extent  does this state of affairs result from  critics' inade­ quacy, reviewers' insufficiency, publishers' delinquency? or from causes less theat­  rically breast-beating and  more  mundane?  Open  answers to  questions  like these might  help further  the causes of Canadian art, and  get  literary  criticism beyond the stage where it thought  defining works as classics was a way of making them so. F. R. Scott, in one of the essays of his Governor-General's Award-winning volume Essays on the Constitution, writes that a "good play or novel may do more to free men's  minds from  prejudice  than  new legislation. The  expansion  of the  arts  in Canada  is a freeing of the imagination  and the achieving of a sense of community not only within Canada  but between Canada and  the world." There  is a certain noble idealism about this aspiration. But it is such openness, such freedom, towards which art and those interested in art ought nonetheless incessantly to strive.
W.H.N.






VJICJITION
 


Cyril Dabydeen


A prawn memory by the seined sea water rising; we furl along
roll with the waves- our clothes on

trade winds lashing shrimp our eyes skin crab we are one with the sea

breathing salt -
our tongues raging scales of love.

4

HUGH MACLENNAN'S TWO WORLDS



Catherine Sheldrick Ross


1:SIX NOVELS  THAT   FORM  the  MaeLcnnan canon  CX·
plore  for  us, in specifically  Canadian terms,  a familiar  pattern of the  humanist's
quest  for  an  ideal  society,  consequent  disillusionment and   despair, and   finally spiritual transcendence. There are  striking  parallels  between  the  narrator's  sense, by the end  of Barometer Rising, that  he is witnessing  "a  great  country move  into its destiny" and  the  Renaissance humanist's feeling of historic  participation in  re­ birth  from  Gothic  darkness. In  their  desire to provide  an  ideal  literary model for Canada's development, MacLennan's early novels resemble  the  numerous mirrors for Christian Princes  and  the literary  models for ideal societies written  during the Renaissance. The  increasingly sombre  tone of the later  novels is an  acknowledge­ ment  that  the gap  between  the ideal model and  the actual Canada is as unbridge­ able  as the  gap  between   Erasmus' "Philosophy of Christ" and  the  statecraft of Henry VIII.
The ideal prince, according to The  Praise  of Folly, "should manage the Publick,
not his Private Interest; study  nothing but  the common  good." The  ideal  role for Canada in  Barometer  Rising  is to  be the  "central arch  which   unite[s]  the  new order." In contrast with  the ideal  model, however, actual  experience is of religious and  civil wars, the Protestant Reformation and  Quebec Separatism, the sixteenth­ century  break-up of Christendom and  the  twentieth-century  collapse  referred  to variously  by MacLennan as standing on  "yawning edge  of  the  precipice"  (The Precipice), "the  disintegration of  the  world  itself"  (The  Watch  That   Ends  the Night), and  the sense of living in the eye of an  apocalyptic hurricane (Return of the Sphinx). MacLennan, in The  Watch  That  Ends The  Night,  refers to this gap  between  the ideal and  the actual as the "conflict  ... between  spirit  and  the human condition." In  Return  of the Sphinx, it is the conflict  between  human ideals  and  human nature: "All  the ideas that  had guided and  inspired  Ainslie's  life-social­ ism, education, the faith  that  science and  prosperity  would  improve man's life ...
-the best he could  say now  of any of these hopes  was that  they  had  foundered in the ancient  ocean  of human nature." When  the  tension  between  the  ideal  and the  actual  finally becomes  intolerable, a possible response to the  resulting despair

5

MACLENNAN'S TWO WORLDS

is repudiation  of this foundering world in favour of some transcendental reality: the quest for the ideal, frustrated in this world by sin and the perversity of human nature,  is transferred  to the spiritual  world.
MacLennan's six novels, from  Barometer Rising to Return  of the  Sphinx, de­ velop according to this pattern. The  national odyssey of the early novels to find an ideal  Canada   becomes a quest  for the otherworldly  Celestial  City. The  change occurs midway in The  Watch That  Ends the Night  and accounts for that  novel's noticeable shift in tone from the detailed, realistic account  of the Thirties experi­ ence at the beginning  to the spiritualized  conclusion in which the everyday world of Canadian life is "becoming a shadow"  and  politics "seemed  the  most unreal of all."  Erasmus'  comment  on the  need to move "through  the  labyrinth  of this world into the pure light of the spiritual  life" (Enchiridion, ii)  forms an apt sum­ mary of the thematic  movement  of The Watch That  Ends the Night  and explains the abstractness,  the detachment from action in this world, and  the  apocalyptic intimations  that characterize  Return  of the Sphinx.
MacLennan's own re-enactment of the failure of the humanist  synthesis is con­
sistent with his perception  of recurring  patterns in human  history. The  humanist tradition  records  an  awesome  history of losses that  include  the  collapse  of the classical Greek cities, St.  Augustine  at  the fall of Rome,  Erasmus,  Luther,  and Calvin at the break-up  of Christendom, and onward  to the Victorian  sense of  col­ lapse.  MacLennan witnesses yet another  disintegration,  this  time  specifically in terms of the Canadian experience. He seems to be speaking through his own fic­ tional character, Alan Ainslie, who says in Return  of the Sphinx:

I've talked history to Daniel by the hour.... I don't know why it is, but all these things keep happening again and again. Mice and men. Men and mice. Can't any­ one ever learn from anything?

Significantly, Ainslie has written a book called Death of a Victorian and, like Mac­ Lennan  himself, is painfully conscious of being one of the last upholders of  a hu­ manist code of values that  the rest of the world considers obsolete. MacLennan's essay in Scotchman's Return, "The Classical Tradition  and  Education," discusses elegiacally the break-up  of humanism  and contrasts the older humanist  education with the present system that  is bound  to the "producer-consumer cycle." But, he goes on to say, "even  when  I was a boy  there were vestiges of the  [classical hu­ manist]  tradition left in  daily life. My  father  was one of them."  MacLennan's father  "read  Latin  and  Greek  for  pleasure"  and  was consequently  "one  of the least provincially  minded  men  I  ever knew, even though  he was full  of Scotch and  Calvinist  quirks."  It  is  specifically Calvin's  brand  of humanism, inherited from MacLennan's father, that  provides a broad context for MacLennan's novels.
The  persistence of the Calvinist  mentality,  even among  those who consciously try to resist it, is the theme  of both  The  Precipice and  Each  Man's  Son.  Mac-

6

MACLENNAN'S  TWO WORLDS

Lennan's preface  to Each Man's  Son explains  the negative  aspects of the Calvinist inheritance:

To Cape  Breton the Highlanders brought ... with them an ancient  curse, intensi­
fied by John  Calvin and branded  upon their souls by John  Knox and  his successors
-the belief that man has inherited  from Adam a nature so sinful there is no hope for  him and  that,  furthermore, he lives and  dies under  the  wrath  of an  arbitrary God who will forgive only a handful  of His elect on the Day of Judgment.

In  the  course  of Each Man's  Son,  MacKenzie confronts Daniel Ainslie  with  an ironic  echo of Calvin:

Man,  having  through  Adam's  fall lost communion  with  God,  abideth  evermore under  His  wrath  and  curse  except  such  as He  hath,  out  of  His  infinite  loving­ kindness and  tender  mercy, elected to eternal  life through  Jesus Christ.

Calvin's dualist  assumptions about the nature of man  are evident enough  in these two  quotations. According to Calvin,  "there be in man  as it  were  two  worlds." The  natural world  fell with  Adam and  is now  dominated by sin;  therefore one should  focus on the spiritual world  and  the Day of Judgment.
Calvin's two worlds  can  betraced to the more familiar Augustinian account of
the "two kinds of human society which we may call two cities.... The  one consists of those  who wish to live after  the  flesh, the other  of those who  wish to live after the  spirit" (City  of God,  XIV, i). Erasmus  reproduces this  conflict  in  the  En­ chiridion:

Let  us suppose that  there are two worlds, ... the one intelligible, the other  visible.
. . . In  the visible world ... we are, as it were, mere sojourners.... I feel that  the entire spiritual life consists in this:  That  we gradually turn from those things whose appearance is deceptive  to those things that  are real ... from  the pleasures of the
flesh, the honors of the world that are so transitory, to those things that  are immut­
able and everlasting."  (III, 5)




NoT suRPRISINGLY, IN  viEw of MacLennan's own Calvinist inheritance and  his consequent familiarity with  the  doctrine of  the  two  worlds, guilt  and   transcendence are  the  twin  dynamic forces  of  a  MacLennan  novel. Awareness  of guilt-what MacLennan calls in The Watch "the Great  Fear" that eddies  up from  the subconscious and  in Return  the  "beasts  [that] were  kept  hid­ den in the darkness" behind  the unlocked door  - this awareness becomes intoler­ able  and  drives its possessor forth  on a quest  for  transcendence. As  MacLennan puts it in his preface  to Each Man's  Son:

no  normal  human  being  can  exist in  constant  awareness  that   he  is sinful  and doomed through  no fault of his own.... the curse remained alive ... like a sombre

7

MACLENNAN'S TWO WORLDS

beast growling behind an unlocked door. It was felt even when they were least con­ scious of it. To escape its cold breath some turned to drink and others to the pur­ suit of knowledge.

The  novelist, needless to say,  must  cope somehow  with  the  dark  domain  that belongs to the beasts of experience.  MacLennan tends to cope in two ways with the  necessity of finding  his materials  in the fallen  world. He  writes satire  and, secondly, he idealizes, turning  the  physical world into a symbol of the spiritual world.  The  satiric  strain,  consistently an  important   element  in  the  novels,  ex­ presses MacLennan's sense of the  betrayal of humanist  values in the world  as he finds it. He satirizes the corrupt  colonial mentality of Geoffrey Wain in Barometer Rising;  the ruthless business world of Huntley  McQueen  in Two  Solitudes;  the New York advertising world that  Stephen Lassiter joins in The Precipice; the life­ destroying influence, even upon  those who intellectually deny  it, of the  "ancient  curse" of Calvinism in Each Man's  Son; the neo-religious fervour  of the political movements of the Thirties  in The  Watch That  Ends the  Night;  and  finally over­ indulged  rebellious youth, and  the American consumer society that  has produced them,  in  Return  of the  Sphinx. Usually,  whenever  MacLennan is at  his most realistic and convincing in his handling  of specific detail, his tone is satiric.
Not contrary  but complementary to the satire is MacLennan's idealism. This is expressed in his favouring  of heroines of spectacular  virtue and  purity, in his de­ velopment of symbolic characters  and allegorical central episodes, and in his con­ sistent use of the quest  pattern. Since, within the Calvinist scheme of  things, the disintegrating  physical world  is fitter as an  object  of satire  than  as  a  source of values, the characters  in  MacLennan's novels are constantly  in  search of some­ thing that  proves to lie outside the world of experience. The novels are all shaped in the form of a quest, and the characters yearn, like Jerome Martell  and  George Stewart  in The  Watch, "to  belong to something larger than  themselves." In  the first three novels, the quest is for an ideal national identity for  Canada. Canada,  having  purged herself of her colonial past in Barometer  Rising, moves to assume her  role as "the  keystone to hold the world together." She must  bridge  the two solitudes and manage,  at the same time, to avoid falling over the precipice of go­ getter  American  materialism.  The  pattern  is  somewhat  varied  in  Each  Man's Son  where Daniel  Ainslie's search  for a son is  really the search  for an  ideal. As MacKenzie  tells Ainslie, "You  aren't  looking for a son, Dan.  You're  looking for a God." We find out in Return  of the Sphinx that the adopted son, Alan, is repro­ ducing Daniel's  Calvinist quest for a route out of this world. Chantal says, "That old father  of his-he gave Dad  the idea that  his life ought  to be some kind of Pilgrim's  Progress to some kind of City of God and what did Dad  turn  that into? His City of God is this greedy country." The  Watch  That  Ends the Night  (which MacLennan has described  as depending "not  ... on character-in-action, but on spirit-in-action") is also concerned  with a pilgrim's progress in search of spiritual

8

MACLENNAN's TWO WORLDS

reality, the "something  larger  than  oneself." Consistently in the novels the char­ acters  become symbols and  the  quest ends with some ideal  that  transcends  the literal.
Characteristics   of  MacLennan's  fiction  that   have   troubled   readers -the
"unnovelistic" endings  that  jettison characters  and  transcend  the  human  situa­ tion, the didacticism-these are likely products of a two-world theory. The novel's subject is the world of change:  "A novel's chief value lies in its capacity  to enter­ tain  and  in  its characters," says MacLennan.2   But  MacLennan  also  desires to instruct,  and  truth  belongs to the spiritual  world. In the long run, the characters  are expendable  vehicles for the message. By the end of The  Watch That  Ends the Night,  for  example,  the  characters  lose their  human  identities.  George  Stewart becomes Everyman and Jerome and Catherine are "half-translated" to the spiritual world:
Like Jerome's only much more so, [Catherine's face] had become so transparent one almost felt one looked at a spirit. Light was in it.... [Catherine]  seemed ... to be somewhere else most of the time, somewhere beyond from which she came back to visit.

It is in The  Watch That  Ends the Night  that  the various tensions between the visible world and  the ideal  world, the characters  and  the spiritual  meaning,  the actual  country  of Canada and  the ideal model finally become irreconcilable  and the two worlds split apart.  The early novels support  the belief that  the barometer is rising. They depict  journeys that  end in lovers meeting and show a model new society forming  itself around  the  united  young couple. The  last  two  novels  em­ phasize the isolation of their now middle-aged protagonists, who end up sojourners and  exiles in  a  disintegrating  world. As MacLennan  becomes  increasingly  dis­ illusioned with the effectiveness of action, he turns from romance and  comedy to irony and tragedy. We can observe the change occurring in The  Watch That  Ends the  Night.  In  "Reflections  on Two  Decades," MacLennan himself  reports  that while writing  this novel he was "like a snake shedding its old skin" -"the intel­ lectual skin most men of my generation  had been wearing since the beginning  of the Thirties": "So long as I wore it myself, my novels had  been essentially opti­ mistic."8
The  narrator, George Stewart,  is Everyman  whose personal history represents the experience  of his generation  in trying to cope with  the final collapse of  hu­ manist values. The first part of the novel examines various inadequate attempts  to discover  sustaining  values  in  this  world:   George's  search  for  a  father-figure; Jerome's  conversion to socialism as a "nco-religious faith"; and George's idea that in Canada he "had  found  the thing larger  than  [himself]  to  which  [he]  could belong."  When socialism and  communism  and  active  political  resistance  against Franco and Hitler all prove incapable of reforming the fallen world, the immediate  reaction is despair and cynicism:

9

MACLENNAN'S TWO WORLDS

But the trouble  is that  none of these substitutes abides.... Then,  though  we may deny it, comes the  Great  Fear. ... There  lay ahead  only the  fearful  tunnel  with nothing at the end.... My subconscious rose. The subconscious-the greedy lust­ ful infantile  subconscious....

George  encounters, eddying up  from  his "underself," repressed  sexual  desire  for his step-daughter Sally as well as jealousy and  intense  resentment for Jerome and Catherine: "I hated  them  both-Catherine no less than  Jerome. I hated  myself and  I hated  life."
George  resolves  this  intolerable conflict  along  the  dualistic lines  already  ex­ amined. In  the  novel's  climactic scene of the  meeting  in the  hospital  room  "with Catherine's small  silent  body  between  [them]," disciple George  achieves mystical unity  with  his Saint  Jerome whom  he has for so long both  loved  and  hated. "He was actually myself,"  George  says. George  has earlier  described  his story  "not  as one  conditioned by character as the  dramatists understand it,  but  by the  spirit." The  conflict  is resolved  when  the  characters turn  themselves  into  pure  spirit  and transcend the  human condition. As George  describes  Catherine,  "her character almost  disappeared  into  her  spirit"; "her   beauty  ... was  suddenly that   of  an angel." The  characters now  prepare to enter  into  the  "city on top  of a hill"  that  Jerome used  to dream as a  child  "was  white  and  ... beautiful, and  ... a great  privilege to enter." This  city is not, as he once thought, the classical city of Athens,  but  Montreal transformed into  the Celestial  City of  light.
The  last  few  pages  re-focus  a  whole  configuration of  images  that   have  been
already   used  in  connection with  the  Spanish   Crusade and   the  novel's  political quest  for a reformed society  in  this  world: for example,  the  long  journey  of the canoe  to reach  the  ocean; martyrdom; death  and  rebirth; dark  and  light;  refer­ ences to Pilgrim's  Progress, Foxe's  Book of Martyrs, and  the  light  on  the road  to Damascus. The  political  quest,  energized  by "nco-religious faith," is only a parody  of the true  quest,  which is achieved in an ecstatic  grande  finale of light and music
-Bach's music  and  Catherine's light-filled  painting. In  this  way,  MacLennan does not  have  to abandon any  of the  imagery  he has developed  in the  course  of the novel. He simply  transforms it from its secular  to its spiritual application. Just as classical Athens  becomes  the  New Jerusalem, Catherine is transformed from  a neo-Platonized love goddess into a portion  of the Holy Spirit.  George  has first per­ ceived  her  in terms  of courtly  love, Renaissance  sonnet  sequences, and  Arcadian pastoralism:

with  the  sunlit  green  of  the  garden  around  her  ... green  was her  color at  that supreme moment of my youth;

and

all these sensual images were so sacred that  I blushed lest my knowledge of  them would seem a profanity;

10

MACLENNAN'S TWO WORLDS


and

So that  summer  I entered  Arcadia and  the pipes played and  the glory of the Lord shone round  about.

By the  end,  however,  he is confident  that  "the loves she had  known  and  inspired
... would  be translated into  the mysterious directions of the spirit  which  breathed upon  the  void."
The  Watch That  Ends the Night is less tragic  and  more  energetic than Return
of the Sphinx. Although it presents  the complete  pattern of earthly quest, disillu­ sionment, and  transcendence, The  Watch  deals mainly  with  the optimistic period of belief  in  political  reform  and  then  later  with  the  ecstasy  of  the  spiritual con­ solation. Moreover, before  the  novel shifts the sphere  of the quest  from  this  world to  the  spiritual world,  there  is time  for  vivid  observations  of  experience in  the Dickensian sketches  of Bigbee  at  Waterloo  School,  the  formidable Aunt   Agnes, and  the  loser  Harry Blackwell,  and  for  realistic  descriptions of the  New  Bruns­  wick lumber camp  and  of St. Catherine Street on a Friday  night  in the Depression. Return  of the Sphinx  begins  where  The  Watch That  Ends the  Night  concludes, with  an  assumption that   the  world,  as  George  puts  it,  is "a shadow in  which politics ... [seemed]  the most unreal  of all." The tone of Return  is ironic  because the  only  thing  at  issue is how  long  it will take  Alan  Ainslie  to  realize  that  he is living in the shadows of Plato's cave. The  novel focusses almost  exclusively,  there­ fore,  upon  the  process  of disillusionment,  despair,  and  repudiation. By the  end,  "the walls of his life and  meaning dissolved around him." Gabriel is left to provide the  epitaph: "When a man  tries to do something positive in the  world,  he's  safe so long  as he can  believe  the shadows  are  real.  Until  this  year  I always  thought that  Alan  could."
Hugh MacLennan's novels, taken  together, form the record  of a process which, one suspects,  has been  completed, with  the  gap  between  the  two  worlds  now  too wide for a novel to span. In  conclusion,  we can  say that  MacLennan's Calvinist brand  of humanism has shaped this dualistic  pattern and  goes far  to account for many   characterisic features of  the  novels:   their   tendency   to  be  didactic and rhetorical rather than  representational and  mimetic; the use of symbolic  characters and  incidents; the  vividness  of the  satirical  sketches  of minor  characters in  con­ trast with the often unconvincing and abstract major  characters; the  use of  apoca­ lyptic  imagery; the  turning away  in the  later  novels from  romance and  comedy  to irony  and  tragedy; the  persistence  of the  quest  motif;  and  the shifting  of the geography of the  quest  from  this  fallen  world  of shadows  to the spiritual world.  To  us MacLennan is important because  his national odyssey  puts the  recurrent humanist dilemma into  a Canadian context. In  his six  published   novels,  we see the completed process of the  political quest  for an ideal model of Canada, despair

I I

MACLENNAN'S TWO WORLDS


and   the  repudiation of  the  "labyrinth of  this  world," and finally  the  movement into "the pure light  of the  spiritual life."


NOTES

1 The  Institutes  of the Christian  Religion, III,  19.
2   "The Future of the  Novel as an Art Form," Scotchman's  Return, p. 145.
3 In  The  Sixties:  Canadian  Writers  and Writing  of the  Decade, ed.  George  Wood­
cock  (Vancouver: University of British  Columbia Press, 1969), p. 31.








THE FJN]IL F]ILL
 


Alexandre L. Amprimoz


There are  things you could  have said in calmer countries.

Autumn came from  the woods, invaded the garden. Look,
it falls  now  on  the  patio
as it did last year
when  this wine was grape.

The sun sets clouds  on fire,
the  wind  blows  the ashes away and  trees move their  tired arms
-old dancers outplayed by the  tempo.

That was the fall you knew,
snowless as a dream-world should  be;
these lines file it for a while.









12

CALLAGHAN AND
THE CHURCH


Judith Kendle





MORLEY CALLAGHAN's DEBT TO  CHRISTIANITY has boen over-estimated and his distance from that  tradition  never fully explored. Content with the assumption  that  the author  is a Roman  Catholic  novelist, most criticism simply ignores the seriousness of his quarrel  with the Church,  and  to date  there has been no acknowledgment  of the aesthetic nature of his views. It is possible, at least, given the importance Callaghan  attaches to his vocation as an artist, that  his moral  philosophy owes as much  to aesthetic considerations as it does to Roman Catholic doctrine. Such, indeed, has proved the case. Whether  or not Callaghan's criticism of Christianity arises out of his youthful determination as an artist to look at the world freshly for himself, it is clear that  he plumps for individual  insight and imagination  in preference to doctrinal approaches  to truth.  He tends, in fact, to equate  superior  insight  with artistic talent  or appreciation  and  to delegate  to the Artist the moral grandeur and the sympathy more commonly reserved for the Priest. Confidence in art, moreover, virtually replaces his faith in orthodox dogma or creed;  wherever traditional belief survives it has undergone significant change. Thus,  while his belief in  the  transcendent  power  of love and  concem  for  the spiritual life of the individual  are derived from the Christian  tradition, Callaghan means something  very different  from  caritas by love and  is, for  the  most  part, resolutely critical of orthodox,  doctrinal,  and  institutional  forms  of Christianity. Not enough  attention  has been  paid to the author's  own  disclaimer:   "The  last thing that's  in my mind is to write religious books.m
Many  other  of his comments  put  his position forthrightly  enough.  In  spite of
his Catholic  childhood,  Callaghan  is suspicious of  metaphysical  speculation,  as impatient  as his hero,  Sam  Raymond,  with  pretense  about  "things  that  could never be known,"  and  contemptuous  of Catholic  conversions. It is his rejection of orthodoxy"  and "authority" in That  Summer  in Paris ( 1963)  which is chiefly important here, for this, coupled with his inherent  distrust of purely rational approaches  to life, makes the claim of his supposed indebtedness  to the  French Roman  Catholic  philosopher, Jacques Maritain,  unlikely.
Extemal  evidence in support  of the influence is scant and the novels themselves do not support it. Callaghan alludes briefly to the "personalist" approach  of Marl-

CALLAGHAN AND  THE CHURCH

tain  in a review of Aldous  Huxley2   and  witnesses to the  personal  appeal  of the philosopher  in an  article  called  "It  was news in Paris-not  in Toronto." 3   But the article is more a piece of Canadian flagwaving than serious philosophical appreciation  and  finds him, at its end, wryly suspicious of intellectual  conversion by sheer force of personality. In view of their friendship in the early  I93o's, it has been assumed that  the dedication  of Such is My Beloved (I 934), "To  those times with  M.  in the  winter  of  I933,'' refers to Jacques  Maritain, but  the  fact  goes unverified by Callaghan, and  its confirmation  would serve only to strengthen  the irony of the novel's depiction  of the decline and  fall of  a priest. Moreover,  Cal­ laghan explicitly denies such a debt, and in a letter written to the author  in March I976  compares  the idea of tracing  such an  influence to "barking up  the  wrong tree." It is just possible that  Maritain's analysis of the inadequacies  of  "bourgeois individualism"4   defined  Callaghan's arguments  in They  Shall  Inherit  the  Earth ( I 934), but the insights were his own prior to I 933 (as evidenced by  works such as Strange Fugitive, It's Never Over, and  A Broken  journey), and the novel con­ tains, in addition,  a damning caricature of a Catholic  convert,  in  the  person of Nathaniel  Benjamin.  While  Callaghan   would  agree  with  the  philosopher  that changes in the social structure must be accompanied  by profound  changes within the individual  heart,  his own  approach  to that  conversion is by way of neither blind faith nor doctrinal  disputation. He admits in his memoirs only to an interest in the  "neo-Thomism of Jacques  Maritain" and  maintains  that  even  the  phil­ osophers themselves would agree that "the artist kind of  knowing" could yield "a different  kind of knowledge beyond  rational speculation."
The  hard  fact is, of course, that  Callaghan  often finds himself in  violent  dis­ agreement  with major tenets of the Christian faith. He is particularly distressed by Christian  pessimism about  human  nature  and  theological  conceptions  about  the nature  of love and  inveighs loudly against  their survival in  the works of Roman Catholic  and secular writers alike.
He disagrees, for example, with the dualism he discerns at the heart of Western Christianity.  Indeed,  he identifies it in That  Summer  in Paris with "that  fantasy running  through  modern  letters and  thought  that  man is alien in this universe" and  regards  writers as various  as Pascal and  Henry  Miller to be equally  heir to that  tradition,  all "the  children of St. Paul."  In the same work, he is distressed by Christian  fears of human  sexuality  and  attacks  an  otherwise "beautiful writer" like Mauriac's evident "disgust with the flesh." Callaghan feels positively "pagan" in comparison and even views the "correct  copulations" of D. H. Lawrence  as an Anglo-Saxon over-reaction.
Hierarchical conceptions of love are thus mocked in Such  is My  Beloved, and the  entire  Christian  vision of life as sorrowful  rejected  in  A  Passion in  Rome ( I 96 I ) . Orthodox theological  opinion  which  considers man's  spiritual  love for
his fellow man to be but a pale imitation  of Divine caritas, and  where sexual pas-

CALLAGHAN AND THE CHURCH

sian does not rate at all, accords ill with Father  Dowling's own experience  in the first novel as evidenced by his reading  of the "Song  of Songs,"  while Sam  Ray­ mond  contends in the second that  "any fool could see" for himself that, far  from being  a  miserable  existence compounded  of sex, sin and  suffering  wherein  the only escape from "desire"  was death,  the human  condition  is frequently  enjoyed by men  and  women,  whose only sin, if any, is their  obvious  delight  in sensual pleasure.
Callaghan  is also critical  of Christian  conceptions of human   nature  as fallen and of Redemption  only through  Grace, regarding them as destructive  of human dignity, responsibility, and free will. The idea of "original sin" does not appeal  to him, nor to Strange Fugitive's  hero, Harry  Trotter; speculation  about  innate de­ pravity bores and irritates Callaghan; and he regards Christianity's "awareness  of evil" as "a  hopeless spiritual  trap."5  Thus,  while Callaghan  admits that  Graham  Greene's acceptance of "man  and his relationship with God as something  revealed with finality within the Catholic Church" gave him "a whole dramatic apparatus" as a writer, he bemoans the "dank  and dismal Catholicism that  came out of it." He confesses himself "completely  bemused" by the reappearance of this "ancient  view" of man in contemporary  literature, in the works say of William Golding and Harold  Pinter, since he regards conceptions of man as "naturally good, or naturally  evil" as "old nonsense" himself. Convinced that "A man's nature  is a very tangled web, shot through  with gleams of  heavenly light, no doubt,  and  the darkness of what we call evil forces,"6  Callaghan admires, instead, the work of Albert  Camus, who arrived  at the "conviction  that  man,  just being what  he was, had  the possi­ bilities for dignity and  responsibility."
In truth,  the whole burden  of Callaghan's  moral philosophy, with its emphasis upon the fullest self-realization possible and upon life as it is lived upon this earth, is often inimical to the other worldly and self-sacrificial Christian  tradition of  Re­ demption  through  Grace  and  out  of Time.  Regarding  mortality  as "a  gloomy inevitable experience," Callaghan  explains in his memoirs how he himself  avoided morbid  preoccupation  with death  (as well as futile speculation  about  the mean­ ing of life)  by immersing himself as fully as possible in the day to day business of living in order  to realize, as he points out elsewhere, all his  "potentialities" and "possibilities" as a man.7  Both Ross Hillquist, interested only in "life on the earth," and Anna Prychoda, who "inherit[s] the earth," as ideal characters in They  Shall Inherit  the Earth, achieve Callaghan's moral goal as it is indicated  in the novel's title, while Father  Dowling's sacrifice of his manhood, through  his original  vows of celibacy and his capitulation to religious authority, is clearly regarded  as mad­ ness. Not only is chastity  regarded  as an impossible  ideal  of self-denial,  but  the concept of self-sacrificial spiritual  love is considered  a  delusion and  a monstrous form of egotism.

CALLAGHAN AND  THE CHURCH

0OCTRINAL DIFFERENCES SUCH AS  THESE make attempts to interpret  Callaghan  as a specifically Roman  Catholic  novelist open to question at least,  and,  indeed,  such  efforts  eventually  run  into  anomalies.  Malcolm  Ross'
introduction  to the New Canadian Library edition of Such is My  Beloved, for example, while recognizing the irony of the work, argues that  "Callaghan's assumptions  are  thoroughly  Catholic," insists that  "He  never  doubts  the  divine nature and mission of the Church," and then experiences difficulty before the fact of Father  Dowling's madness:

Now this sacrifice of the mind,  this offering up of the priest's sickness, is not a pleasant symbol. Does Callaghan mean by it a rejection of the intellectual life as irrelevant  (or even dangerous)  to salvation?

Ross thinks not and  is forced  to argue  that  the priest's sacrifice of "prideful self­ sufficient intelligence at  work in the vacuum  of the  abstract" restores  love. The truth  of the  novel is exactly  the  reverse. Father  Dowling's  self-sacrifice in  the name of love is a capitulation to pride and to obedience and  restores not love in the human  sense, which is all that  Callaghan  sees as either  possible or necessary for man, but as presented in the novel, futile, and essentially mindless, theological "commentary on the Song of Songs." The  ironic  implications  are  clear:  instead of self and human  sexuality in this life, Father Dowling should renounce  the idea of sacrifice itself, idle speculation  about  the  nature  of Divine love, and  the vain hope of redemption  out of time.
Despite quarrels with authority and Christian doctrine, Callaghan  retains affectionate  respect for Mother  Church.  A variety of churches file across his pages as inescapable physical facts and spiritual signs of man's loftiest aspirations;  priests do, upon occasion, tender  perfectly good advice, and  many of his characters, not­ ably his women, draw strength  and comfort still from their faith and from tradi­ tional ritual and dogma. There is, on the other hand,  neither  hesitation to expose imperfections, nor compunction to mute condemnation  of the Church's  palpable failures. The  work witnesses, in fact, to the demise of Church  influence in society, and to the disaffection of contemporary  man.
It would seem that  Callaghan hopes to fill the gap. Readily admitting "there  is no doubt  I'm  hopelessly corrupt  theologically,"8  while aiming,  nevertheless, as he explains in That  Summer in Paris, to "relate  a Christian  enlightenment  to some timeless process of becoming,"  Callaghan  proceeds by way of intuition  to a set of personal convictions which owes more to his own aesthetic philosophy and the creative process than  to orthodox  Christian  belief, and whose expression in terms of religious symbol or jargon betrays ironic distance as much as their source. There is no doubt of his indebtedness to the tradition,  but  just as Priest is supplanted  by

CALLAGHAN AND  THE CHURCH

Artist,  faith  is transformed by aesthetic philosophy  and  traditional religious  sym­
bolism  put  to literary, as opposed  to devotional, use.
It seems to Sam  Raymond, Callaghan's spokesman  in  A Passion in Rome, for example, that  "all  the  doctrinal ideologies of his day  had  been  fading into  myth and  literature, as the fixed opinions of the Greeks and Romans had  become simply literature." Certainly Callaghan's own  approach to religious  symbol  and  the  use of Biblical  parallel  in  his work  is more  in the  tradition of artistic  licence  than  of affirmation of literal  belief.  Parallels  with  the  life of Christ  inform   Such  is My Beloved  and  More  Joy in  Heaven  ( 1937), but  the  heroes  are  neither modern exempla of the  holy  passion,  nor  saintly  sinners  whose  tragic  suffering and  in­ evitable  failure  can  only  be  redeemed by  means  of Grace.  Far  from  a  feast  of suffering   in  order  to  achieve  mystical  release,  or  pious  contemplation  of  man's fallen  nature in aid of Christian resignation, the object  of each  novel is irony,  and the  discrepancy between  the  ideal  and  the  actual   hero  is explored  in  order   to expose an  unfortunate waste  of human potential.
It is clearly  madness  on  Father Dowling's  part,  so  mesmerized  is he  by  the spectacle of the  Cross, to attempt to emulate self-sacrificial  Divine  love in  hopes of salvation out  of time.  His  only  real  moral  alternatives, Callaghan implies,  lie this side of Heaven. On  the other  hand,  Kip's  crucifixion  is probably preventable. As much  his own as society's fault,  Caley's temporal failure  is the result  of naivete and  fantasies  of social  acceptance, as well as a lack  of responsibility on  the  part of society,  and  it is ultimately more  regrettable than  tragic.  Obviously an  ironic Saviour-society  gets  "the kind  of hero  [its]  time  deserves"-the question of whether there  is "more joy in  heaven" becomes  irrelevant, as the  novel  demon­ strates  how mankind is cut off in some mean  or desperate way from self-fulfillment this side of the  grave.
Biblical  myth  and  pattern inform  They  Shall  Inherit  the  Earth  as  well.  But Michael Aikenhead's movement as prodigal  son, from sin through repentance and absolution to forgiveness,  provides  more  in the  way of irony  and  dramatic struc­ ture  than  pious illustration of Biblical story. It is his moral  development, after  all, which  provides  the  model  for  his father's, and  he regains  an  earthly, as  opposed  to spiritual, Paradise.
It  is his use of "The Beatitudes" and  the  "Song  of Songs"  which  reveals  the uniqueness of Callaghan's approach most clearly. On  the one hand, a Biblical  text is used in They  Shall Inherit  the Earth to refute  Christian otherworldliness with irony,  while  on the  other  "the bold  sensual  phrases" of religious  poetry  stand  in direct  opposition  to theological commentary. Far from  religious exhortation to transcend the  sensual  self  through spiritual   striving,  Callaghan interprets "The Beatitudes" as a  call  for  self-realization and  whole-hearted commitment  to  the world. Similarly  his reading  of the "Song  of Songs" in Such is My  Beloved  contra­ dicts orthodox opinion. While  Father Dowling's  speculations about  the  nature of

CALLAGHAN  AND THE CHURCH

love  are  finally  rejected   by  Bishop  Foley  as  heretical,   Callaghan clearly  prefers them  to passive acceptance of Holy Writ:

Father  Dowling in the beginning  may have loved the prostitutes  in a general  way and, of course, that  was good. His love for them became too concrete.  How could it  become too concrete?  From  the  general  to  the  particular,   the  conception  ex­ pressed in the image.... From  the  word to the  flesh, the word  made  flesh, from the general to the  particular, the word made  flesh, no, no, nonsense ... then the general made concrete  ... no, no. (Italics  mine.)

It is the  good  father's experience of the  Bible as imaginative literature that  has led him  to his perception of its human truth. Instead of finally  revealed  truth or Roman Catholic dogma, the  poetry  of the  Bible  is approached as metaphorical sign, and  the most appropriate attitude towards  it is one of awareness  not reveren­ tial  awe.
One  could  argue, of course,  that  Callaghan's sense of  metaphor, particularly
his attempt as he explains  it in his memoirs to reunite  the "flesh" and  the "word" in his work, is Catholic in a fundamental way. Malcolm   Ross has suggested,  for example, in Poetry and  Dogma ( 1954), that  just such a sense of metaphor, what Ross refers to as the  "analogical" sense, is central  to the  Christian experience, at once  natural to the  sensibility  attuned to the  mystery  of the  Eucharist and  inevi­ table  in a truly  Christian writer.  Whether or not Callaghan achieves reconciliation in  his work, it is likely that  he has some such  theory  in mind  in  view of his dis­ taste  for  separations and  duality. It is possible, in  fact,  that  what  he  is arguing for in novels like Such is My Beloved is a renewed  sense of  the sacredness  of ordi­  nary  human experience, which  the Church, in his view, has forgotten. One  misses, however,  in Callaghan "that sense of commitment and  obligation, which," it has been suggested,  "is  the  essence of religion."9    Callaghan's allegiance is all to him­  self:

A real writer, that  very rare thing-a man who looks at  the world out of his own eyes ... his loyalty is all  to this humanity  in himself. ... If such a man  has any wisdom, any philosophy, it is imbued in him, it is never consulted, never dwelt on.
. . . If he tried  [sic] to see things as others see them he becomes a liar and hack, and
above all he betrays himself. Thinking  in this way, it seemed to me that  all great
writers by their very nature  must be hereticaU0

We are close here  to the heart  of Callaghan's aesthetic.  Resisting  the authority of Christian dogma  by treating the  Bible as a  piece of literature, Callaghan effects a transformation of belief. Traditional religious concepts  are  reinterpreted in  the light  of his experience as an  artist,  and  the  Christian faith  is ultimately replaced with  what  amounts to  a  theology  of  the  creative   imagination.  Resurrection  in terms  of  metaphysics is  dismissed;   innocence   born  of  ignorance is  a  sin;  and salvation  is achieved through awareness.
It is, after  all, his painter's eye for "form  and  colour"  which  permits  Sam  Ray-

18

CALLAGHAN  AND THE CHURCH

mond to discern "The ages creeping back to us" in the Papal  funeral,  and as Callaghan's spokesman in A Passion in Rome,  he continues to exercise his imagi­ nation. Thus he defines his faith in opposition to traditional  belief:  Michelangelo's "Last  Judgment" is rejected as an "old old lie";  "that  burden-of-guilt nonsense" is dismissed; and  "fear  of life," in opposition to innate depravity,  is advanced  as the cause of evil and  human  suffering. Sam's explanation  of the true meaning  of the Resurrection  is perhaps  most typical of  his self-confidence. Explaining  what the Resurrection  means  to a Roman  Catholic, Sam  equates  it at  once with  the unquenchable spark  of the human  spirit and  the eternal  promise of spring,  and replaces pious hope in Life Everlasting with a "fiercely exultant" faith  in human potential and  the  possibilities of life on this earth.  An amalgamation of personal observation and  an  intuitive  feeling for pattern,  Sam's  conviction  escapes meta­ physical speculation  and  is surely what Callaghan  means by his attempt  to relate a Christian  enlightenment  to some timeless process of becoming. Sam's  beliefs are described by Anna  Cannel,  for example, as "very  big stuff ... some line of love or truth  or  something  [all  the  way from  Egypt]  right  up  to  the  events  at  St. Peter's."




LE EMPHASIS  ALREADY NOTED IN   THE  NOVELS, upon  self­ realization  and  sexual  love in  opposition  to  religious ideals of self-sacrifice  and spiritual  passion, is also accompanied  by special efforts to combat  Christian  con­ ceptions of the fatal  fall  to  knowledge. Ultimately  such  efforts  end  in  comple­ mentary myth, in a kind of redemptive  quest for awareness and  the approach  of the Artist to God. Callaghan  makes, for example, an  unusual  connection  in  his work between innocence  and  evil. He suggests, moreover,  that  innocence  that  is not knowing is a sin. Three  of his novels in particular,  Such is My  Beloved, More joy in Heaven, and The  Many  Colored Coat, illuminate  the relationship  between the two.
The  complementary  careers  of Father  Dowling  and  Kip  Caley  demonstrate clearly that  pride  born  of ignorance  goes before a fall.  Both  are  saintly  sinners and  innocents  abroad  whose palpable  naivete  about  themselves and  the  world around  them  betrays  egotism,  profound  disillusionment,  and  despair.  Whereas self-knowledge and  faithfulness  to his original dream  of obscure  anonymity  and the ordinary  life of the common  man could have saved Kip from his fantasies of social acceptance  and  prevented  his untimely  end,  Father  Dowling's  manhood might have been redeemed  if he had followed his natural  instincts and  intuition instead  of accepting  the  Christian  vision as his own.  Social  and  religious  con­ formity  are  equally  unsatisfactory  alternatives:   every  man  must  seek  his  own truth, and innocence compounded  of naivete is a sin.

CALLAGHAN AND  THE CHURCH

Harry Lane  reaches  similar  conclusions  in  The  Many  Colored  Coat  (1g6o). Forced  to  ponder   the  ambiguity of  human  motivation, including his  own,  and the  difficulty  of  determining absolute  truth, he  abandons the  idea  of  innocence as a dangerous form  of pride.  "Innocence" is described  as a murderous weapon, a "Two-edged sword  without a handle" which wounds both  the person who wields it and  its intended victim.  Later  he equates "the greatest  of sins" with "unaware­ ness"  and  embarks for  "a  new  world  of  new  relationships with  people," armed  with sensitivity  and  awareness.
Of  particular significance is the  distinction   Harry draws  between  a  fall  "into some awareness that  could  give width  and  depth  to a man's  whole  life" and  the primal  Christian tragedy. Far  from a fall "into corruption," Harry's abandonment of "innocence" paradoxically saves his life. On  the other  hand, Kip  Caley's con­ version  to  Christianity,  also  described   as  a  redemptive  fall,  ultimately   proves illusory. Supposedly making him "innocent" in a new kind of way, Father Butler's  good  influence   upon   him  in  prison  quickly  gives  way  to  cynical  aggressiveness again,  as impossible  Christian idealism  proves unequal to the realities of the world.  It is clear  that  the theme  is a conscious one, and  Callaghan explains  it himself:

Well, if what  I'm  talking about  is prized, innocence, I mean innocence  as a  prized thing,  I guess innocence  is not knowing. The  whole Jewish-Christian  thing about man  in the Garden  of Eden,  the symbolic story of man  losing his innocence,  this never convinced  me. I  just never could quite understand  this as a symbolic story. Man knew nothing about  good and evil. I don't even know what that means, unless it means there was no good and evil. According to this Christian-Jewish myth, man must have had no awareness before the fall. But what makes man  interesting  is in his awareness  of right  action:   what  he does, what  he doesn't  do.  We know this from  our experience  in this world. The  most insensitive person in this world is a man who is unaware; he's frightening  always.U

As sensitivity  and  awareness usurp  innocence as virtues in Callaghan's  eyes, salva­ tion through imaginative consciousness, which is what  Callaghan means  by aware­ ness, replaces  redemption by means  of Grace.  Similarly  the Artist  himself  assumes greater significance  in  his work.  Indeed, as the  Bible fades  more  and  more  into literature, the  Artist  ultimately emulates God  as Seer of Divine  Truth.
A tendency towards moral superiority is apparent in most of the  novels.12 What has been  called  "compassionate irony,"13 the  prevailing  tone of Callaghan's work, often disguises paternalism and  a kind of rueful contempt on the part  of Callaghan for his characters. Never  more  apparent than  in Such is My  Beloved where  priest and   prostitutes are  children, the  temptation to  take  unfair   advantage is rarely resisted elsewhere.  He  delights,  for example, in the  fumbling  incomprehension of Harry Trotter in  Strange  Fugitive  and  that  of  Scotty  Bowman   in  The   Many Colored Coat. On  the  other  hand, most of his successful  heroes  adopt poses like the  author's own:  Harry Lane  and  Sam  Raymond, his surrogate, both  become

20

CALLAGHAN AND  THE CHURCH


seekers after  truth, and  Sam  in particular resolves like Callaghan to "see the  ends of the  earth  and  judge  them." Indeed, describing  himself  in  his memoirs  as an observer  par  excellence,  Callaghan comes perilously  close to identification of the Artist  with  a merciful  God:

We are born, we live a while, and we die, and along the way the artist keeps looking at the appearance of things, call it concrete reality, the stuff of experience, or simply
'what  is out there.'

Certainly he sees the Artist  and  God  as eternally  vigilant  and  the  ultimate  judges of the  human condition. "The great  fiction  writer," he explains, "must not  only have  a view of man  as he is, but  of man  as he ought  to be," 14 and  God,  like the author, waits patiently for  recognition of His truth. "God  sees the  truth," a priest in  The  Many  Colored Coat  explains  to one  of Callaghan's characters, "but  He sometimes  waits.... He is waiting and  watching" for "Recognition of His truth." God, the Artist, and  the idea of perfection  are also associated  in Callaghan's mind. Musing, for example, about  the  poet Ezra  Pound's interest  in St.  Anselme's proof of  the  existence  of God,  Callaghan goes on  to speculate that   if God  is equated with  perfection, then  the  Artist  must  surely approach Him  in  his longing for  the ideaJ.l5   Elsewhere,  as we have  noted,  he equates  the  end  of separations  between "words" and  "the thing  or  person  being described" with  the  "word made flesh" in  his  work,  which  leads  one  reluctantly to  the  conclusion   that   as  long  as  the Artist is in his heaven everything is right with the world. The Artist  evidently emu­ lates  God  as  Divine  Seer  and   Judge of  truth, but  as  Word-maker,  he  reigns supreme.
Which  is not to say that  Callaghan ends  by making  a religion  of art,  far  from
it in fact.  Sam  Raymond, after  all, is a failure  as an  artist,  and  the  point  seems to be that  he must  put  his personal  life before his career.  Callaghan still seems to prefer  the  artist's life.  Responding with  some  amusement to  the  suggestion   that he  might  have  been  a  priest  himself,  he  paints  a  harsh  portrait of  the  religious life, and  although he evinces sympathy for the calling, it is clear  that  "the ecclesi­ astical  life would  have  been  a horror  for  [him] ."16 The  preference is  reflected  in the  novels. Whereas Father Dowling  and  Sam  Raymond are  equally  failures  in terms  of  their   professions,  the  artist  is  permitted  "success  of  the  heart." Sam restores to life and  to reality  not only himself, but Anna  Connel as well.
It is tempting to read  Callaghan's work as an exercise in rationalization. If the sudden   finality  of  revealed  truth is rejected,  then  the  artist  is obviously  free  to choose  his own.  Certainly he  insists upon  his own  insights.  Whether or  not,  or how serious  the  author is in his equation of the Artist  with  an  All-seeing  God,  it is clear that  he usurps  "the old authoritarian priest."17  Indeed, Callaghan's treat­ ment  of the  Roman Catholic Church is related  to an  essentially  aesthetic  philos­ ophy  of life, and  the  effect  of this  upon  the  work is crucial. Not  only  are  efforts

21

CALLAGHAN AND  THE CHURCH


made in  the  novels  to combat traditional concepts of innocence and  the  fatal fall to  knowledge with   complementary myth, with   a kind   of  redemptive quest   for awareness and  the  approach of the  Artist  to God,  but  orthodox ritual and  symbol are  put  to literary as opposed to devotional use. The religious impulse itself is seen in  A Passion in Rome to  be an  inevitable response to mortality, pointing to noth­ ing  beyond itself  but  the  indomitable courage of man:

[St.  Peter's] had  long  been  the  place  of the  dead.  Rapt as  [Sam] was, he could believe that  behind  the figures in the aisle, conducting their  burial  rite on this Vati­ can  Hill,  he saw the shadowy figures of others  in antique  processions, precursors of those  he saw  now,  who  were  perhaps saying as the  others  had  said,  that  man  was a  unique  creature on  earth because  he was aware  of the  mystery  of  existence  and  death, and  now was facing  it....

If God  has not  quite disappeared from  Callaghan's pages,  His  Church has become historical fact, and as the  Bible  fades  more  and  more into myth and literature, it is clear  that it  is imaginative approaches that are  redemptive, and that everyone ought to  pursue.

NOTES

1 From  an interview by Robert Weaver, "A Talk  with  Morley  Callaghan," The  First Five Years:  a selection  from The Tamarack Review, ed. Robert Weaver  (Toronto: Oxford Univ.  Press, 1962), p.  I 38.
2   Morley  Callaghan," 'Ends and  Means' and  Aldous  Huxley," Canadian Forum, I7 (March I938), 422-23.
3 Morley  Callaghan, "It  was  news in  Paris-not  in  Toronto," Saturday Night   (5
June   I95I), pp. 8,  I7-I8.
4   Jacques Maritain, Scholasticism and Politics, 2nd. ed.  (I94o; rpt. London: Geoffrey
Bles,  I945), p. 62.
5 Morley  Callaghan, "An  Ocean Away," TLS (4 June   I964), p. 493·
6  "A  Talk  with  Morley  Callaghan," p. I 36.
7   Ibid.
8  Ibid.,  pp.  I 35-36.
9  Helen  Gardner, Religion and  Literature (London: Faber  and  Faber, I97I), p. I34·
10 Morley  Callaghan, "Solzhenitsyn," Tamarack Review, No. 55  ( I970), p. 72.
11 From  an  interview by Donald Cameron, "Defending the  Inner Light: An  Inter­
view with  Morley  Callaghan," Saturday Night  (July  I972), p. 20.
12  Callaghan appears to  have  noticed  this  tendency  recently  himself.  In  A  Fine  and Private  Place  ( I975), the  author, Eugene  Shore,  is accused  of  being  "[his]  own church."
13 Frank  R. Scott,  "Lorne Pierce  Medal: Morley  Callaghan," Royal  Society  of  Can­
ada Transactions, 3rd series, 54  (Proceedings, I96o), 57·
14 Morley  Callaghan, "Novelist," in  Writing in  Canada, ed.  George   Whalley   (To- ronto: Macmillan, 1956), p. 32.
15   "Anthology," a CBC  radio  broadcast, I4 November  I972.
16   "Defending the  Inner Light  ... ," pp.  I8, 20.
17 Ibid.,  p. I8.

22

MOVEMENT AND VISION IN The Sacrifice


Michael Greenstein

Lucn WIDELY ACCLMMED ev"' 'ince  iu. 'eception of the Governor-General's Award  for  Fiction  two decades ago, Adele  Wiseman's  The Sacrifice has been subjected to relatively little critical analysis. Beneath  the salient
theme of the Wandering Jew, the nature of the sacrifices, and the Old Testament names lies a complex  tension  between thought  and  action,  or more specifically, between vision and  movement,  which incorporates  mountain, plant,  and  animal symbolism.
The  dichotomy  between  motion  and  perception  appears  in  the  opening  sen­
tence:  "The  train was beginning to slow down again, and Abraham  noticed lights in the distance." The  "familiar  pattern  of throbbing  aches inflicted by the wheels below" is a reminder  of the circular  journey to a new land  from the old country where the pain of pogroms has been inflicted on Abraham's family. Fighting  the rolling motion of the train, the seemingly endless journey, Abraham "tried  to close his eyes and  lose himself in  the  thick, dream-crowded  stillness, but  his eyelids, prickly with  weariness, sprang  open again."  This  opposition  between  vision and motion  recurs cyclically until the final scene where Abraham's grandson,  Moses, returns  from  Mad  Mountain "in  the bus that  rattled  its way down  toward  the city, with his hand shielding his swollen eyes from the possibly curious glances of the other passengers," but at the depot he lifts his hand away from his face. Isaac, the link between the generations, "shifted his bundle uncomfortably  under curious stares and raised his eyes upward  and ahead in imitation of the oblivious purpose­ fulness of his father."  The  oxymoron indicates the conflict within  the  immigrant  family -a conflict based upon the need to act as opposed to the imperatives  of perceiving. In  mind  and  body Abraham  must  build:  "They  would  not  be idle in the world. In spite of his fatigue, his legs moved more quickly to the rhythm  of his thoughts."
On impulse Abraham  decides to challenge this perpetual  motion  by settling in
a  city where  he can  "send  down  a  few  roots-those  roots,  pre-numbed   and shallow, of the often uprooted.... No matter  what is done to the  plant,  when it falls, again it will send out the tentative  roots to the earth  and  rise upward  again to the sky." In  place of the promised generations  numerous  as stars or grains  of

THE SACRIFICE

sand,  Abraham envisions  the  past  and  future organically in the  plant  metaphor, the natural cycle reflecting  the human. His God  "could  pluck  the fruit  of a man's desire when it was scarcely  ripe and strangle  such seed" yet replace  through 11oses "new  grapes  on  the  vines."  Like  life, death  is a seed  that  is sown  as  Abraham explains  to Chaim, comparing it to a weed or fungus:

We think it's a sudden  thing, and it is, in a way, in its moment of triumph,  when it has drawn  the last bit of life into itself and flowers into its own world of stillness. And yet, try though  he may, a man can't  choke it off. I think  that  death  is sown in all of us when we are conceived, and grows within the womb of life, feeding on it, until one day it bursts out. We say then that life is dead. But really death  is born.

Wiseman repeats the  image  of growth   (plant movement) and  identical phrasing when  Abraham considers  how  people  have  forgotten his son's  heroic  deed: "The weeds of everyday  life sprout  up quickly around the rare flower and  seem to choke it off and  hide  it away.  But  push  aside the  weeds and  the  flower  is there." This "choking" forms  part  of the  larger  pattern of binding and  constricting actions  in the novel:  "The gap  where  Isaac  had  been was still there.  But the  ragged  under­ brush  was beginning to creep  up,  to cover the  wounded  earth, to try  to  hide  the spot  where  something fine  had  stood." The   passage  echoes  Abraham's  earlier  reference   to  his  other  sons,  "Death cuts  a  gap  in  life."  Thus, Abraham must destroy  Laiah, that  "great overripe  fruit  without  seed."
Like  life  and   death, birth   is  analogous   to  the  organic   tree  which  Abraham invokes  in  expectation of  a  grandson. The   presence  of  Isaac   and   Ruth "is  as when  a man  has a cherry  tree  in his garden."

There  had  been  such  a  cherry  tree in  Abraham's  childhood.  It  was a  pity  that cherry  trees didn't  grow in this climate.... Weren't  Ruth  and  Isaac  like a cherry tree that a man  could sit and  watch in the springtime? The  young buds swell and strain  and  puff themselves out in the sunshine. A man  wakes up in  the morning, and  suddenly  the  blossoms leap into his eyes, waving their  new-released  petals so that  the whole tree sways with happiness and freedom. So the two of them in their excitement,  they too broke forth in his eyes as the cherry tree that blew its blossoms in the sun. And where the blossom is, the fruit  will follow.

The   extended   metaphor is  accompanied  by  the  characteristic interweaving of vision and action. Though the image decays for Sarah ("Perhaps she had  withered and  twisted  about a little,  as a delicate  tree will when its branches have  been torn off"), the  metaphor is developed  in  the  procreation of the  masculine wind  and feminine flower.  "Did the  wind  consult  the  weather  bureau   before  it  picked  up the  seeds  or  blew  the  pollen  to  the  waiting  flowers?"  In  Abraham's theory  the animus is visually  active  whereas  the  anima   remains  passive:  "A  man  could  be compared to the  wind,  which  must  riffle through life, turning over  the  leaves of time  with a restlessness, trying  to see everything at once, always seeking. A woman waits,  rooted  in the  earth, like a tree, like a flower.  Patiently she lifts her  face  to

THE  SACRIFICE

receive  the  gift  of the  wind.  Suddenly he sweeps across  the  earth   and  stoops  to blow the  dust." Abraham imagines  Isaac's  reaction  to this speculation: "He was never content  to examine merely  the beauty  of the flower.  He  had  to find its very roots."  Once  again  the  deracinated must  go beneath the  surface to  find  deeper meanings.
Wind  and  tree,  male  and  female  are  both  interconnected with  the  characters' movement. Icarus-Isaac, after  "the wind  blew  him  forward, and  he  flapped   his arms  as though  in flight,  as though he were about  to take  off from  the  ground," stops against  a tree,  just as Abraham had stopped  in front  of a tree,  but  Abraham cannot  fly:  "Wings? My  arms  are  like lead  weights.  I can  scarcely  raise  them." Realizing that  his mother is moribund, Isaac  leaves  this female,  arboreal shelter and  starts  home,  "placing one  foot  uncertainly in  front  of another." His  action parallels  Abraham's earlier  return home "over  ground  that  met  his strides  firmly, as though  he had  just learned to walk,"  and  the  return to  Isaac's death:  "Now Abraham's feet seemed  to take  a long time to reach  the ground." After  his argu­ ment  with  Ruth, Abraham pauses  to lean  his head  against  a fencepost  as  Isaac  had  rested  against  the  tree.  "The warm  wind  of a summer night,  tugging per­ sistently  at  Abraham's beard, pulled  him  gradually out  of  his  stupor. ... Only  the  wind,  threading the  hair  on his face,  whispered  teasingly  of  life."  The  super­  natural power  of the  wind  appears in  Abraham's simile  about  Isaac,  "Like the wind,  you would  shake  down  the  stars,"  and  in his question  about   his two  dead  sons, "Why did  I  weep,  then,  when  I saw them  hanging, swaying  at  the  will of the  wind?"  Though not as important as W. 0. Mitchell's and  Sinclair Ross'  use of the symbol, Adele Wiseman's prairie  wind is one of the activating forces in the novel, plunging  father and  son toward  catastrophe.
Just  as the  plant  imagery suggests  rootedness,  a sense  of  belonging or  fulfill­ ment,  so the "mountain" is developed  as a psychological  as well as  physical land­ mark  involved  in  the  dialectic of  vision  and  movement. Isaac  surveys  the  city with  its "double-crested hill that  dominated the  eastern  landscape. To  Isaac  the land  seemed like a great  arrested movement, petrified  in  time,  like  his memories,  and  the city crawled  about  its surface  in a counterpoint  of  life."  The double  crest is possibly an  allusion  to the  sacrificial  Mount   Moriah  and  Moses'  Sinai  or  may be taken  physically  as the  female  breasts, for later  Abraham mentions the  gentle  swellings of the earth's breasts  while Laiah  fingers her low-cut  housecoat. Further­ more,  Mrs.  Plopler's two daughters who explain  the  meaning of Mad Mountain to Isaac  are themselves  "like  twin  mountains." In contrast to the  pulse of the  city and  the opulent  residential "heights," the mountain is frozen,  like Isaac's past, in the  eastern  direction. "He was aware  of  the  hill to the  east  as he walked. When he didn't look at  it, it  seemed  to  crowd  up  closer, as though it  were  watching, absorbing  every gesture  in its static moment.  He looked sideways  and  back toward it, and  the  mountain assumed  its  proper  proportion, the  sweeping double  hump

25

THE SACRIFICE

carelessly  mantled in  splotches  of  autumn color."  The  interplay between   vision and  motion  is transferred to  the  mountain which  witnesses the  activities of  the city's  inhabitants; the  distinction between  observer  and  the  observed  disappears. Ironically, through observation and  static  force, Mad  Mountain regulates what  is below  it: "a  strange name  to  call  a  mountain that  looked  so  intimately on  all the  affairs  of the  city. Strange to  think  of the  people that  it  had  gathered up  to live with itself." But this double-breasted shield cannot  always protect: "Although, with  a certain  fondness  for their  native  landscape, the citizens  claimed  that  Mad Mountain sheltered   them  from  many  a violent  wind,  the  winds  had  apparently learned to circumvent this hazard and  blew most persistently from  the undefended north." Masculine wind  contends with  feminine  mountain and  tree.
Whereas the  wind  manages to avoid  the  mountain, Isaac  remains magnetized to its centripetal force  at  the  end  of the  first chapter when  he and  his parents sit in the  little  park  by the  river:

Isaac  watched  the  double-crested  mountain,  towering in front  of them,  and  was aware of it even as his mind  jumped from thought  to thought. It was strange  that, no matter  where his mind  went, the hill remained  there, solid in his vision, every time he looked up. It was a comfort  that  it didn't  change, like the  people he had known and  the other  things that  had once stood rooted, it had  seemed forever. It was like the sight of his father's  face when he had opened his eyes for the first time after  the fever, towering over him, claiming him.

The  perceiving  mind  wanders while  the stable  mountain stays  permanent and  is identified not with  mother earth  but  with  the father  figure. The  mountain accom­ panies  Isaac  through the  hardships of winter.  "The wind  that  blew  down  from the northeast past Mad  Mountain and  whipped  across his shoulder blades seemed, in its way, to be trying  to help  him  along," and  "The mountain, too, seemed  to jog  along  with  him." Vision  and   movement   vie  during this  trudge:   "Things creep  up from  behind  while you keep your eyes ahead  of you, trying  to edge your way safely through life.... As though to prove this, he turned quickly  and  caught  the  mountain in  the  act  of creeping forward in the  dusk." The hypnotic power of the  mountain also affects  Ruth's vision:  "She  was looking  at  Mad  Mountain. The  hill,  rising  above  the  houses  across  the  way, had  already thrown off its day cloak  and  was wrapping itself in evening  blue. Just such  a dress Ruth wanted  to
sew for .herself .... Contemplating it, she lost track  for a moment of what  Isaac was saymg.
Moses seeks visual  refuge  from  Dmitri's gang  in  the  mountain: "He made  a face  again, then   looked   past   them   with   pretended indifference toward  Mad Mountain in  the  distance." And  in  the  final  chapter Moses  inherits his father's visual affinity for the lofty beacon  as he prepares for his ascent  to visit his grand­ father. "Moses  laid  down  the  novel  as in  the  distance  a  cluster  of  yellow  lights popped  open  and  peered  from  behind  the Mad  Mountain's hump. Once that  had

THE SACRIFICE

been the signal for him  to close his eyes and  rush quickly into  his disappearing act."  But  he cannot  escape into  invisibility like the  giant  Iloig,  for  his mother places a heavy burden  of responsibility on his shoulders. "It was a  mountainous weight that  dropped  on him when she talked like that,  of death  and  the evil of man,  like  an  old  mountain   of  his  grandfather's stories, settling,  crushing  the giants of his childhood over again, breaking them into splinters that tore him apart inside." The  description  reverses the iconoclasm of the Biblical Abraham towards Terah's idols, while the  allusion to Sisyphus is also evident.  In  preparation  for his revelation on the mountain  Moses keeps his eyes focussed on it during his meet­ ing with Aaron: "Moses glanced  back at the mountain  with narrowed eyes" and "He  nodded toward the mountain.... eyes still on the mountain." One of Moses' childhood  daydreams  is about  a  journey to the mountain  where  he  confronts  a shadowy  old  man;  in  reality,  however,  he overcomes through  communion   the "height  of the mountain  [that] might still be separating  them." Facing eastward, intoning  to the eastern  air,  Abraham  is once again  identified  with  Mad  Moun­ tain. Thus,  Mad  Mountain, a symbol of mental instability  yet  ironically  a stabil­ izing force for the  city at  large  and  for Abraham's  family specifically,  plays its role in the movement-vision axis.
In addition  to the mountain  and the vegetable world, the animal  world's rela­ tionship to man  is of some importance  in the  novel, for man's  progress  may  be measured  in the substitution  of animal sacrifice instead  of human  sacrifice. The civilized  advance  to  animal  sacrifice  is an  ironic  contrast   to  the  debate   be­ tween  Abraham   and  Isaac  on  evolution,  the  former  denying  any  Darwinian  notions. On  the lowest level animals  provide some of the lighter  moments in the novel from the reduction  of Mrs. Plopler as a rabbit to Polsky's pregnant  cat, but a  more  serious  dimension  is  usually  involved.  Though  Abraham  first  alludes comically to Laiah  in a bovine metaphor  ("They say that  a cow will stand  in a green field and  wave its tail and  show its rear  to  every passing bull"), he soon regrets his pronouncement: "What  could she  have  to do  with  them,  with  her body ... and her hoarse, low voice with its persistent animal  call? ... It was not for him to laugh  at  her because he had  chosen to live another  life -not,  espe­ cially, while he could still understand  the animal  call." Abraham's identification of the slaughtered  cow and  Laiah rests on the vision of the slaughterer and  the slaughter  preceding the act:  "the sky crowded into my eyes piercingly, blindingly.
. . . In front of me the cow was looking downward  in a sort of modesty, with her eyelids covering her eyebulbs, which seemed so fine and  large  under  their  veil." Abraham  also brings Nikolai a large slab of cow as a "thank  offering."  Abraham and  Chaim  depend  on the  butchering  of animals  for a  living;  yet they  gain  a great awareness of life and death in their relationship to animals.  Moses, too, comprehends  his grandmother's death  when the landlord's  shaggy  dog dies.

THE SACRIFICE

Running counter  to the  primitive  world of sacrifice is the evolutionary  theory upheld  by Isaac  but  rejected  by his father  during  their  debates  on  the subject. "Avrom  had  afterward had  an  interesting  conversation  with  Chaim  Knopp  on the subject  of man's  relationship  to animals. And  together  they  had  discovered many  similarities  not  only  between  man  and  the  apes,  but  between  man  and many other creatures  of God's  world."  Isaac distorts social Darwinism,  the "sur­ vival of the fleetest," to attack  the mechanistic capitalism in the factory, but the phrase also comments  on the speed of escape from  persecution. Descended  from lower forms of life, man is compared  to various animals to imply the baser instincts in the chain of being: Hymie Polsky claws Laiah with the "animal uncontrol of his strong young paws";  Abraham is like "some four-footed  creature" scuttling from one coffin to another  in his surrealistic dream;  Abraham and  Ruth  argue, "tear­  ing  like beasts at  the  raw  entrails  and  the  naked  heart,"  while  he  paces "like some animal  pent  up"  as the "long, twisted reptile sounds snaked  around  him." Conversely Abraham confronts  the  beast within  himself, the darker,  deeper side of life, when  he  prepares  to sacrifice the  animal  before  him. Thus,  plants,  the mountain, and  animal  imagery  all form  part  of the larger  motif of vision and action.



No sooNER IS ABRAHAM SETTLED   at  Mrs.  Plopler's  than movement  recommences in a variety of forms, not the least of which is the visual. Sarah  is hypnotized  by the Dickensian landlady's  "hyperactive  nose" and  equally active mouth  (her  name  is derived from the Yiddish "chatter") and  eyes: "she swept her eyes over their pale adolescent son" and "Her  eyes took in their portable belongings." Like her characters, Wiseman  progresses experimentally  in the first chapter from a brief stream-of-consciousness passage flashing back to earlier stages in the family's history as Isaac tries to fall asleep, to a temporal overlapping similar to Stephen's  and  Bloom's  wanderings  in Ulysses.  This  contrapuntal  discovering begins with  Abraham's rehearsal  of his son's  English instructions,  followed  by Isaac's walk to school, Sarah's ordeal with Mrs. Plopler, Abraham's return  home, and  finally  the  family  outing  in  the  park.  Through   movement  and  empirical absorption,  each episode demonstrates  the family's initiation  into the new milieu.
In  the  first section  Abraham repeats  the  English names  for  tree,  sky, cloud, house, and  mountain  -each  a vertical  marker  for  the  aspirations  of the  new­ comers. He stops in front  of a tree, frowning  at  it demandingly,  "and  his  eyes traveled  up  the  trunk  in  search  of a clue."  Isaac's  peregrinations  through  the autumnal city parallel  his father's: "Isaac  walked to school, studying  signs and faces, learning  the contours  of the  city, wondering  what  was  to come for him." Under  the questionable  tutoring  of Mrs. Plopler, the cicerone of the ghetto who telegraphs  "significant  looks" with "expressive movements of  the nose, eyes, and

THE  SACRIFICE


lips," Sarah is introduced to the city, as though the  nibbling face of her landlady were pursuing her. Headed for the  reunion  in the final section,  "Abraham  paced home  over  ground that  met  his strides  firmly,  as though he  had  just  learned to walk."  The  student-walker becomes one  with  what  he sees as he  remembers the name  for "tree": "It came  to him suddenly, out  loud.  Tree.... Now  they  looked at  the furrows about  his eyes as though  he were the  trunk  of some  tree.m  By the end  of the  chapter father, mother, and  son sit together  in  the  park  while  "each one  made   his own  silent  voyage  into  the  past  and  future" in  contrast to  Mrs. Plopler's garrulousness and  their  own  testing  of the  new  language. In  order   to establish  firm  roots Abraham decides to buy permanent seats at  the  neighbouring synagogue.
The  tragic  events  of the  past  cause  the  mental   and  physical  restlessness while the  exigencies  of Canada compel  the  immigrants to  develop  an  empirical mode of perception. Pausing only to watch  the snow  drifts,  the  external counterpart of the  huddled family,  "Abraham paced  restlessly as his past  years  in  their  fullness forced  themselves  over  him." Sarah's distant   and  dream-haunted eyes  "grated together   when  she  blinked  them,  and  ached  so"  as  a  reminder of  the  painful events witnessed.  For once, the landlady catches  one of her tenant's visual  habits: "Mrs.  Plopler's eyes  had   taken   on  a  slightly   vacant  look  of  reverie."  When memory  focusses on the  past,  the  present  becomes  blurred, unrecognizable: thus, Isaac,  recalling his brothers, rushes into  his classroom  "without even  seeing"  his friend; thus,  Abraham, recounting those  years  to  Chaim, "leaned forward and scrutinized  the  ground   in  front   of  the  bench,   without  seeing  it."   Abraham's chronicle  of the  emergence from  the  cellar  after  the  pogrom  shows  the  pain  of sight: "even  the light seems hostile to us. For a while we are  nearly  blind.  It hurts us to see. Perhaps, after  all, now  that  I think  of it, the light  was our  friend  and wanted to shield  us."  Past  vision mixes with  present  haphazard motion: "For a few moments he  moved  about  aimlessly, quickly,  back  and  forth....  His  arms moved as though  he had  no longer  any control  over them." This split  in Abraham between   thought and  action   foreshadows  his  loss of  control   in  the  murder of Laiah. "I saw all and  felt nothing.... All I wanted was to move, to run  run  run. My  body  screamed to wear  out  all its movements in  violence  and  to drop  down in a  heap,  unfeeling, somewhere, anywhere."
Isaac's recollection  of the same  events immediately follows Abraham's. In  the cellar's  darkness  fear  and  laughter "ran  out  of his eyes" until  danger passes and Nikolai  releases them:  "Isaac strained past  him  to see if there  were  really  stars left, to catch  a glimpse  of something-any shapeless  thing  in the  yard  to try  to focus his eyes on.... How  his eyes ached-unbearable shooting pains  from  the sudden  light.... As he walked  along  the lane  ... he had  to keep  pressing  his fists in his eyes to ease the  hurt." When  they return  to Nikolai's  to thank the  peasants, they  recognize  their  own  samovar stolen  during the  attack:  "His father's eyes,

29

THE SACRIFICE

now perfectly blank, moved past his own.... His mother was not looking at any­ thing  but  sat  still,  her  swollen  eyes on  nothingness.  Isaac  didn't   want  to  look toward  the kitchen  again.  But in spite of himself his eyes kept slithering  toward the kitchen door." The  revelation leads to the urge "to get up and go-quickly, to run if necessary," for vision results in action.
Following  these  two  remembrances,  the  narrator   contrasts  father's   and  son's modes of perception: "Why  couldn't  he be like his father,  keeping his eyes fixed somewhere, at a point, so that  everything he saw had to mold itself to his  pers­ pective?  Instead  his eyes wavered  from  point  to  point,  and  nothing  remained fixed under  his stare  but, moving, changed  and  revealed itself as something  new. Even  when he looked into  himself, his own motives, the  things  he thought  and the things he professed, he could see a thousand  hidden sins."  Isaac  asks Ruth,  "Do I really see things he doesn't see, or does he just see them in  a different  per­ spective?" and later he poses the question to Abraham: "And if we can't  seem to see the same thing  in the same  way at different  times, how  can  we tell what  is the  true  way of seeing it?"  Isaac's  skepticism and  Abraham's certainty  lead  to frequent  debates  with  tragic  results;  the  reconciliation  between  relativism  and absolutism occurs in the third  generation  when Moses discovers the truth  about his grandfather. Yet despite his firm belief  in God, Abraham  loses his faith, a loss expressed visually through  flight:  "I lost my mind, my eyes that  could see ahead of me.... We fled blindly."  At the same  time when Isaac  contracts  typhus  his father sees him "as though  for the first time."
Slaughter  or sacrifice is associated with vision or lack of it. "The abattoir  was out of sight. It was part  of the dark  underside of life. Abraham  knew something of this side." Abraham narrates  the sacrifice in Genesis to Moses who "doesn't take his eyes" from  his grandfather's face:  "the  glint of the knife and  the glare of the sun and  the terror  of the moment  burning  into his eyes so that  when the time comes many  years later  when he must in turn  bless his sons he is too blind to see that  Jacob  has  again  stolen  the  march  on  Esau."  Wiseman   juxtaposes insight and  blindness in Abraham's slaughter  of the cow:  "Not  only did I see in that  moment the depths of baseness in a man,"  but  he blinks at the creature  and searches the sky which "crowded  into my eyes piercingly, blindingly."  The  same emphasis  on  the  visual  reappears  when  Abraham   murders  Laiah:  "She  felt  a thrill  of relief as  his eyes moved  with  awareness over her. . . . She  let  her  eyes flutter  closed under  the ardency  of his gaze," and  "Looking  at  her then,  he was lifted out of time and  place.... he saw her as though  for the first time, and  yet as though  he had always seen her thus, saw her as something holy." The  blinding vision of  the  three  participants in  the  sacrifice  correlates  with  the  circle  that encloses eternity in a split second. Abraham  had also seen his son "as though  for the first time" during  his typhoid fever, for the old man is never too old to re-learn

go

THE SACRIFICE

the  lessons transmitted   mystically and  empirically  through   the  windows  of  his soul.
Abraham's despair after Isaac's death resembles the blinding  purification  of sacrificial revelation:  "Again  and  again he broke the surface, staring  about  him with salt-washed eyes, caught  sight of some fragment,  and  because it was only a fragment  and  the salt  had  burned  his eyes clean saw  it with  a  ruthless,  useless clarity before he sank to the massed confusion below." The  distintegration  which ensues manifests itself mainly  in  Abraham's   actions  but  also in  his  perceptual abilities:  "Unnoticed, the dusk of an early spring evening  had  crept  in through the kitchen window, muting the clear distinctions between one object and another.
... There  was a fuzzy blueness about  Ruth,  close though  she was to him. He did not even know what  he himself really looked like any more."




WrH THE  INTRODUCTION OF   MOSES at the structural centre of the novel followed soon by the deaths of his grandmother and  his father, Wise­ man presents a different mode of perception. The young boy sees his dying grand­ mother  through  a narrow  crack in the door, while Mrs.  Plopler's application  of the glass cups becomes grotesque  when seen through  Moses'  eyes:   "the  glasses with  their  great  gobs of  discolored  flesh stared  at  him  from  her  back."  Mrs. Plopler's therapy  is one of the first impressions on his tabula  rasa;  it "helped  to imprint  on  his memory  as  the  first indelible  recollection  of  his childhood  the strange,  yellow-shadowed scene at  his grandmother's bedside." At Sarah's death Moses wanders about, detached, viewing the world from the narrow vantage  point of the green box. "He  managed to pry the lid up and, after climbing in, crouched, peering out  through  a slit in  the  lid that  he could  make  larger  or  smaller  by pressing back or ducking down  his head." This adjustment of focus on a narrow slice of life prepares for Moses' need for spectacles.
Also leading to the time for glasses is the scene in the  park  where father  and son watch  the  movement  of the  clouds. "The  child, stretched  out  in  the  same attitude  as his father,  one hand  firmly clenched in the larger one, squinted  up at the sky." The scene combines vision with the motion of the cloud;  it also demon­ strates  Isaac's scientific relativism seen earlier in his discussion of  evolution, and contrasts with the final scene in the novel between grandfather and grandson  who join hands. Moses braves the Copernican  carousel:  "The whole earth  was speed­ ing quickly past the clouds. Moses felt a little dizzy. They were rushing along, and he couldn't  stop. With  a sudden  little scream he wrenched  his eyes away  from the  cloud and  twisted  his body  around  so that  he toppled  right  on  top  of  his father.  'I jumped off!'  He  adjusted  his eyes to his father,  blinking  a little.  His father,  close and  solid in  his vision, laughed  too."  As  Isaac  seeks the  shifting

THE  SACRIFICE

cloud  or  shifting   mountain, he  thinks,  "Strange how  a  child  will  skip  from  a thought into  an  action, afraid neither  that  he will lose the  thought nor spoil the action." Isaac  is about to experience the  difference  between  the  vita  contempla­ tiva  and  the  vita  activa  when  he  rushes  spontaneously into  the  synagogue, for Isaac,  like his Biblical  namesake, is aligned  with  vision and  thought, whereas  Ish­ mael  "was  a man  of the  fields, more  used to action  than  to speech." Proud  of his son, Isaac  closes his eyes filled with  the  kaleidoscopic cloud  of vision and  action: "In the  confusion  of  pre-sleep  it  seemed  to him  that  his son  had  committed an act  of courage, jumping off that  way, and  as he fell  asleep  he was  pointing  this out  with  a swell of pride  to the  figures  that  crossed  his eyelids."
The   scene  shifts   to  Moses'   handicapped  eyesight.  Like  Stephen  Daedalus,
"Moses  looked  around him  experimentally. The  outlines  of things  sprang sharply into his eyes. He blinked  once or twice. On  his nose perched  the spectacles,  round, black-rimmed. They  seemed  to  be  all over  his face.  He  swiveled  his eyes round and  round, trying  to see the  entire  circuit  of the  rims.  Experimentally he took  a step  or  two  forward to  find  out  if the  world  would  remain  steady  about him." With  these  new  spectacles   Moses  must  face  the  derision  of  Dmitri, his  father's heroic  act  and  consequent death, and  his grandfather's crime.  As a result  of the murder, Moses and  his mother leave the neighbourhood, carrying on the  tradition of the  uprooted Wandering Jew,  combining wary  vision and  action. "They were moving.  Moses  helped  to uproot the  furniture.... he nevertheless  moved  with  a feeling  of furtiveness, of  haste,  glancing about   him  every  time  he  came  out  on the  porch  with  another bundle, to see whether  there  was  any  movement in  the neighbouring houses."  The   mode  of  perception during the  departure  resembles the  mode  when  Moses  is first  presented at  the  crack  in  the  door  and  the  slit in the  box;  "seeing  but  not  being  seen,"  he crouches  among  the  furniture: "With narrowed eyes he  peered  after  the  bent  figure.  Slowly, deliberately, he  raised  his finger and  took aim." Though unlike the hunters Ishmael  and  Esau,  Moses Jacob, the  musician, demonstrates a streak  of action  or violence;  similarly  his violin bow becomes  a sexual  object,  and  the  key to his house is a literal  symbol  of his rite de passage like his grandfather's key to  Laiah's apartment.
The  two  major  sacrifices  in  the  novel  are  connected   with  each  other  by  the interaction  of  vision  and   motion. Wiseman   transfers   from   the  scene  between Abraham  and   Laiah  (whose   master's  "movements had   traced   themselves   in fire"), in  which  they  discover  that  they  "had been  scarred   by  much   the  same fires"  to  the  scene  where   Isaac   rushes  into  the  burning synagogue. He  notices "two  enveloping arms  of flame" which  seem to be "in  supplication," a parallel  to Abraham's pain-filled  arms  which  are  purged  in  the slaughter of Laiah. Just  as Isaac's action  is preceded  by the sight of the glow within  the synagogue  windows, so Abraham sees  Laiah's shadow, the  shadowy   underside of  his  life,  cross  the kitchen  window. Like  Isaac,  Abraham "was  tired  in every part  of him": "every

32

THE SACRIFICE

separate  movement  seemed  to  require  his complete  concentration. He  labored upward  under a growing heaviness, as though  he were carrying  his whole life on his back up an endless flight of stairs." This Sisyphus ascends as his life's burden becomes heavier with  each  step.  Instead  of Isaac  "Leaping out  of the  inferno, like a revelation bursting from the flaming heavens," Abraham's "thought leaped" before "his arm leaped, as though  expressing its own exasperation,  its own ambi­ tion,  its own  despair,  the  Word  leaped  too, illuminating  her  living  face."  The spontaneous  sacrifices of father  and son lead to revelation, death, and  ostracism.
While much of the action and  vision move in the direction  of growth  and inte­ gration,  a movement  in the opposite direction  of division and  disintegration de­ velops, particularly  in the second half of the novel where one character is excluded from a social group or where a character  is divided within  himself. Though  Ruth is included in the family, she is excluded from the past  tragedies  which  bind  her husband  and  his parents: "it  seemed to her as though  they  were suddenly  sus­ pended, the three of them, in a thought from which she was excluded. She would look from  Abraham  and  Sarah  to  Isaac, her  husband, and  he would  be sitting quietly, not looking at anything." As Moses grows, Sarah begins "to  fade  away"  from  Abraham: "It was as though  the strings of  his spirit  that  bound  him  to Sarah  twanged  suddenly,  spreading through  him  vibration  upon  vibration  of a feeling  that  was a  confused  mixture  of fear  and  sadness  and  certainty." With each  of the several deaths  a  new gap is cut in  Abraham's life, and  even young Moses wanders about,  "detached," trying to find a place for himself in the midst of Sarah's  death.
The  two  major  sacrifices result  in isolation-Isaac's and  Abraham's  move­
ment away from society. After saving the Scroll, Isaac "was imprisoned in a trans­ parent  bubble. It pressed inward  with a constant contracting  pressure.... If he relaxed slightly it shrank in on him, so that it was the action of  his own body that determined  the size of his prison." Captured  in his relativistic microcosm, inexor­ ably bound  to his sacrifice in  an  act  which  has separated  him  from  mankind,  Isaac tries to escape through  vision and "superhuman movement," but ultimately fails. "Sometimes,  in a burst of energy and  desire, he  pushed  out  and  outward, expanding  his sphere, stretching  his limbs beyond any  length  that  they had  ever achieved, so that the tips of his toes and fingers alone touched  its surface, and  he poised in the  ecstasy of effort, certain  that  one final  burst  of strength  and  will would stretch  the  bubble  to its limits and  he would  break  through." Wiseman collocates Isaac's  "ecstasy"  with  his son's "vast  ecstasy" at  the  end  of the  pre­ ceding chapter; she also repeats  Isaac's  "bursting  out  of the synagogue"  in  the final incarcerated  "burst." The  literal sense of "ecstasy" indicates  that  Isaac  and Moses stand  outside of the social  mainstream  while being divided  within  them­ selves. The  mirror  vision which  follows the futile  movement  further  emphasizes the segregated  ego:  "Gradually,  as he strained  his eyes to see what  lay beyond

33

THE SACRIFICE

his sphere,  he began  to realize that  although  it was transparent, he could make out only his own face grimacing  at him in reflection."  Isaac's  ambiguous  sphere resembles the  fenetre symboliste of Baudelaire and Mallarme  as dream  and reality become blurred  for the  "horizontal hero" whose vision had  always followed the verticality of Mad  Mountain: "If I broke through  I'd  no longer have the sphere as my boundary,  but  I'd  lose its protection  too. The  bubble  bursts, and  I burst with  it, into  the  unknown.  On  the other  hand,  if I  give way  I  collapse, I  am crushed, again into the unknown.  Aren't  the two things in the end the same, my victory and  my defeat both illusory?"
Isaac's  "breakdown" leads to a similar split in his father-a  division within himself and a retreat  from  his fellow man, witnessed climactically  in the slaying. Ever since Isaac's  heroism  "there  have been two voices" in  Abraham: "all  the time  while one  voice  rejoices  the  other  is whispering.  What  is wrong,  then?" Abraham's dissolution appears  in his walking:  "Now  Abraham's feet seemed to take a long  time  to  reach  the ground.  Instead  of air  he walked  through  some heavily resistant  material  to  which  the  ground  was not  very firmly anchored." The  movement  contrasts  with  Isaac's ideas "so grimly anchored  to the ground." The  separation  also manifests  itself in long silences, a  wandering  mind  "as  the English phrases skipped by," and in vision: "He  did not even know what he him­ self really looked like any more. He had only a feeling of face. Here  his arm lay in front of him loosely on the table, his fingers drumming,  a thing apart from him. He  had  only  a  feeling  of  arm,  a  throbbing  feeling of  two  aching  arms.  The threaded  violin pierced  in and  out,  tied  him to the  table,  bound  him  to Ruth,  looped through  the room.... Where was the whole man, Abraham?" The  physi­ cal dissection at once  prepares  for Laiah's  sacrifice and  recalls Isaac's  imprison­ ment  in the sphere as Abraham attempts  to retrieve and  reintegrate  the severed parts of his ego:  "It was with an effort, with the deliberate  movement  of all his body, that  he restored the feeling of the whole outline of his physical self." Isaac's reflecting sphere  reappears during  Abraham's  argument   with  Ruth   which  ac­ celerates the schizoid  propensities:  "He  had  come, begging to know, to under­ stand, and suddenly a mirror  had been flipped up in his face and  he himself stood revealed as he was to another -a stranger,  an enemy, an egoist." Through  this looking-glass Ruth's words cut  additional  gaps in the old man's  life:  "It was as though  another  vital part  had  been slashed away from him, and  he was all con­ torted,  trying to hold his wounded  members in place and at the same time trying to fend off with his own fury the fury that threatened  to dismember  him entirely."
Abraham  emerges from  the violence of this argument,  no longer in control of his  actions,  thoughts,   and   words.  "As  though  invisibly  propelled,  he  headed through  the  hot  summer  air,  unaware  of direction,  scarcely aware  even of the piston  movement  of  his  legs,  and  totally  unaware   that   he  was  speaking  his thoughts  aloud  to the  night  air  around  him."  In  this state  he  reaches  Laiah's

34

THE  SACRIFICE

apartment where his thoughts,  words, and  actions are  completely divorced  from the present reality; he is conscious of a special awareness, "of a reaching  out of his senses. Sensations impinged  on him sharply and separately."  Laiah  is apart  from him  just as his actions  and  parts  of his body  are  removed  from  him.  All  the nerves of his body are  drawn  to his hand.  "But  this seemed to  be taking  place apart  from him." The systolic and diastolic rhythm that locked Isaac in his sphere overtakes  Abraham: "It was as though  he were seized up  by something  within himself, by a strong  hand  that  gripped  his insides tightly,  then  released  them, gripped  and  released and  gripped  them again."  Leah's  whisper, "like  one,"  and the "other  part"  of Abraham  recall his two voices and contrast  with  the ultimate unification  of hands  between  him  and  Moses. Abraham's mind  "zigzags"  back and forth from past to present while he is glued to the breadcrumbs and to Laiah's body heat.  The  contradictory, fragmenting  forces within  Abraham are  sympto­ matic of his need to be both creator  and destroyer.
After all this disintegration,  Avrom and  Moses are  united  in  a  reconciliation of vision and  action  that  invokes the Shakespearean  identification  of lover, fool, poet, and  madman: "one  hand,  the hand  of a murderer,  hero, artist,  the  hand of a man."  Their  hands, symbols of action, unite with the vision. "His  eyes, fasci­ nated, saw that  the hands were not really different.... It was as though  he stood suddenly  within  the  threshold  of a  different  kind  of understanding,  no  longer crouching  behind  locked doors, but standing  upright." Moses' narrow  mode  of perception  will henceforth  be widened to encompass his future  as an adult.
To answer the questions of Abraham's  culpability and  who controls the move­
ments and  visions of the characters  in The  Sacrifice, one must examine  the prob­ lem of free will and  determinism.  Abraham's  spontaneous  decision to stop at  the unknown  city demonstrates  the strength  of his will. "The  thought  took  hold  in his mind like a command.... He must act now." He is "fixed in his determina­ tion" as he "wills" the cramp out of his body; he feels "excited  at  making a posi­ tive gesture in the ordering of his fate." Though  he retains the strength  of a young man, deterministic  forces work against him:  "What did it  matter  to destiny, the age of a man?  A God who could pluck the fruit  of a  man's  desire when it was scarcely ripe and  strangle  such seed as could have  uplifted the  human  race did not think in terms of days and years." And when  Abraham  finds employment  at Polsky's, Mrs. Plopler exclaims, "As though it were fated!" Yet if the first chapter  begins with a declaration  of Abraham's  free will, it ends on a deterministic  note: "After  all these sorrows, God had  chosen to set him and  his family down  in this strange  city to await  what  further  He had  in store for them,"  and  on the  train "It  was as though  the wheels below had  taken control of our lives." In  place of the earlier "Enough!" the chapter  closes with the more resigned "Very  well," the same words of acquiescence uttered  by the Biblical Abraham  when asked by God to sacrifice Isaac.

35

THE SACRIFICE

The  lives and  deaths  of Abraham's sons appear  predestined, for  Moses was a singer and Jacob  a thinker  almost from birth;  as for their  premature deaths, "In the end  I told  myself that  God  knew best whom to take and  whom  to leave. It was not for me to argue His decisions.... It was meant to be." Contrasting with his Job-like acceptance  of suffering is his joy for life and  birth, his celebration  of Ruth's  "miraculous" pregnancy-"he felt at home with miracles." Determinism at birth  heightens with the  parallel anouncement  of the birth  of Chaim's grand­ son: "It  was strange,  and  he and Chaim often discussed it, how all had happened  almost as though  they had  planned  it. It  was meant  to be, there  was  no doubt about  it. Looking at the child, Abraham  could not recall a time when  his grand­  son had  not been there, implicit in his life." And  just as Abraham sought  to de­ termine the future of his sons through signs, so he attempts  to augur his grandson's  life; ultimately, however, God controls the fate of his dying wife and  newly-born grandson: "Did she not deserve a few more years at least to see the child grow up, to see whatever  it was that  He, the  Lord -and  Abraham  did  not  presume  to prognosticate -at  least  to catch  a  glimpse of what  He  had  in store  for  their house?" Abraham's fatalism and God's will are at work in Isaac's  death: "It was as though  he were walking into a picture  that  had  hung on his wall all his life, waiting for him."  Even Laiah's  presence in her doorway prior to her death  is "as though  this had  been promised or foreseen." Finally Abraham  understands  that he must subserve God's will instead of deifying himself:  "I was not content  to be, as He willed it,"  and  he almost accuses  himself of deicide. Moses visits him  on Yom Kippur  "when  our fates are sealed" and inherits his grandfather's religious determinism: "He  felt as though all along he had known it would have to be."


NOTE

1 From the examples which I have chosen it is evident that Wiseman overdoes the "as though" construction. The only possible defence of this repeated simile is that she tries to portray the heuristic immigrant experience by constantly comparing it to another set of experiences to suggest the experimental, unsettled life of the newly arrived.

THE FICTION
OF SINCLAIR ROSS




Gail Bowen






AT THE   END OF   SINCLAffi Ross'  late>t novd,  Sawbones Memorial  (1974), Doc Hunter, the sawbones of the  novel's title, and  the  Rev­ erend Grimble, in this instance at least a decidedly by-the-Book Christian, engage in an easy but  earnest  discussion of metaphysics. Doc, forty-five years a  general practitioner  in a prairie town, speculates that  perhaps man is a kind of  error, the product  of a  young  "still  learning"  God  who  when  "He   realized  we  weren't working out, that something  had gone wrong, [might  have]  gone off  somewhere to try again" and "just left us to run down, tire out, blow ourselves up."
Predictably,  Grimble  is shocked at Doc's heresy, but  he is also baffled, baffled that  a doctor  who is himself so intimately  concerned  with  life, could see man's history as being without  progress, without  point. He  tries to catch  Doc out  by reducing  his argument to its lowest common  denominator: "Like  the  ants,  you mean,  no progress, the same  repetition -oh  no." But  Doc is adamant:  "Like the ants and  the flies and  the crows-doctors trying to heal bodies, priests and preachers  trying  to  heal  souls -all  miracles, all  going  nowhere.  Creation  one day, destruction  the  next-a  sort  of game -like turning  out  jugs and  bowls just to be able to have the fun of smashing them."
When  we look at the fiction of Sinclair Ross, it seems that  Doc's vision is the reality and that the Reverend  Grimble's God, the "Supreme Intelligence ... Per­ fect and Eternal," is the child's fairy tale. Ross' first writing, his short stories, col­ lected  as The   Lamp  at  Noon  and  Other  Stories, grows out  of  the  hailed-out,  droughted-out, rusted-out  Saskatchewan  of the depression,  a  world in  which it must indeed  have seemed that  if there was a God, He was at  best indifferent  to His creation and at worst active in His desire to destroy it. The prairie of the short stories is seemingly, to use Doc Hunter's image, the world of  "the  Great  Sow that eats her own farrow.... The Great  Mother and the Evil Mother,  maybe one and the same, creating life only to turn  and destroy it."
With his novels, Ross moves from the farms of the depression to "civilization," but his concern is still with the  problem that  absorbed  him in the short  stories:

37

SINCLAIR ROSS

how can  man,  an  imperfect  being, live in  a  universe which  is seemingly  with­ out ordering  principles or a caring  God? The  characters  of Ross' novels are not devilled by the  malignant   prairie,  but  they are devilled nonetheless.  Spared  the farmer's  agonized confrontation with the unknowable land,  the men  and  women of Ross' novels must confront  instead the agonized demands of their unknowable selves. Spared  the  physical  isolation  of  the  prairie  farm  family,  the  men  and women of Ross' novels must  face the final terror  that  comes  when  man  realizes that, even in community,  he is alone.
Thus in As For Me and My  House ( rg.p ), Mrs. Bentley, safe in her parsonage, spinning out her tin of meat with lettuce and hard-boiled eggs, can, upon hearing her husband's  infidelity, know the knife-plunge-into-flesh agony that  Martha  ex­ periences in "A  Field of Wheat" when the hail batters her home and  leaves  her family without  "so much as an onion or potato" for winter. And the gifted Philip Bentley, dully subsumed  in saving souls for a God in whom  he does not  believe, can know the spiritual  numbness that  the farmer, Will, in "Not  By Rain Alone," knows when every spring  he must once again gather up all the rocks heaved out by "the  bitch-like earth" before he can plant the crop that,  in all likelihood, will produce a flawed harvest. With Ross' novels, we see, then, that there is nothing in "civilization" which increases man's  capability of dealing with a life in which we live, as Doc Hunter says, "strictly  on our  own -sink  or  swim in  our  infested, mud-bottomed, little Here and  Now."
There  seems little to rejoice about  in Ross' world, but  for all the  hopelessness
of their condition,  Ross' men and  women are rarely without  hope for long. In a universe which is indifferent  to their fate, Ross' characters are remarkable  for the energy and  courage  which they bring to their attempts  to make their lives make sense.
Simply put, Ross' people have backbone. Confronted  with a hail-battered field, a broken marriage,  a pair of purebred  horses that  balk, or a love affair  that  was doomed  before it began,  the men and  women of Ross' fiction most often simply pick up the pieces and  begin again. There  is something  heroic in their efforts to give their lives value and  importance, and it is because of their  heroism that  we come from  Ross, not with  a sense of defeat, but with a feeling of pride in what man is and with a modified hope for what he may become.
In The  Lamp  at Noon  and Other  Stories, Ross sets up the tension which will
inform  much  of his fiction:  the tension between a world which is inhospitable  to illusion and the need for illusion in an inhospitable world. The  prairie farm of the dirty  thirties  offered little  place for illusion;  the dust was too real,  the  bills too large, the drought  too long. Yet when we look at the men, women and  children of Ross' stories we see that  illusion, the  belief in something  better,  offered the only way out of the back-breaking, spirit-numbing  reality of depression Saskatche­ wan.

SINCLAIR ROSS

We can  best approach an  understanding of what  Ross is saying  about the  need for  illusion  in  men's  lives by looking  at  the  role illusion  plays in  "The Lamp at Noon." Its  protagonists, Paul  and  Ellen, have spent  their  short  married life pitted against  the same enemy,  the "betraying prairie." Yet Paul  has survived and some­ how been strengthened by his struggle,  and  Ellen  has been  beaten. At  the core of the story is the question  of why confrontation with  the same  destructive force ful­ fils "the inmost  and  essential  nature" of one  person  and   drives  another person into  "a  nervous  dread  of what   [is]  still to come."  As Paul  comes  to  realize,  the answer  to this question  of survival  lies in  man's  ability  to  dream:

There  was so much he planned.  And so vivid was the future  of his planning,  so real and constant, that often the actual  present was but half-felt,  but half-endured. Its  difficulties were  lessened  by a confidence  in  what  lay  beyond  them  ... She looked forward  to no future.  She had  no faith or dream  with  which  to make  the dust and poverty less real. He understood  suddenly.

In  Ross' fiction,  then,  illusion  is first a weapon  against  being  defeated by reality, but  as Paul  describes  his dream of the future, we see that  illusion  offers  the  Ross hero  more  than  a mere  buffer  against  pitiless truth:

He would plant  clover and  alfalfa,  breed cattle, acre by acre  and  year by year restore to his land its fibre and  fertility. That  was something to work for, a way to prove himself. It  was ruthless wind, blackening  the sky with  his earth,  but  it was not his master. Out of his land it had made a wilderness. He now, out of the wilder­ ness, would make a farm and  home again.




IN A  WORLD IN  WHICH  MAN  IS  DENIED his Christian identity as a child  of God  and  must  instead  accept  himself  as a  kind  of aborted  experi­ ment,  it  is critical  that  man, himself,  make  some sense of  his existence. As Paul  realizes,  his belief that  "out  of the  wilderness  he would  make  a  farm  and  home again" gives him a way of proving  himself. Paul's  dream  is his assertion  to an  in­ different universe  that  as a man  he has value. That is why, when  confronted with proof absolute  that  his dream is folly, he refuses to abandon it. When, after  three  days of windstorm, Paul  sees his land,  the  reality of his situation is apparent:

before the utter  waste confronting  him, he sickened and stood cold. Suddenly,  like the fields he was naked. Everything that had sheathed him a little from the realities of existence; vision and purpose, faith in the land, in the future, in himself-it was all rent now, stripped away.

But  Paul  knows  that  to  accept as irreversible  the  "utter waste"  his  lands   have become  is to  accept  the  fact  that   henceforth there  will be  nothing for  him  but the  "realities of existence." As he must,  he refuses to give in.

39

SINCLAIR ROSS

Repeatedly  in Ross' fiction, we see characters  who, like Paul,  are confronted with the folly of their dreams,  but  who, again like Paul, refuse to accept the fact that their dreams have betrayed  them. Because in Ross' world, the dream is, most often, not an exit from reality for the weak, but a statement  of faith  in the mean­ ing of life by the strong,  the Ross hero must hold fast to his dream. The dream is his only assurance of existence.
For  the  adults  of the stories, the  dream  is pitifully grounded  in  reality. The men dream  the simple dream  of "one  good year";  the women long for a better future  for  their  children  and  a few nice things for  the  house. The  dreams  are small, but  it is not  the  content  of the dream  that  is important; it is the fact  of being able to dream.  It is towards  this knowledge that  Martha, the farm  wife of "A Field of Wheat" moves.
When  the  new  wheat,  the  "freshening  promise"  of  Martha's life, is beaten down by "an  act of God,"  she is furious, and  her fury is fanned  by knowledge of her own impotence,  "how  rebel against a summer storm, how find the throat  of a cloud?"  But  as Martha sees her  husband  sobbing  against  his horse, she  per­ ceives what it means  when  a man  accepts the fact  that  he has been bested  by a malevolent  universe. In  her determination  that she will not let John  be defeated, Martha finds a  partial  answer  for  the  question,  "how  rebel  against  a  summer storm":

Martha hurried inside.  She started the fire again,  then  nailed  a blanket  over  the broken  window  and  lit  the  big  brass  parlour lamp-the  only  one  the  storm  had spared  ... John would  need  a good supper  tonight. The  biscuits were water-soaked, but  she still  had  the  peas.  He  liked  peas. Lucky  that  they  had  picked  them  when they did. This  winter they wouldn't have so much  as an onion  or potato.

"How  stand  up  to  an  all-powerful  universe?" By refusing  to  be  beaten.  By picking  up  the  dream.  In  the  simple  act  of getting  the  dinner  ready,  Martha makes her statement  of faith  in man's  ability to exist with dignity in a  meaning­ less universe.
If the dreams  of the  adults  in The  Lamp  At  Noon and  Other  Stories are all statements  of faith  in a better  future,  the dreams  of the children  are statements of faith  in a better  world.  Faced  with a world which is harsh  in its demands  on energy and spirit, these children  tenaciously cling to any scrap of evidence that somewhere  there is a world,  not of crops, but  of beauty,  not of practicality,  but of magic.
In "Circus  in Town," eleven-year-old Jenny is given a piece of a poster adver­ tising a circus. In  Jenny's  joy at  this mutilated  proof that  somewhere  there is a life quite  different from  that  of the depression farm,  we see again  how deep the need for "something  other"  is in Ross' world:

SINCLAIR ROSS

The  bit  of poster  had  spun  a  new world  before her,  excited  her,  given  wild, soaring impetus  to her imagination; and  now, without  in  the least understanding herself, she wanted  the excitement and  the soaring, even though  it might stab and rack her, rather  than the barren satisfaction of believing that in life there was noth­ ing better, nothing more vivid or dramatic,  than her own stableyard.

Jenny's family  respond  to  her  dream  with  anger,  with  sorrow  and  with  pity, but Jenny is stubborn in her refusal to give up that  "sudden dilation of life within her"  that   her  circus  poster  has  brought. In  her  instinctive  knowledge that   she must guard her dream  from  the  practical world, we see that  awareness of the perishability of the  dream   which  we will see in  much  of Ross'  fiction.  It  is this awareness  that  makes  Whir of Gold's  Sonny  McAlpine see  in  Mad, his  loving emissary  from  a  practical world,  an  enemy  who  can  destroy  his  dream of  self. And  it is this awareness  that  makes Jenny see in her  practical and  loving  mother a force which  can destroy  a self Jenny  does not yet know.

she was afraid of her mother tonight. Afraid because all at once she felt defenceless, perishable. This  sudden  dilation  of life was like a bubble  blown vast and  fragile. In time it might subside, slowly, safely, or it might even remain  full-blown, gradu­ ally strengthening itself, gradually  building up the filmy tissues to make its vastness durable,  but  tonight  she was afraid.  Afraid  that  before the  hack  of her  mother's voice it might burst and crumple.

Despite  her  brother's warnings that  she  will  "catch it"  if she  goes  to  the  hay­ loft  to  cherish  her  scrap  of poster,  Jenny  honours  her  dream. In  Ross'  account of the "dilation of life" Jenny experiences  because she has refused  to compromise her  need for illusion,  we have  a key which  helps us to understand  the behaviour of other  dreamers in Ross' fiction  who risk "catching it" from  a  practical world in order  to know a larger  world  and  a better  self.

Catch  it she did, but for once the threats of what would happen  next time failed to touch her. The  circus went on. All night long she wore purple  tights and  went riding Billie round and round the pasture in them. A young, fleet-footed Billie. Caparisoned  in blue and  gold and scarlet, silver bells on reins and  bridle-neck arched  proudly to the music of the band.

The  demands of practicality and  the  need  for  beauty  again  clash  head  on  when in "Cornet at  Night" young  Tom  Dickson is sent  to town  to choose a farmhand and  is drawn to Philip,  a young  man  whose slender  hands  are obviously  unsuited to farm  work.
In  Philip,  the  part  of Tom  which  hungers  for something more  than  crops  and
Sunday   musicales  in  his  mother's plushy  parlour  finds  sustenance. Philip   is  a traveller  from  a larger  world,  and  he brings  with  him  a cornet, a symbol  of that larger  world.  When  Philip  plays a march, Tom  experiences  the  "dilation of life" that  Jenny  felt through her  poster:  "this  was another march that  did  march. It

SINCLAIR ROSS

marched  us miles. It made  the feet eager and  the  heart  brave. It said  that  life was worth  the living and  bright  as morning shone ahead  to show the way."
For the assurance  that  "life  [is]  worth the living," the Ross hero will sacrifice much. To ignore the cornet  which "bright  as morning" shines ahead  to show the way to a life worth  living is to be forever a  prisoner of the  "Here and  Now." Tom's  father  senses this when  he hears the cornet.  To  Tom's  excited  "Didn't I tell you he could  play?",  Mr.  Dickson responds with anger.  Tom,  however, sees his father's  response for what it is:

It  was helplessness, though, not anger. Helplessness to escape his wheat when wheat was not enough, when something more than wheat had  just revealed itself.

Tom  cannot  decipher  his mother's  response to the cornet, but  in his attempts  to guess what she felt when she heard its "piercing,  golden" notes, Tom  comes close to explaining  the force  which  makes the Ross hero, against  all odds, follow his dream: "A harvest,  however lean, is certain  every year;  but a cornet  at  night  is golden only once."
If in The  Lamp  at Noon  and  Other  Stories, Ross speaks of the  need for the
dream in man's life, in As For Me and My  House, he begins to examine the relationship  man  should  establish between his dreams and  the reality of his life. In  As For Me  and My  House, we see that  Philip  Bentley distintegrates  because his commitment   to  his dream  has  been  niggardly  and  that   Mrs.  Bentley  dis­ integrates  because her commitment to her dream  has been overly-prodigal.
In the child Jenny's  hoarding  of her illusion against "the  hack of her mother's
voice," we see the knowledge that  dreams must be nurtured  and  kept faith  with if they are to flourish. Philip Bentley seems never to have been granted  this knowl­ edge. He  has  been  miserly in  meting  out  faith  to  his dream;  his  dream,  half­ nurtured, is slowly dying, and  Philip is dying with it.
The  life of one Ross hero is often an implicit comment on the life of another,
and  there  is an  incident  in  the  life of Whir  of  Gold's Sonny  McAlpine  which brings to light the malignancy  at the core of Philip  Bentley's life. Young Sonny, drawn  by the  beauty  and  promise of a flicker, "flashing  like a  whir  of gold, a gust of feathered  light," is seized by the desire to capture  the flicker. In his words, he wants "to  possess and  delight in, not to maim."  To capture  his flicker he uses a  gopher  trap  because  "the  trap  was all  I  had,  all  I  could  think  of."  But  in Sonny's  practical  application  of the means at hand  to come to know the illusory beauty of the flicker, the flicker and its beauty are destroyed:

half  an  hour  later  there  it  was. Head  down, suspended by the  chain,  its  legs mangled, its wings flapping feebly, ruffled and bruised. And the eye, just about level with mine, an unsparing, snake-hard little drill of hate.

In  Whir   of  Gold,  Sonny  McAlpine  comes to  realize that  to  pursue  a  shining dream with less than shining means sullies both dream and dreamer so that  neither

SINCLAIR ROSS

can ever shine again. Philip Bentley's life bears witness to the truth  of Sonny's perception.  In  his decision to enter the ministry to make his dream  of an artist's life a reality, Philip  has used a gopher  trap  to snare  a  flicker. His  dream,  like Sonny's, has been "mangled, ruffled and  bruised"  because he has not  kept faith with it. Philip  has betrayed  his dream,  and  his dream  has  repaid  him  for  this betrayal  by sapping  the  life out  of his art  and  by making  of Philip,  himself, a hollow man.
In the short stories, we saw how a man's dream  becomes his one stand  against accepting  his nothingness  in an indifferent  universe. Philip  in  ceding  his dream has also ceded his claim  to be master of his own life. Mrs. Bentley says of her husband:

And now, withdrawn, he seems to feel that the responsibility for what's ahead is no longer his. He's finished. This one, the next one, it's only Main Street anyway. And there's the strange part-he tries to be so sane and rational, yet all the time keeps on believing that  there's a will stronger than  his own  deliberately pitted
against him.

In  Ross' fiction, the fate of the betrayer of the dream  is fixed:  nothing  can ever be right for him again.  Philip  experiences a brief resurgence of life when  he sees in the boy, Steve, a Pegasus who will lift him above reality, but  as Mrs. Bentley comes to discover, you cannot  make a Pegasus of a boy or of a husband.  Steve leaves, and  Philip  becomes apathetic  and  accepting,  a spouter  of false wisdoms about  the folly of keeping yourself "keyed  up for something  beyond  yourself all the time"  and  about  the virtue  of "being  just as casual  with  life as life is with you."
But the "unflaring  leaden"  look in Philip's eyes reveals what  his betrayal  of his
dreams  has cost him. At the  novel's end, the Bentleys adopt  Philip's  illegitimate child, and  Mrs. Bentley hopes that  "for  his son's sake he will be worthy of  him­ self." The  reader  finds it difficult to share  her hope;  he is left with  a  very  real question about whether  for Philip, betrayer of his self, the miracle of a child will be, to use Doc's phrase, "another miracle going nowhere."

To  have him notice me, speak to me as if I  really mattered  in his life, after twelve years with him that's  all I want or need. It  arranges  my world for me, strengthens and quickens it, makes it immune to all other worlds.

This is Mrs. Bentley's dream. But in Ross' world, a world without ordering principles, peopled by imperfect  beings, it is the cruelest kind of folly to premise your existence upon the existence of another  person. To  her dream,  Mrs. Bentley has sacrificed music,  the  dream  of her  young  womanhood.   Most  damagingly, Mrs. Bentley has yielded the very essence of her self to her struggle  to "possess" Philip, to "absorb  his life into hers." She has made her dream  of Philip  her only refuge against acceptance of the fact that "my day is finished ... the rest has but

43

SINCLAIR ROSS

little meaning."  After twelve years, Mrs. Bentley knows her dream  of Philip  can never be realized, but like Paul in "The  Lamp at Noon," Mrs. Bentley senses that to accept the devastation  of her dream is to accept the end of her life. She persists:

In the darkness, perhaps I see clearly, but I don't admit it. Don't dare admit it. I must still keep on reaching out, trying to possess him, trying to make myself matter. I must, for I've left myself nothing else. I haven't been like him. I've reserved no retreat, no world of my own. I've whittled myself hollow that I might enclose and hold him, and when he shakes me off I'm  just a shell.

Driven  by her dream  of possessing Philip, Mrs. Bentley, like Philip  himself, uses a gopher  trap  to snare a whir of gold. She desperately attempts  to bind  Philip to her with the cozy bonds of domesticity, but like other Ross characters, Mrs. Bent­ ley comes to  the  realization  that  illusion  cannot  be trapped   and  that  a  cruel attempt  to capture  a  dream  can  forever  alter  both  dream  and  dreamer.  When Steve leaves, it seems finally that  Mrs. Bentley has trapped  her  "whir  of gold." Philip,  beaten,  seems at  last  ready  to  take  his place in  her  world.  But  in  the "leaden  look of resignation"  in  Philip's  eyes, Mrs. Bentley  sees the  truth: cap­ tured,  her quarry  seems not  to  have  been worth  the  hunt.  She  has  triumphed, but to what end? Her  whir of gold is an embittered shell, and  she, herself, is "a fungus or parasite whose life depends  upon his."
We leave Mrs.  Bentley as we leave Philip,  unconvinced  that  there  has  been enough  change.  In  her  clinging  to Judith's baby, whom she also names  Philip, we wonder if Mrs. Bentley is starting  afresh to make sense of her life through  the life of another  person. Like the old dream of Philip, the new dream  of the child seems too fragile to withstand  the malevolent cycle of "creation  one day, destruc­ tion the next."



IN The  Well  ( 1958), Ross examines the paradox  of illusion: although  illusion  is necessary for  existence in  a  hostile world,  illusion  can,  in cutting  you off from your own humanity  and from the humanity of others, sepa­ rate you from the only forces that  make the world less hostile.
Chris Rowe, the hero of The  Well, comes out of a world which, like depression Saskatchewan,  seems to have  been created  to destroy the human  spirit.  Chris is the  product  of Boyle Street,  Montreal. He  is young. He is tough.  He  is, in  his own mind at least, without  illusion about  the world, but for all his pride in  him­ self as a realist, Chris is a prisoner of his illusion of himself.
To survive in the Boyle Street gang, Chris has crafted himself an illusory Chris Rowe, whose credo is "to take and never be taken" and to trust no one. In Chris' relentless efforts to maintain  his idea of himself, we see the same drive to make sense of his existence that  we have seen in other  Ross heroes. All of Ross' pro-


44

SINCLAIR ROSS

tagonists are vulnerable,  but even among the vulnerable Ross heroes, Chris Rowe is peculiarly fragile. Ross says of him:

His  needs were  urgent: to stand  out  and  shine,  to be liked,  looked  up  to-and because  his sense of validity  and  purpose  was involved,  it was as necessary  to satisfy them,  as much  a duty  to himself as to satisfy his hunger.

Like Narcissus, Chris finds his only assurance of existence in the reflected  image of himself. He constantly seeks out  mirrors to make certain  that  his beauty,  and hence  his self-esteem, are intact.  His treatment  of people is marked  by his need to find reflected in them an image of his own worth. But as Ross notes, narcissism carries its own peril:  "Because he existed only in the reflections [the  gang]  gave back, he was at their mercy, even while he went among them, assured and slickly superior." Moreover,  Chris'  narcissism has  sapped  his  will. He  has  killed  (or perhaps  killed)  a man because he found insupportable  the image of an un-armed Chris Rowe staging a hold-up.  Remote from the Boyle Street  gang,  Chris  is still at the mercy of his self-crafted image as a man  without  decency or humanity.
This is Chris Rowe as he comes, on the run from the law, to live on the  pros­ perous farm of Larson, an old farmer  who is himself a prisoner of his dream of a happier   time,  and  of  Sylvia,  Larson's  young  wife,  who  has  married   Larson because, after  a childhood  of fantasies about  the "slicked up  and  smooth" men in the  Eaton's  catalogue,  she has known too many slicked up  and  smooth  men.
The  Well  is a seriously flawed  novel. It  is, by turns,  trite  and  melodramatic,
but despite its flaws, The  Well  is important  to the student  of Ross because in it Ross sets forth some concrete ways in which men can give value and  importance to their lives.
In  his stay with the  Larsons, marked  as it is by lust and  violence, Chris  dis­ covers the falseness of his old dream  of self, and  he finds a self he can  live with. As if often the case in Ross' fiction, Chris finds his better self through  his relation­ ship with horses. The  old work-horse, Ned, teaches Chris "a  kind of  respect"  for those who have  worked hard  in  adversity and  who, against  all  odds, have  sur­ vived. Fanny,  the matronly  mare,  always bloated with foal, always friendly,  has "a serenity and  fulfilment"  that  disturbs Chris.
In  his reluctant  admiration for the "old  values" of Larson's  stable,  Chris  dis­ covers that  there is a better world than Boyle Street;  most significantly, he begins to  perceive that  there  is a  part  of himself that  is better  than  anything  in  the Boyle Street  Chris  Rowe. When  Fanny  has her  colt, Chris,  the  fastidious boy trapped  in his mirror image, is re-born into Chris, a man who is no longer afraid to sully himself in  the  cause  of another.  "Repelled,"  "outraged" by  the  birth process, Chris helps Fanny deliver because "his sense of  responsibility pressed on him."  Slavish subservience  to  his idea  of  himself has  made  Chris  a  prisoner;  acceptance  of responsibility makes him a free man.

45

SINCLAIR ROSS

The  death  blow is dealt  to the  Boyle Street  Chris  Rowe  when Sylvia Larson thrusts  a gun  into  his hand  and  demands  that  he shoot  her  husband.  The  old Chris would have  pulled  the trigger, not because he wished Larson's  death,  but because his idea  of self could not  have survived  the thought  he had  acted  with "cowardice." But the new Chris docs not shoot, and  with his "cowardice" comes release;  "He  was free -there  was room  for  nothing  else. He  had  been  living under  a spell-of  what  he was, always had  been, always must  be, a doom  of Boyle Street cheapness and frustration-and now the spell was broken."
With Whir of Gold  (I 970), Ross returns to a study of the need for the dream in man's life and of the need for integrity in pursuing that dream. Its protagonists, Sonny, the hero of Ross' short story "The  Outlaw," now twenty-four  years old, and  Mad,  a thirtyish  Maritimes  blonde who has too often  loved not  wisely but well, arc dreamers. Sonny wants the world of music, "a clean, brave, honest world, where  men and  clarinets  receive their  due."  Mad  wants  "a  right  one,"  a  man who will give her again  that  feeling about the rightness of life that she felt when, at sixteen, she fell in love with  a man  who was everything  she dreamed  a man would be.
Like other  Ross protagonists,  Sonny and  Mad  are  committed  body  and  soul
to recapturing that "dilation of life" they sensed once when they touched the better world of their  dreams.  The  tension of the novel grows out  of the  fact  that  the dreams  of Sonny  and  Mad  arc  mutually  exclusive. Sonny  wants  music:   Mad wants Sonny. Their  situation  is, in short, much  like the situation  Philip  Bentley and  his wife faced twelve years before they came to Horizon.
No two women  could  be more dissimilar than  Mrs. Bentley and  the slightly
blowsy, cheerful, "take  it on the chin" Mad.  Yet these two women arc driven  by the same force:  the need to absorb another  person into their  lives to make sense of their own existence. In Sonny, we have a character  much like Philip before the fall,  unswerving  in  his commitment to  his dream  and  capable  of displaying  a degree of emotional ruthlessness towards those who stand in the way of his dream.
I have suggested that  the life of one Ross character  can often shed light on the life of another.  The  flaw of Whir of Gold  lies in the fact  that  we really cannot make much sense of its hero's  behaviour  unless we have read  much  of Ross' fic­ tion. Wc know that  Sonny is committed  to his dream  of playing the clarinet, and we know that  he feels his life will be soured  and  diminished  if he  compromises with his dream,  but  we know  rather  than  feel this. Our  sympathies arc not with Sonny's dream  of having  his own band;  they arc  with Mad's small  dream  of a clean well-lighted place and  "a  right one."
For the reader  who comes to Whir of Gold  with  the memory of the  Bcntlcys fresh, Sonny's refusal to crawl into Mad's safe and loving world is both clean and courageous. Knowing  what  compromise has cost Philip  Bentley and  the woman who wanted  the compromise, this reader  judges Sonny's repeated  rebuffs of Mad

SINCLAIR ROSS

necessary and  humane.  But Sonny's instinct for survival strikes a different  chord in the heart of the reader who is less concerned with metaphysical  ends than  with humanitarian means. Whir  of Gold fails, I think, because it leaves us with a very real question about  the price of survival in the mud-bottomed Here and  Now.
There  is a good feeling about  Sawbones Memorial. To this point, Ross' fiction is characterized  by a certain  tension. His heroes, young, introspective,  unsure, are engaged  in what,  for them,  is a life and  death  struggle  to  bring  some meaning to their own existence. They  must operate  in a world which  they see at  best as indifferent,  at  worst as hostile, to their  efforts. The  very nature  of their  search demands  that  they be loners. They  are all, as Philip  Bentley would say, "keyed up for something else." They  are all, to paraphrase  Sonny's  piano  teacher,  Miss Whittle, engaged in the fishes' struggle to walk on land.
In nature  and in tone, Sawbones is quite different from Ross' questing  fiction. It  is entirely  dialogue;   hence  there  is no  place  for  the  brooding  introspection which marks Ross' other works. And the nominal hero of Sawbones is a seventy­ five-year-old man  who, after  years of general  practice  in a small town, is saying good-bye to life as he has known it. The  novel is not  concerned  with  the search for self-realization which is so much  a part  of Ross' other  fiction.  Doc  Hunter's dreams  have  been dreamed  long before Sawbones opens. If ever  he found  that "dilation  of life" which is the reason for being for so many of Ross' characters,  we do not know it. If ever he lusted for a whir of gold, the lust has long since turned  to ashes. Alone of Ross' protagonists, Doc Hunter  has found his place in the mud­ bottomed  Here  and  Now and  accepted  it. It  is his  acceptance,  I think,  which gives the novel its sense of peace.
I believe the change in form, in hero and in tone argues that,  in Sawbones, Ross
is doing something  quite  different  from what  he has done  in his other  fiction. I think  that  in  Sawbones  Memorial, Ross has stopped  fighting  life and  come  to terms with it.
To this point, the outstanding  characteristic of Ross' people is their inability or
refusal to accept  half-measure  from  life; in Sawbones,  we see men  and  women who have had to accept  half-measure  and  who, while they have  not triumphed, have not disintegrated.  In the townspeople of Upward, there are those who have made a success of life and there are those who have failed, but in contradistinction to Ross' other  fiction, the  dividing  line between success and  failure  is not  that between those who have  been faithful  to their dream  and  those who have  com­ promised with it. The heroes of Sawbones are people who have worked at bringing their existence into line with what  they believe life should  be, but  who have also come to accept the fact that  their work will have limited results. They are heroes, not because they survive, but because they survive with grace.
Ida  Robinson, pioneer  farm  wife, is one of these heroes. Doc  Hunter  says of
Ida:  "she stood out because she had her own standards, her own laws. She didn't

47

SINCLAIR ROSS

just survive,  she  came  through   with  her  head  up,  telling  a  joke on  herself." Appalled at the treelessness of the prairie when she arrives as a bride from Ontario, Ida  plants hundreds  of Manitoba maples. When they die, Ida  plans caraganas,  a sure thing in Saskatchewan.
This  cheerful  acceptance  of  "the  way  it  is" also characterizes   Ida's  grand­ daughter-in-law. Caroline  Gillespie, an English war-bride, wastes no time in lan­ guishing  for  the  old  country.  She  becomes an  Upward   "booster," standing  up and criticizing because "I want this to be a better town." As with  Ida,  Caroline's openness to life is reflected  in  her  openness to the  botanical  possibilities of her adopted  home. At Doc's farewell party, someone remarks upon the beauty of the ivy in the  picture  of Caroline  at  home in England.  Caroline  says:  "yes, the ivy is at least a hundred  years old, but  there's something too to be said for growing geraniums  and  begonias in pots."
When we look at the people of Sawbones, we see that  those who have brought value and  importance to their  lives are  those who, like Caroline,  have  seen the worth  of "growing  geraniums  and  begonias in pots." The  heroes of Upward  are the people like Sara  and Dune Gillespie who have not only accepted  but also welcomed life as it has come to them.
Pre-eminently,  of course, the hero of Sawbones Memorial is the Sawbones him­ self, Doc Hunter, "a salt and  aspirin man"  who, by his own account,  has "never done anything  but deliver babies and set a few broken bones." But if  Ross has a message in his latest novel, it can  be found  in what  this deliverer  of  babies and setter of broken bones finally has to say to the Reverend Grimble about the business of being alive. Grimble  tries to dismiss what he sees as the Doc's dark vision about man's existence:

"If you were so convinced the  prospect was so bleak, that  we were all just so many discards, doomed, you couldn't have carried on, couldn't have  cared."
"Bleak? Well,  yes and  no. Discards,  perhaps-nobody up  there  even  aware  of us, much  less concerned about  our  fate,  nothing working  for  us but  a few  traces of intelligence, maybe  a little  dust  and  sweat rubbed  off from  the original contact. But just  supposing in  spite  of everything we could  hang  on  a  while,  learn  to  use the intelligence, spread  it round-"

" ... just supposing in spite of everything ... " -not a bad epigraph  for the fic­ tion of Sinclair  Ross, a man  who seems at last to have come to terms  with  the mud-bottomed  Here and  Now.

IN THE G)lRDEN



Water from  the hose fills my sons pool
He stands  by, belly distended

From  the driveway issue
elderly  ladies  who ask in brogue if I question Gods  purpose,
if my future is secure  They refuse lawnchairs preferring to stand, to discomfit, and  answer  my questions
in dogma
with  whatever is next on their  woolly tapes

I would like to turn
the garden hose on their ankles, turn them  a nutty  brown

In  the kitchen
my wife resumes  smoking,
once again  mistakes  soda  for tonic, will someday  chop  her fingers
for  carrots, notice  no difference in pain

As the ladies retreat,
a mediterranean gentleman advances, offers two years free  furnace insurance
if I will use his fuel
His eyebrows meet,  he is too familiar

Behind  the garage I hide in tomatoes
My son, naked  as onions, hides by my leg
 


J.D. Carpenter



















































49

WORD  AND FACT
Laurence and the Problem  of Language



Theo Quayle Dombrowski


"T
JHEN, MERCIFULLY, THE  WORD   WAS   REVEALED TO   HER." After the momentary  loss of her normally astonishing ability  to speak-volubly, fluently, intoxicatingly-the market  woman of "A Gourdful  of Glory"  (in The Tomorrow  Tamer) regains her powers. Morag, novelist, protagonist  of Margaret Laurence's  last book, The  Diviners, is not so lucky: "The  gift, or portion of grace, or  whatever  it  was, was finally  withdrawn  to be given  to someone  else." This utterance  from  the  conclusion  of this work clearly suggests that  the  Word  has been withdrawn, as indeed,  Laurence  herself has claimed about  her own writing career.  Mammii  Ama,  the  protagonist  of  the  Mrican  short  story,  embodies  a facility in  many  ways like that  of Morag:   in fact,  Morag's  direct  and  detailed examination  of her gift and  her final recognition of its loss is merely the fullest treatment of a concern central  to much of Laurence's fiction.
In many associated ways, Laurence  repeatedly questions the nature of the word.
Without  revealing  a consistent  philosophy of speech as it formalizes or, indeed, affects reality, she nevertheless reveals an often impressive power to scrutinize the nature of language and communication -and usually without the sententiousness of cliched thinking that  this somewhat fashionable topic often attracts.1 Essentially the matter  has two aspects, the words of human interchange  and the words of imaginative  vision, but, as Laurence  makes clear in The  Diviners, the two aspects are often closely allied. In terms of human relationships-for she fulfils the tradi­ tional  role of the female  novelist in making  that  her chief concern -Laurence repeatedly concerns herself with characters  frantic to explain, often frustrated be­ cause they cannot  find  adequate words, because some acts  transcend  words, or because words themselves are untrustworthy.  Always conscious of the tenuous and tricky relationship  between  words and  fact, she presents  protagonists for  whom speech is beyond conscious control, either because they lose the ability to articulate or  because  their  own  inner  voices take over, overwhelming  their  intentions.  In terms  of the  creative  property  of  words  themselves, Laurence  shows words  to achieve  almost  talismanic  significance;  names,  phrases,  songs,  legends  achieve potent imaginative  force in shaping reality for the Laurence  protagonist.

50

LAURENCE & LANGUAGE

"Mac-let  me explain,"  Stacey MacAindra  of The  Fire-Dwellers thinks fre­ quently. "Nick?  Listen-," her sister, Rachel Cameron,  of A ]est of God, thinks with equal  frequency.  It  is more  than  family  relationship  that  makes  the  two women similar:   Laurence's  characters  are  often  desperate  with  the  burden   to "explain," to be what Stacey ironically calls "Explainer  of the Year."  "[I]f you would allow me to explain,"  implores  Nathaniel  Amegbe  of This  Side  jordan; "I had to tell him, make him see," recalls the narrator  of A Bird in the House; "Bram, listen-," thinks Hagar  in The Stone Angel; "I've  got to tell someone," echoes Morag  of The  Diviners; "I felt ... the old need to explain,"  says Violet Nedden of "The  Rain  Child" in The Tomorrow Tamer. The  basis of the need is often obvious enough:  "Do  you good to tell it," says Murray  Lees of The  Stone Angel, thereby  prompting  Hagar's grimly wry observation that  he is treating  the need to speak "As though  it were worms, to be purged."  No doubt  there is much truth  in such a statement.  Many  characters simply require  a confidant: "I have to speak aloud to someone. I have to," says Rachel, searching  for a break  in her silent isolation in order  to extend  the tentative  freedom  she has gained  through her love affair. "And if [Mac]  doesn't speak of [his problems]  to some extent, one of these days he'll crack  up,"  Stacey likewise says. But Violet  Nedden  offers an explanation more important to Laurence's general treatment  of characters  needing to explain:  "We  are all so anxious that  people should not think  us different.  See, we say, I  am  not  peculiar-wait until  I  tell you how it  was with  me."  This character's  analysis is partly accurate: to explain, Laurence suggests, is to be able to accept oneself. More important, it is to be accepted.  Confronted  by the  com­ plexity of existence, confused and  guilt-ridden  by their own behaviour,  many  of Laurence's  characters  (especially Stacey, Hagar,  and  Rachel)   remain  convinced that  if they can  but  explain  themselves-that is, make  themselves  known,  not necessarily  justify themselves -the  terrible  spectres  of solitude  and  confusion will be exorcised. "I'd had  many things to say to him, so many  things  to put  to rights," recalls Hagar  of her husband's  unexpected  death. Rachel, likewise, feels an  urgent  need  to  tell  Nick everything  about  herself,  particularly   because  his understanding  will transcend the inherent difficulties of  words:  "There isn't much to say about  myself, nothing  that  can be spoken. And  yet ... I feel as though  I might talk to him and he would know what  I mean."
One  cause of urgency  which  Rachel  feels arises from  the  manner  in  which
words can become for her, as for so many of Laurence's characters,  empty, devoid of meaning. Herself evidently fascinated ambivalently  by jargon and  cliche, espe­ cially in her delineation  of the secondary characters  of The  Fire-Dwellers-Tess Fogler, Thor  Thorlakson,  Dolores Appleton, The  Polyglam lady-Laurence also presents protagonists typically sensitive to the cliched word, the empty automatic phrase, what Rachel calls "set patterns of response." Stacey herself acts as a kind of authorial  sensibility at many  points, wryly observing the cliches of advertising

LAURENCE & LANGUAGE

(she terms some of these "pieces of folk literature") . It is Richel's sensitivity in this matter  which is especially significant because hers is a struggle to break free from such  "patterns," especially because she feels their  strength  so acutely.  Thus,  for example, she fears the growth  in herself of the typical grade  one teacher's  "sim­ per,"  reminding  herself that  "Children have built  in  radar  to detect  falseness." More  important, she reacts against such set patterns  in those closest  to  her-in Calla, whose speech is marred  by "favourite  sayings," in  her mother,  whose use of the "pattern" is both more unconscious, and, for Rachel, more oppressive. For Hagar,  such sensitivity to the automatic,  empty  phrase is directly  related  to her core of integrity,  her distaste for anything  spurious. Characteristically,  she reacts against  the  newspaper  style that  clouds the  fact,  against  the  manifestly  "false" term, "my dear," and, similarly, against the false automatic  apology. Interestingly, this automatic  "I'm sorry" is singled out for considerably more extensive attack  in The  Diviners, where Christie's  disapproval  of that  "useless christly awful  word"  becomes  a  recurrent   motif  in  Morag's  memory.  And  when   Morag   protests Maudie's  use of "Right  On," she merely  articulates  more clearly what  many  of Laurence's  protagonists feel, that  the same words that  can be so essential to both knowing and  defining,  can  be equally  debased,  meaningless:  "Right   On.  Dear little Lord Jesus, what did that mean? Like saying Great, Stupendous.  No meaning at all."
What  further  emphasizes the need for explanations  in Laurence's  characters  is
the frequent difficulty they have in finding words, their realization that words often cannot  possibly contain  what  they must.  Hagar's recollection, "I could  find  no words that  would  reach  deeply enough,"  an  essentially trite  and  unremarkable assertion, resonates as it does because it epitomizes a central problem in Laurence's novels. The problem here is further  distinguished and made relevant to the under­ lying problem of words and  fact  by those instances where Laurence  manages  to suggest the  primary  processes both  of comprehension  and  speech.  This  she fre­ quently does in Nathaniel's struggles to explain in This Side  jordan, and, in "The  Tomorrow  Tamer" from  the volume of that  title, she describes the  protagonist's father  struggling  for  words,  "trying  to  weave  into  some  pattern   the  vast  and spreading  spider-web  of his anxieties."  This  struggle of the  mind  both  to know and to make known is especially important  in those narratives  which focus, as so many of Laurence's  do, on the developing psyche. In such cases, the very failure to find  words is directly  related  to the  confusion  of the  inchoate  consciousness. Thus,  for example,  in the title story of A Bird in  the House, Vanessa  MacLeod,  the  narrator, recalls her loathing  of a hymn:  "all  at once the words themselves seemed too dreadful  to be sung." When her father asks why she so hates the hymn she is unable  to speak of her  loathing-even  to herself she is unable  to articu­ late  her  emotions.  In  this  volume, the  protagonist  suffers many  such  frustrated attempts  to verbalize, at one point even insisting upon the inadequacy  of language

52

LAURENCE  & LANGUAGE

itself. Of the desolating view of one of Manitoba's great lakes stretching  "out  and out, beyond sight," she feels "No  human word could be applied." Yet the distanc­ ing irony here between the awe-struck adolescent and the mature authoress again reinforces the sense of a  developing  consciousness struggling  simultaneously  for understanding and articulation.
However, the irony does little to mitigate Laurence's  reiterated  suggestion else­ where that  language is as inherently  limited as Eliot's Four Quartets  argues it to be. Even in an early short story, "A  Mask of Beaten Gold," 2  one  character  feels his inability to find words to contain accurately the reality of his wife:  "The words only pursued her limpingly, unable  to catch the reality of her, like dragonflies in the sun."  Indeed,  it is perhaps  significant as a  parallel  to the  whole movement towards silence suggested by the conclusion of The  Diviners that the novel presents a protagonist  who, in spite of her professional skill with words, increasingly feels their inadequacy.  When during  Morag's harassing last argument with Brooke, she complains, with so many of Laurence's  characters,  her inability  to "explain" (in this case, her reasons for separating from  him),  her failure  reflects not only the enormous emotional complexity of the moment, but also the weakness of language itself:  "Words  have lost meaning." And it seems that  this conviction is no passing thought  for Morag. From  the very beginning of the novel she is shown grappling unsuccessfully for words to describe the quasi-symbolic  river outside  her Shallot. She is unsuccessful not because of her own failure but  because of the limitations of words:  "no  one  could  catch  the  river's  colour  even  with  paints,  much  less words."  Indeed,  as an  adolescent,  she is thrown  into  a  panic  by the  possibility that "Maybe  there are not" words sufficient to the multiplicity of experience. Yet, though the matter is never explicit, Laurence simultaneously suggests that Morag's  difficulty with  words, more  than  just being  a comment  on  their  inadequacy, is related both to the departure of her genius and to her almost too acute sensitivity to words: "I find words more difficult to define than I used to," she confesses near the end of her writing career.
Yet elsewhere Laurence  suggests that  part of Morag's  difficulty arises from the
fact that some experience transcends any possibility of speech, that  many kinds of communication  demand  a medium  other than  words:  her very relationship  with the  largely non-verbal  "halfbreed," Jules  Tonnere,  reflects her  deep  attraction towards an area of experience  where language is less inadequate than  irrelevant. Most obviously, such experience  is sexual, "someplace  beyond language." How­ ever, her  whole relationship  with Jules clearly embodies this level of  experience "beyond  language."  As school children they share a grin of  complicity; as adoles­ cents they agree without  words to meet for their first sexual adventure; as adults they share entire evenings while Jules "does not speak at all." Even shortly before Jules' death,  Morag  decides that,  to him, there is "No way of saying everything she would like to say," and  adds, significantly, "Maybe  none of it really needed

53

LAURENCE & LANGUAGE

saying, after  all."  While  it is Morag's  relationship  with Jules  that  does most to stress this experience  beyond speech, her two other  affairs reveal much  the same thing. At one point, for example,  Morag  remembers making love with Brooke, at first recalling  (somewhat  awkwardly)   the broken cries of love-making  and  then deciding that there were "no words at all, and after all there are no words, none." As Morag  sentimentally  declares,  "there  are no words." Similarly,  as she recalls making love with Dan McRaith, her third lover, she reflects that their love-making is "the  continuation  of their talking, the same thing in a different  form."
If Morag   (and,  presumably,  Laurence)   goes farther   than  most  earlier  pro­ tagonists in discovering experience where words are irrelevant  she merely extends a trait  well established in the Laurence  protagonist.  Mr. Archipelago  and  Doree, for example, of "The Perfume Sea," discover after their first confessions of  mutual affection  that  that  affection  goes beyond speech, that,  as Doree says,  "we  don't need to talk about it any more." Rachel is most nearly like Morag, however. With an irony subtler  than  most of hers, Laurence shows the abandoned  Rachel  long­ ing for the return  of contact  with Nick, at first bargaining  with some vague trans­ cendent  power  (as Laurence's  heroines are wont to do)  to relinquish  her ability to touch  Nick if only she might  speak with  him, but later  reversing her  claims: "Nick -if  I  couldn't  speak  with  you, all  right. I  would accept  that.  If only I could be with you and  hold you." The reversal is intensified when  yet later she repeats her willingness to give up speech if only she might touch, thus not merely commenting  unintentionally on her own  priorities in the affair,  but also showing the  predisposition  of Laurence's  heroines  (Stacey  MacAindra is the  other  most notable instance)   to abandon words only in the face of sex.




Y.T EVEN WHEN  THEY EMBRACE TOTALLY the need for words and their integrity, Laurence's  characters must often come to terms with their own inner failure,  the loss of their  verbal facility. If The  Diviners moves towards  an acceptance  of silence, that silence is variously explored, fought,  and  analyzed throughout her fiction. Nevertheless, most often the loss of the ability to find words is largely temporary  and  does not involve the faculty itself. In  fact,  Morag's  loss of the  power to "divine" at  the end of The  Diviners reflects a much  more  pro­ found loss than that of most, though  of course Morag's creative faculty is certainly more than  a purely verbal  one. With little obvious design, but entirely  consistent with  her  treatment of the  faculty  of "word  magic"  in  The  Diviners,  Laurence tends in all of her works to polarize characters,  presenting both  those with great verbal  powers and  those with  very little, thereby emphasizing  the inborn  nature of  the  verbal  faculty.  Thus,   for  example,  Godman,   the  wizened  "oracle"   of "Godman's Master"  babbles garrulously  when allowed the opportunity, his very

54

LAURENCE & LANGUAGE

role as "oracle" serving as a hazy symbol of his verbal gift. In contrast, the servant girl Love, in "A  Fetish for Love," remains nearly silent, her speech a mere "par­ roting."  In  "A  Gourdful  of Glory"  the  polarity  is explicit:  on  the  one  hand  is Mammii  Ama,  intoxicated  with  the "golden  lightning"  of the  word, capable  of intoxicating  others with her impromptu  speeches and songs. On  the other  hand is her  antithesis,  "T'reepenny," who is capable  of no words  except  her  cry of "t'reepenny," who "only said one word, ever." The T'reepenny's, those of stunted speech, recur  through  Laurence's  works-Phillip, a character  of the  "Mask  of Beaten Gold," admits "I'm not especially articulate"; Clara,  Brampton  Shipley's first wife, is "inarticulate as a stabled beast"  (or so Hagar  claims, concerned  as she is with  the social status  of correct speech); Jan,  Stacey's  youngest  child,  is almost  pathologically  late  in  speaking  her  first words;  Mac  and  Ian,  Stacey's husband  and  son, both  choose to communicate  with  as few  words  as  possible; Prin of The  Diviners is always "simple," and becomes increasingly silent;  indeed, Lilac,  Morag's  first fictional  heroine,  is, in  Brooke's  terms,  "non-verbal." Yet Laurence  is evidently  fascinated  more  by  Mammii  Ama  than  by  T'reepenny: those with  the gift of speech, especially those with  oratorical  power, are  one of Laurence's  main types. Even the ironically presented proselytizers, Brother  Lemon of "The Merchant of Heaven,"  clearly a study for Thor  Thorlakson,  the prophet of vitamin  pills in  The  Fire-Dwellers, and,  too,  the  "spell-binder" Tollemache Lees of The  Stone  Angel, vividly embody that power of speech that  seems to fas­ cinate Laurence. The rather absurd questers of "glossalalia," the "gift of tongues," in A ]est of God, likewise attempt  to achieve a faculty whose pursuit  is rendered futile, as Calla comes to suspect, largely because it is not a "gift of tongues" at all, but is the antithesis of a verbal gift. It  is the real verbalizers like Mammii Ama, like Christie  in  The   Diviners  with  his  "legends"  and  his declamations  on  the "Nuisance  Grounds," or, in another form, like Morag herself, that do most to con­ trast  the inarticulate, at least until  they lose their gifts or die.
Yet if Christie  ends  his life only after  his power is gone,  his speech  "pretty garbled"  by a stroke, if Prin  sinks deeper  and  deeper into  silence,  and  if Jules Tonnere  likewise is silenced,  no more  able  to sing, it  is only  after  silence  has achieved,  through  the  course of Laurence's  fiction, some small  degree  of grace. In  A  Bird in the  House, the two  nearly saint-like figures, grandmother  Connor and the Chris of "Horses of the Night," both confer on silence their own kinds of strength,  and even Calla of A ]est of God, realizing her friend's  distress after  her operation,  is able to give Rachel  an enormous "gift"  of silence. As Stacey comes to realize, after  her frantic  efforts to speak openly with her husband,  her failure is equivocal:  "The  silences aren't  all bad."
What  makes the passage to silence further  equivocal is the fact that  the  power of the word is often seen as a potential  burden,  sometimes merely inconvenient, other  times even dangerous.  Repeatedly  Laurence  presents characters  for  whom

55

LAURENCE & LANGUAGE

the gap  between the fact and  the word is all too narrow.  Like the sorcerer's ap­ prentice they become the victims of the very power they otherwise prize. And  the important   psychological implication -important  because it closely  parallels  the implication  that  MoragjLaurence's gift of "divining" is beyond  any  conscious control-is that  the faculty  of speech is closely linked to the subconscious. Des­ pite their earnest efforts to control  their speech, Laurence's characters  again  and again  speak in a  manner  that  defies their own intentions.  When  a character  in an African short story claims, "I did not mean to say that," he is merely putting in conventional  language  a trait  common  to  Laurence's  characters: "I was not aware  that  I was going to speak until the words came out,"  claims the narrator of A Bird in the  House;  "I didn't  mean  to say that," Morag  echoes, and  adds, significantly, "I didn't  even mean it." When  Laurence  writes similarly of Stacey that she "hears the vehemence in someone's voice that is coming from her mouth," she is not merely suggesting that such characters  slip and allow themselves to be harshly frank. On  the contrary, she is making it clear that  they consistently utter that  of which they have no conscious notion. This is especially true of Hagar  and Rachel.  "How  is it  my  mouth  speaks by itself ... ?" complains  the  distraught  Hagar.  That  her frequent lapses into unintentional asperity are not mere senility is made  clear  both  by her  own claim  that  she "never  could"  keep her  "mouth  shut"  and  by  the  fact  that  her  weakness is frequently  shared  by  the  far  from senile (though self-confessedly neurotic)  Rachel.  "I suppose it must be my voice, although  God  only knows what  it is saying," she thinks, for example,  when she finds her  innate  maidenly  reticence taking over from her sexual desires in much the same  manner  that  Hagar's innate  bitterness  takes over  from  her  goodwill. Indeed, both  characters undergo  the similar terror  of feeling utter  divorce from the  voice  that  speaks  within  them.  At  the  prayer  meeting  as those around  her attempt  to gain the "gift of tongues," Rachel finds herself listening with fascinated horror  to a "crying,  ululating" voice only to discover it is "Mine. Oh  my God. Mine. The voice of Rachel." Similarly, in the hospital, Hagar  lies awake listening to the  voices of her  fellow patients,  until she hears that  "One  voice has  almost screeched. Some time elapses before I realize the voice was mine." The facts that Hagar's cry has been "Bram !" the name of her dead husband, and Rachel's been, as she observes, "the  forbidden  transformed  cryptically  to  nonsense"  confirms, not surprisingly,  that  the  uncontrolled  cry is indeed  intimately  bound  to  inner­ most personality.
And  again,  the  nature  of these inner  voices seems significant simply  because
they are so like the voices that allow Morag to write, from a source within, beyond conscious control. Even as a girl Morag discovers that  when she writes, "She does not know where it came  from.  It  comes into your head, and  when you write it down, it surprises you, because you never knew what  was going to happen  until you put it down."  The  rather  cathartic  nature  of this verbal ability, like that  of

LAURENCE  & LANGUAGE

the subconsciously based speech of many of Laurence's  other  characters,  is made more  explicit  at  several  other  points  in Morag's   revelation  of  her  essentially Longinian  view of her own creativity:  at one point, for example,  she says of her current  work in progress, "I guess I'll have to go on with it"  in spite of her  dis­ content  with  it, and  at  another  claims that  writing  creatively  is like  "Someone else dictating  the words. Untrue of course, but that was how it felt, the characters  speaking. Where was the character, and who? Never mind. Not Morag's concern. Possession or self-hypnosis-it made no difference. Just  let it  keep on coming."  Admittedly,  this smacks a little of melodramatics. But such a  view of the relation between  the  ability  to  use the  word  and  what  the  word  signifies is intimately related  to Laurence's  continuing  view of the word itself, the  verbal  faculty,  and its subconscious basis.




WAT GIVES MORAG's PREOCCUPATION  with the facility with words special urgency is the attitude,  evident not only in The  Diviners but also in most of Laurence's  other  works, that  words have almost  talismanic  significance. More than  being merely the ciphers of communication, a transparent medium  of expression, they are for both Laurence and her characters of special portent in themselves. This is particularly  the case with names. It is clear that  both Laurence and  her  characters  are  acutely  sensitive to names-to  the  correspondence  be­ tween a complex and  often  unknowable  identity  and  the  word  which  acts  as a symbol of that  identity.  Laurence's  own sensitivity in  this  regard  is  obvious  in even the most cursory review of her characters. The Biblical names, of  course, are most obviously portentous-Rachel, Hagar,  Christie,  Matthew,  Ruth,   Moses, Adamo,  Joshua,  and  so on. Fortunately,  while Laurence  tends to  emphasize  the Biblical associations, she usually avoids coyness, both because she makes emphasis on  the  names fairly  unobtrusive  (e.g., Hagar  is merely called  "the  Egyptian") and  because she keeps the Biblical parallels subtle. The  ways  in  which  Hagar  is like her Biblical counterpart, for example, are not contrivedly obvious. The  por­ tentous Biblical names are  matched  by others equally  portentous,  names such as Calla, Jason,  Lees, Mercy,  Godman,  Miranda,  Love, or, perhaps  too obviously, Mr. Archipelago.
Often  as sensitive as Laurence  to names are the characters  of her books, espe­
cially when they are concerned  with the suitability of the name.  Violet  Nedden, for example, is as humiliated  by the inappropriateness  of her  name  to her  bulky stature  as is, for identical  reasons, Calla.  Calla  is hardly  lily-like as  her  name suggests, but, Rachel feels, is instead like "a sunflower, if anything,  brash, strong, plain."  Of the many  characters  in The Tomorrow Tamer  who likewise feel the significance of names, one of the most prominent  is Constance  of "A  Fetish for

57

LAURENCE & LANGUAGE

Love," intrigued alike by the names of the "Mammy lorries"-"Tiger Boy, King Kong, One-Time Boy" -and  by the name of a servant -Love. It is in fact the unknown source of this girl's name-possibly drawn from  Biblical teaching,  or, Constance's  husband  more feasibly suggests, from a company  of  ironmongers­ which she somehow feels provides a clue to the enigmatic  character  of the girl. Yet  more  typical  of  the  Laurence  outlook  are  those  characters   for  whom  the name itself becomes a kind of clue to reality, the name acquiring  great  symbolic significance. Typical  of this attitude is the narrator  of  "The Drummer of All the World,"  who is so overwhelmed  by the potency of  the  names of the  native gods that  he "learned  some of the other  names of  Nyame" and  "for  a whole year ... called God by the name of Nyame"  and at another  point "invoked  Nyankopon's strong  name, Obommubuwafre." Similarly, Stacey is able to weave an elaborate fantasy  about  the  northern   wilds of  British  Columbia,  using  as  key  referents, "names   like silkenly  flowing  water,  Similkameen,  Tulameen,  Coquihalla,  the names on maps."  In This  Side  jordan, Laurence  goes so far as to make Johnnie Kestoe identify and  analyse the relationship  between the powerful  name and  the self:  "Magic  symbols-a  rune,  a spell, a  charm -the thing  that  made  him different  from  any  other  man  on  earth.  His name  John  Kestoe.  What  proved identity  more than  a name? If you had a name, you must exist. I am identified; therefore, I am." In Johnnie's case, his semi-conscious musing upon his own name is made consistent  with his general  concern with names and  reflects his desire to reassure himself of  his own significance. However, as a rather  obtrusive  element in the flow of his thoughts,  even though  afforded  a distancing  irony, it seems to reflect even more Laurence's own interest in the significance of names.
Where  names are thus so powerful, the act of naming becomes critical because
that  act establishes the name's  ability both  to reduce an  identity  to essence and, equally important it seems, to influence that  identity. Mr.  Archipelago's  adopted name  is an  obvious instance.  Both  Johnnie  Kestoe's naming  his new  daughter after his mother and  Nathaniel  Amegbe's naming his new son Joshua  are likewise given enormous emotional and symbolic weight, in the latter instance reflecting Nathaniel's immense  burden  of  hope  and  ambition:  "Cross  Jordan, Joshua." Even simple and  relatively unstressed acts like Vanessa's instinctive, assured  nam­ ing of the half-Husky  (in  the story of that  title)  as "Nanuk," is an act  both of recognition  and  of creation.  This  is particularly  true of Vanessa's  private  name for  her  grandfather, "The  Great  Bear,"  a  name  which  because  of  its  highly evocative  nature  (what  Vanessa  calls its "many  associations")  goes  beyond  the obvious  appropriateness Vanessa  consciously recognizes to  attain   an  enormous imaginative  influence on her assessment of her grandfather.
Again,  however,  The   Diviners  develops much  more fully  than  any  previous books all such matters  concerning  words:  as Morag  herself thinks, "I don't  know why names seem so important to me." At this point, as an adult,  she adds, "Yes,

ss

LAURENCE  & LANGUAGE

I guess I do know. My own name, and feeling I'd  come from  nowhere."  Such is certainly the case in her fruitless attempts  to penetrate the enigma  of her Scottish lover's Gaelic name for her, "Morag Dhu."  Nevertheless, this is only part  of the truth.  After all, as a creative artist, distantly echoing God's creative act by making the  Word  flesh, she is especially attuned  to the indefinable  power of names. At one point, for example, she becomes intoxicated  with a list of wildflower names and, at another, fantasizes enviously of the Adam-like power that  belongs to who­ ever is first able to give such wildflowers their names:  "Imagine naming flowers which have never been named before. Like the Garden of Eden. Power! Ecstasy!" It  is  perhaps  significant  that  she  somewhat  facetiously  adds,  "I  christen  thee Butter-and-Eggs," for such a name for such a flower (like Vanessa's name for her grandfather) is clearly an act both of recognition and creation. Again,  the word and  the fact  are reciprocally influential.  This is especially true  of Morag's  reac­ tions to peoples' names. Her  uneasiness that  her  daughter  Pique  should  have  a friend  with  the same name  as her own former lover, and  that  Pique  should  be given a  name  like that  of her  aunt   (Piquette)  but  distinct  from  that  tragedy­ laden  name,  evince her implicit  belief in the  power  of the  name.
Not surprisingly, most of Laurence's  chief characters are equally fascinated  and puzzled by words and  phrases, feeling somehow that  those words are prior to the fact,  that  they create  their  own  reality. In  many  instances  puzzlement  directly reflects  a  child's  struggles  to  understand   the  baffling adult   world.  Such,  for example, is the case with Vanessa MacLeod's deification of the mysterious words, "Depression" and "drought," and  Morag's considerably more frantic  attempts to penetrate  the mysteries of Prin's  use of the word "cord": "What? What  cord? What  means Cord?"  In fact, in this latter novel Morag's desperate  "What means
... ?" acts as a kind of leitmotif, later in her life being echoed by her own daugh­ ter. More closely related to Laurence's  intensely personal attitude towards words, though, is the manner in which she presents characters for whom ordinary  words, like names, are highly evocative, capable of creating their own reality. Even Hagar  recalls as a  girl staring  at  the  words and  pictures  in  her  little  reader,  hoping "they'd  swell into something  different, something  rare." And  for  Mammii  Ama, the very nature of political freedom becomes somehow secondary  to the powerful word itself:  "He  be strong, dis Free-Dom,  he be  power  word."  This  fascination with words is particularly  felt by the two  characters  who are  also writers  (and who, of course, in some ways are  Laurence herself),  Vanessa  and  Morag: for Vanessa, "Great  Bear Lake," "Rest beyond the river," and "Slowly, slowly horses of the night," achieve particular significance. Of this last instance, for example, she dismisses the intended  meaning of the line, insisting that "to me it had another,  a different  relevance."  Morag   is  even  more  drawn   by  words:    "Words  words words. Words haunt  her." As a child, she is especially fascinated  by Prin's  word, "moaner," and, like Vanessa, she dismisses conventional meaning in favour of her

59

LAURENCE & LANGUAGE

own:  "to her it means something else." As an adult, she is likewise fascinated with the shifting  meanings  of words, as though  their  very uncertainty  not  merely  re­ flects, but actually constitutes her own:  "Fan  ... is ... in a very good bargaining  position? Bargaining  position. One  of the sexual  postures not  mentioned  in the Kama  Sutra.  Postures. The  ways in which one lies." So strong is this attraction  to words in themselves that  she will even play a Gaelic record over  and over again, listening to what is in fact "Just  a lot of garbled sounds."
Yet for Morag  the greatest  power of words is achieved  not  by their  effect in isolation or in phrases, but  in the stylized forms of songs or fiction. Indeed,  the talismanic power of words is especially felt by those who are able to go far beyond mere  fact  so that  more  than  merely  using words  or  names  like  "mooner"  or "Great  Bear Lake"  to define a personal reality, they use whole configurations  of words to establish an existence that  is at once fictional and  real. Implicit  in her early works, this view of the fictional word becomes explicit in The  Diviners. In an early story such as "The Perfume Sea," for example, we encounter  Mr. Archi­ pelago who "enjoyed  talking  about  himself" simply because "no  one  could ever be sure where truth  ended  and  the tinted  unreality began."  Clearly, this kind of character, disposed to create a fictional reality, intrigues Laurence. Nick Kazlick's father  in  A  ]est  of God,  for  instance,  is hardly  integral  to  the  action.  To  the whole notion of subjective  and  objective reality, a key theme  in  that  book, how­ ever, he is integral.  Thus  Nick makes repeated  reference to  the unselfconscious fabrications  of his father,  and  Rachel  herself is impressed by  the power his mind seems to have over external  reality:  "He  walks as though  the  rest of the world were an interesting but unlikely story he had once told himself." Chris, the subject of "Horses of the Night,"  is another  such figure, creating  his own  (almost  patho­ logical)  reality. Yet, when  Vanessa  says of  Chris'  two fictional  horses, "I had known for some years, without  realizing it, that  the pair had only ever existed in some other dimension,"  she is merely saying in other words what  becomes expli­ citly repeated  and emphasized  in The Diviners. As Morag thinks, looking back on her life as a "Wordsmith," she has often, ambiguously, felt that  "fiction was more true than  fact. Or  that  fact was in fact fiction" (thus directly echoing Laurence's much  quoted  view that  "fiction  is more true  than  fact").3   She has even felt, in the  past, that  "words  could  do anything.  Magic.  Sorcery. Even  miracles."  The reality  of Morag's  own  "magic" use of words, her  novels, is evident  at  several points: while writing her novels she finds it tormenting to leave her fictional world for the objective one. As she says of one character's  fictional plight, "The  blood is no less real for being invisible to the external eye."
It is not solely Morag,  however, who is a "Wordsmith." Christie and Jules, as they  both  re-make  the  past  in  legends and  songs, are  equally  the  creators  of a fiction  truer  than  fact.  Throughout her  own  career  Laurence  has  been  much interested  in legends and  songs. She has in fact  collected and  translated  Somali

6o

LAURENCE  & LANGUAGE

legends and  poems in  A Tree   for Poverty, but,  more  important here,  she  has,  in her  fiction,  included many  fragments of poems, songs, legends  for  verisimilitude, local  colour,  or,  of  course,  thematic relevance.  The   "Ladybird" rhyme  of  The Fire-Dwellers is an obvious instance  of this last use, but the influence, for example, of the African proverbs  and  parables  on the  protagonist of "The Drummer of All the  World," of "The Song  of Solomon" and  hymns  on  Vanessa, of  songs  and poems on Hagar, are  profound and  pervasive. Indeed, in this last book, Reverend Troy's singing  of a hymn  transforms both  himself  and  Hagar, providing her, "shatteringly," with  the  knowledge of her  own  deepest  values.  For  Morag,  how­ ever, such  examples of extended creativity  are  important not  only  for  their  per­ sonal  symbolic  meanings or  their  relations  with  the  past.  They   are, in  additon, significantly  related, first, to her  own  sense of Gaelic  heritage and,  more  impor­ tantly,  to her view of the creative  word. Of Jules' stories and  songs, she insists, "It doesn't  matter a  damn" whether or  not  they  are  objectively  true;  of  Christie's fictitious  hero,  Piper  Gunn, she likewise insists (rather  melodramatically) that  he "probably never  lived  in  so-called  real  life  but  ... lives forever.   Christie   knew things  about  inner  truths that   I am  only  just  beginning to  understand." So  im­ portant is this kind  of "inner truth" for  Morag that  she  eventually realizes  that  the Gaelic  heritage she had  long believed to exist in Scotland exists, in fact,  in the fictitious -but, of course, "true" -words of Christie. As a pattern of acceptance, relevant   to  Margaret  Laurence  herself,  The Diviners   thus   embodies  both   the acceptance of silence and  the acceptance of Canada.
Though rarely  does she  directly  or fully  consider  the  nature of language and its  relation   to  what   it  symbolizes,  the  characters  whose  responses  she  shapes repeatedly reflect  a  closely  connected series  of  attitudes towards the  nature of words and speech. Admittedly, few would claim that  Laurence's position in Cana­ dian  letters  is due  to her stature as a "thinker." Yet it is evident  that  her  presup­ positions  (in this case, about  the use of words)  whether conscious, unconscious, or more  likely, in  the  vague  area  between,  are  both  pervasive  and  tellingly  indica­ tive  of  an  impressively  thoughtful sensibility.  What makes  the  examination of Laurence's treatment of the issues dealt with  here of peculiar  interest  is the some­ what  ironic  fact  that  The Diviners  serves in general  as the  most  fully  articulated account  of ideas  suggested  in  earlier  fictions  at  precisely  the  same  time  that   in this last book Laurence suggests the loss of her ability  to articulate in fiction.



NOTES

1 Indeed, she satirizes in passing the fashionable  jargon-laden  approach to the  prob­ lem through  Jake  Fogler of The Fire-Dwellers.  She writes of him that  he is "fond of talking  about  the  breakdown  of verbal  communications   and  the  problems  of semantics in mass media."

61

LAURENCE & LANGUAGE

2  Tamarack  Review,  29  (Autumn 1962), pp. 3-2r.
3 See Clara Thomas, Margaret  Laurence  (Toronto:  McClelland & Stewart, rg6g), p. 14.



BREjlKING jlND ENTERING

Richard Hornsey

Someone was watching
as he drowned among  lilacs
in the privacy  of his own back yard

Someone  listened when  he whispered that  chestnut trees are  candelabras which  burn  all night

And someone  watched him walk  with  his lady
warm  palms  gently locked feet  feeling  textures
of concrete and  grass

Someone  listened  when  he  had  gone somehow slipped  the  bolt and entered the world
of his rooms

And  all was changed violated, penetrated, opened, drawers eviscerated
the toilet  bowl broken
letters stolen
the  mattress split and  gutted

So now
behind  screwed-down windows deadlocked doors
the sound  of a radio  ever playing he too
watches  and  listens and  waits

THE SEARCH FOR FPG


D





o. SPETIIGUE's DISCOVERY of   the true identity of the late  Canadian novelist who called  himself Frederick  Philip  Grove  will probably not greatly affect the criticism of the Grove novels.1  However,  the semi-autobio­ graphical  A Search For America and the allegedly autobiographical In Search of Myself demand  a new critical  investigation  in the light of this discovery, not so much  for biographical  reasons as for aesthetic ones. For if Spettigue's claims are valid, we are dealing  with works of fiction  rather  than  with  works of biography. Consequently,  the reader's  response is determined  not  by the story of the life of Frederick  Philip Grove, but  by a  number of textual features  of which the narra­  tor's position (which  can no longer be identified with that  of the author) is only one.
The  prologue to In Search of Myself, first published as an essay under the same title in 1940, offers the most dramatic  juxtaposition of biographical  and  fictional readings.  In  its anecdotal  framework  and  by virtue  of its function  as a  quasi­ preface to the "autobiography," it seems verifiably and  tantalizingly biographical. At  the  same  time  the  double-stranded narrative  structure,   the  recurring  flash­ backs, the  polarity  represented  by the  position of the  narrator  and  that  of the "young  Frenchman" constitute  literary features which invite interpretation. The reader's  knowledge of Grove's true  identity is, of course, a factor  which lies out­ side the text. His recognition of the irony expressed in the title In Search of Myself is, however, a consequence of this knowledge and  may  therefore  be regarded  as a point of departure for an  interpretation.
Such an interpedendence between author's  biography  and  "autonomous"  text
is in  any  case problematical  in  terms of critical  theory  and  methodology.  It is especially problematical  in  In  Search of Myself where it becomes, in a way, the subject of the text itself. The  essay seems to describe an episode in the life of the author: it  pretends  to be autobiographical. But the  accessibility of the  "truth" (i.e., the real biography  of the author)  has textual  relevance since it constitutes the indeterminacy  of the text for the knowing reader.  We are  dealing  not with a mixture  of truth  and  falsehood,  fiction and  fact,  but  with  their  ironic displace­ ment within an aesthetic form.
The main narrative,  which describes a journey through  the Ontario wilderness, is interrupted by flashbacks and  philosophical reflections, resulting in an alternat-

THE SEARCH FOR  FPG

ing pattern  which  presents a past ideality  (the  narrator's  European youth)  con­ trasted  with a present  reality  (the  North  American experience), the one marked by wealth, social standing and  promise for a brilliant literary career, the other by poverty, failure  and  disillusionment.  In  the course of the  essay this past  ideality becomes more and  more identified with "art" as opposed to "life,"  or  the imme­ diate demands  of the present reality out of which the narrator  speaks. His allusion to his friend,  the  "young  Frenchman," now a world-famous  writer, is the  point of departure for his personal  and  literary reflections. He  cannot  help  comparing their situations, and muses over the fact that the exclusive and innovative  circle to which he once belonged, today  (i.e., 1940)  can be said to virtually define modern literature, whereas he, isolated in a pioneer country, is struggling  to maintain  his material  existence as a country  schoolteacher, whose literary  voice has awakened no echo, has, in fact, scarcely been heard. With this realization  of failure comes a sense of the necessity to explain  it. But as with his other work, the question of his readership, or lack of it, arises. With whom is he to seek communication, to whom explain?  It  occurs to him  that  there  is no more  appropriate listener  for him  to address himself to than  the "young  Frenchman," by whose success he has meas­ ured the extent of his own failure and acknowledged his own defeat.
The opening of the essay presents a landscape which in its barrenness and deso-
lation suggests a vision of a primordial  world, or an entropic one.

It  was a dismal  November day,  with  a raw  wind  blowing  from  the  northwest and cold,  iron-grey  clouds  flying low-one of those Ontario days  which,  on  the  lake­ shore  or in a country of rock and  swamp,  seem to bring  visions of an  ageless  time after  the emergence of the earth from chaos, or a foreboding of the end of a world about to die from  entropy.

In the best romantic  tradition, this landscape  reflects the mood and  the situa­ tion of the figure perceiving it. With his reference to the lateness of the season and the cyclical movement of creation and destruction, the narrator, who later portrays himself as an aging  writer,  may  be seen to allude  to the  uncertainty of his own future  life and creativity.
This vision of an ageless and uninhabited  world recedes with the appearance of the narrator, who in one sentence focuses it into spatial and temporal  familiarity.

It  was into such a country of rock and  swamp,  a few miles north  of Lake  Erie, that my business took me that  day.

The landscape becomes a physical obstacle to be overcome on the way to a destination.  He  is driving  to a farm  where he is to pick up  a girl as household help. The  road  on which  he is travelling  grows progressively worse until finally he is forced  to stop:  it has been completely washed away. This  forced  pause in his drive leads him to reflect, to withdraw from immediate reality which demands that he act.

THE SEARCH FOR FPG

There follows  a  reminiscence of  his youth,  as promising as that  of  his friend, the  "young Frenchman," whose biography has been  brought him  by a visitor  the night  before.  His feeling  of misery  stems  not  from  his momentary situation, but from  the  contrast between  the  Frenchman's success and  his own failure.
Like a flash of lightning  it had struck me that,  to earn  the distinction  of seeing his biography  published within  his lifetime, he must have achieved  things  which  had focused on him the eyes of a world, a living world as full of fire and  enthusiasm  as any world that had ever been-whereas I, only slightly his junior, in spite of often titanic  endeavor,  had lived and worked in obscurity, giving expression, at the best, to a few, a very few, mirrorings  of life in the  raw such as it had  been my lot to witness.

But his situation forces him out of his reminiscences.  He must decide on a course of action.
There  were three possibilities. I might abandon  my task and  try to retrace  my way by backing out. I might alight and, leaving the car where it was, leap the washout, to cover the  remaining  distance  afoot. I might  try to attract  the  attention of the people on the farm  or in the  house-they  were expecting  me -by  blowing my horn.

Thinking once  more  of the  Frenchman and  the  brilliant prospects  of  his youth, he chooses the last of these alternatives.
For  ten minutes  or so, at intervals  of perhaps fifteen seconds, I made  the horn  of my machine  ring dismally out over the fens whose very existence seemed a calamity of defeat ...

As he again  falls into  his musings  he suddenly  sees movement on  the  farm. He has  been  heard. But  the  figure  coming  towards him  is not  the  young  girl  he  is expecting; it is an  old  man,  her  grandfather. The  dialogue which  ensues  culmi­ nates in a grotesque scene:  between  bursts of senile laughter the old man tells how a salesman, trying  to collect  a  payment from  his son-in-law, struck  the  washout  and  somersaulted into  the  swamp. When  the  car  was  pulled  out,  the  salesman  was found  dead  with  a broken  neck.
The  essay concludes  with  the  narrator heading home,  the  girl  by his side,  and a resolve forming in his mind: to explain  his literary  failure  by writing, "with an avowedly  autobiographical purpose," the story  of his " ... LIFE AS   A  WRITER  IN
CANADA."

IT IS NOT  suRPRISING that  In Search of Myself has been  con­ sistently  read  as an  expression  of the  artist's dilemma in a  pioneer  environment. It  was, for  a long time,  seen as a sort of document, sociological,  since it exposed the  role of the  artist  in a pioneer  society, and  literary, since it revealed  the  effect
of isolation,  of the  break  with  the  past, on the  artist's creativity. A. J. M.  Smith,

THE  SEARCH FOR FPG


introducing the  essay  in  his  anthology, sums  up  this  view:   "This pathetic and heroic  piece of self-revelation written in a matter-of-fact and  homely style throws a clear  beam  of light  on  the  problem  of the  artist's isolation  in a new  and  thor­ oughly  bourgeois  country."2
Little  attention has  been  paid  to  the  suggestive  narrative structure  and   the equally  suggestive  descriptive passages-in other  words to the essay as an artistic work. Yet the  narrator's journey  through the  wilderness  clearly  has an  allegorical function, and  an  ambiguous one at that. The  difficulties met  with  on the  journey may   be  seen  to  metaphorically  describe   not   only  individual  features  of  the speaker's present  life in Canada, but  in fact  his entire  past,  the  decisive moments of which  seem to be alluded to in the  journey's  description as well.
One  need not dwell on the  parallel  between  the  journey,  through the wilderness of rock and  swamp, and  Grove's  life, which  was determined by an ever-thickening bog of personal,  professional  and  financial  problems. The  "complete stop" neces­ sitated  by the road  which  has been washed away finds its biographical counterpart in the  fact  that  Grove's desperate situation led  him  to fake  a suicide  and  flee to America, breaking all ties with the  past.
The  point of crisis, signalled  by the washout  in the road  in the narrative, neces­ sitates a decision. The three  alternatives listed by the narrator, and  the significance  of the  one chosen,  are  perhaps the  most explicit  references  given  the reader  as to the intention of the  essay. For in choosing to make  himself heard   (by blowing  his horn) he seems to be referring directly  to the essay itself, and  even to its narrative structure. The  sounding of his horn,  "for  ten minutes or so, at intervals of perhaps fifteen  seconds," may  seen  as representing the  alternating  pattern of description and  reflection  we find  in  the  essay, a  pattern which,  in  turn, corresponds to the duality of life and  art  which  the  essay seeks to demonstrate.
Read  in this light,  the  horn-blowing episode may  be seen as a hidden  signal  to the  reader, around whose  response  one of the  most  moving  passages of the  essay turns.

. . . I had  never had  an  audience; for no matter  what one may say, he says it  to somebody; and  if there  is nobody to hear, it remains as though  it had  never been said; the tree falling in a forest where there is none to hear,  produces no sound. A book arises as much  in  the  mind  of the reader  as in that  of the  writer,  and  the writer's art consists above all in creating response; the effect of a book is the result of a collaboration  between writer and audience. That  collaboration  I had failed to enforce ...

The  passage  quoted above  separates the sounding of the  horn  from  the  unex­ pected  response to it, ironically confirming the validity of the narrator's statements. Yet  the  response  to  the  dismal  echoing  of the  horn, expressing  an  acknowledge­ ment  of the  narrator's defeat  as much  as the  will to make  himself  heard, is also ambiguous in its implications. The  old man's  appearance in  answer  to the signal

66

THE SEARCH FOR  FPG

ironically anticipates  the close of the essay, where the narrator  announces  his in­ tention to address the explanation  of his failure (in the form of his autobiography) to the "young  Frenchman," now a man of over seventy. The  old  man's  appear­ ance is, however, only one consequence of the narrator's  signal. The  young girl's subsequent  arrival  represents  the successful achievement  of the  journey  while it also suggests a new impulse for both "life" and "art": the narrator announces  his decision to write his autobiography.8
Like the metaphor  of the journey, the allegorical function  of the figures, land­ scape and events is not difficult to identify. The  polarity suggested by the opening of the essay (in the vision of a world which is primordial  or entropic)  is echoed in the  contrasts and  oppositions  represented  throughout  by the  "young  French­ man"  and  the aging  narrator. The  one inhabits  " ... a living  world ... full of fire and  enthusiasm,"  in fact constitutes its centre  (the  "eyes" of this world are "focused"  on his achievements)   while the other  is banished  to  an  inhuman  wil­ derness which diminishes man and his deeds to insignificance. Thus the two figures come to represent the contrasting  "worlds"  they inhabit,  as  well as the opposite extremes of success and failure, youth and old age, life and art, reality and dream.
The  Frenchman,  always referred  to as young, incarnates  the memory of a past which is lost, inaccessible to the narrator. This youth is, in fact, an illusion, for the "young  Frenchman," like the narrator, is no longer young. But youth also mani­ fests itself, in the narrator's present reality, in the form of the young girl  he is on his way to fetch. These  two figures, one a shadow  from  the  past,  the  other  an immediate  reality, may be seen as two manifestations of the narrator's quest. He is seeking, through  the Frenchman, to recover his past, his lost youth, but it is the girl he is going to fetch who represents the new beginning,  in a new  context,  of an artistic life. He cannot recapture  his youth in the reality which surrounds  him:  he can only re-create it, so to speak, in a new form, in the form of  a "story,"  i.e., through  art. Although  it is the "young  Frenchman" who, through  the memories he evokes of his youth, inspires him, it is the immediate experience of that  journey through  the wilderness and the encounter  at the farm  that  motivates him to act, that is to write.
The  problem of old age also involves a two-way contrast,  namely between  the "young  Frenchman," now  a  venerable  old  coryphaeus  who  has  fulfilled  the promise youth held for him, and  the old farmer,  that spectre of a senile old age, a vision of the narrator's potential  decay. The story of the salesman,  told by the old man,  illustrates the dread  vision of a fate narrowly escaped:  like the senility of the old man, it is the potential fate of the narrator.
In  addressing the explanation  of his failure  to the  "young  Frenchman," the narrator  is addressing a figure into whom he seems to have distilled all the signifi­ cant  relationships, encounters  and  experiences from  his past.  The  Frenchman's phenomenal success dramatically  points up the narrator's failure, and so serves as

THE SEARCH FOR  FPG

a strong  point of contrast. But as a sort of alter  ego to the  narrator, he also reveals the  man   the  narrator might   have  been.  He  represents   not  only  the  intended "audience," the listener  to the story of the "life of a writer  in Canada," but  also, simultaneously, both  its object   and  its subject-the dimensions of  the  self the narrator is in search  of.

As AN    EXTERNAL   CONTRAST  figure  to  the   narrator,  the identity or even existence  of the  Frenchman has remained more  or less irrelevant for  the  reader. As is now  obvious,  Grove  must  have  intended it  to  be so, since
identification of the  "young Frenchman" would,  presumably, have  led to his own identification as well. However, the  function of the  Frenchman in  the  narrative may also be seen against  the  biographical background indicated earlier. In prefac­ ing  his  "autobiography" with  this  essay, Grove  may  have  meant,  as  Spettigue suggests, to address  an  explicit  signal  to Andre  Gide. Spettigue has identified  the "young Frenchman" as Gide,  who  recorded  an encounter with  Grove-his  real name  was  Felix  Paul  Greve-under the  title  "Conversation  avec  un  Allemand  quelques annees  avant  la guerre." If, as Spettigue contends, we have  all reason  to believe that  Grove  had  access to Gide's  Oeuvres Completes, we can  imagine  how the  publication of this intimate dialogue would  have affected  him.  The  antithesis  of life and  art  implied in  In Search of Myself, in  which  the  narrator represents one side and  the  Frenchman the other,  may indeed be a response to the conversa­  tion  in  which  Grove  affirms  his  preference  for  "life" as opposed  to  "art." Gide introduces the subject  with  his comment on  FPC's essay on Wilde.
-C'est par la que m'a  tant  interesse votre premiere plaquette  (sur Oscar Wilde).
Je crois tres juste l'antagonisme ou vous placiez la vie et l'art  ...
11 m'interrompt.
-Eh bien! moi je ne trouve cela juste du tout. Ou plutot ... si vous voulez ... oui, il est dangereux  pour !'artiste  de chercher  a vivre; mais c'est precisement  parce que, moi, je pretends vivre, que je dis que je ne suis pas un artiste. C'est le besoin d'argent qui maintenant me fait ,ecrire. L'oeuvre d'art  n'est pour moi qu'un pis­ aller. Je prefere la vie.4

At  the  same  time  he warns  Gide  of his "lies,"  which  seem  to  consist  in  con­ sciously  creating an  appearance which  coincides  with  reality  or  "truth,"  repre­  senting   an  ironic  identicality  between   the  created, or  the  "lie," and  the real. Significantly enough, the  example he  chooses  to  demonstrate  his  "lying" is the self.
11 faut que je vous avertisse, Monsieur Gide, que je mens constamment ... ce n'est pas ce que vous croyez ... J'eprouve le meme besoin de mentir  et la meme satis­
faction  a mentir  qu'un  autre a montrer  la verite ... Non, ce n'est pas ce que vous
croyez ... Tenez  par exemple:  quand  quelqu'un  entend  un bruit subit a son cote,

68

THE  SEARCH FOR FPG


il tourne  Ia tete  ( ... ) : moi pas! ou quand  je Ia tourne,  c'est volontairement: je mens.

Thus In  Search  of Myself, anecdotal and  episodic,  apparently relating a  lived­ through situation and  crisis, sums up and  demonstrates, structurally and thematic­ ally, the essence of the "autobiography" itself. It also illustrates  the hiatus between  verite  and  mensonge, vie and  art manifested in the  "Conversation  avec  un  Alle­ mand." In  purporting to address  the  young  Frenchman in an  autobiography yet to be  written, the  essay or  prologue acts  as a signal  which,  as  it  turns  out,  itself contains the  message it announces. In its thematic structure, it  reflects  the  phases of life "lived  through" by the  author in terms  which  refer  with  the same  validity to the  artistic  problem  mentioned in the  dialogue with  Gide:  the mensonge is in the text presented to the reader, while the verite is to be discovered, by the  reader, in his recognition of the  irony  contained in the  text.
One  may say that  in In Search  of Myself the  problem  of the  artist  in a pioneer environment is only  the  most  superficial  one;  the  musings  of  the  narrator  lead to the  statement of antithesis between  life and  art  already  mentioned, while  the essay, itself an  art-form, is the  medium  used to represent  life, and  thus,  in a way, ironically resolves the  opposition it  expresses.  Furthermore the  entire   essay  may be seen as a "coded" revelation of FPG's  identity,  and  finally, as an  explicit  signal to Andre  Gide,  not  only  that  FPG  is alive, but  that, in fact,  the  dialogue noted down  in the  "Conversation avec  un  Allemand" is to  be continued. Whether the signal  is heard  or recognized  is not  the important thing.

Whether  he  [the  young Frenchman] ever read  the explanation   [of  his failure], what  did  it matter?  There  would  be others,  if not  today,  then  ten  decades  from now. And if there were none, at  no time, did it matter?  The  only thing  that  did matter,  as far as I was concerned,  was the fact  that  the attempt  had  been made. The  rest I must leave to the gods ...

But  in  its  attempt to  communicate with  the  Frenchman, the  essay  affirms, through its very literary  form  of existence,  the  presence  still of  the  common  de­ nominator, "a great enthusiasm for life and art," which seems at first to be negated  as the  narrator describes  his own  situation.
The  landscape image  at the beginning of the essay suggests itself quite  naturally to the aging  narrator, and  leaves open,  or seems to do so, the  alternative whether the  beginning of old age  will represent  the  end  of life or the  beginning of a new phase  of it. The  determining factor  is the  act  of will performed by the  author  in creating a literary  work, in which  he re-creates  his entire  life. The "beginning" suggested  by the landscape is an image  of birth  and  represents, in the artistic con­ text, the birth  of the work of art,  which, in turn,  represents  the life of the narrator. Through this work of art,  then,  the  author makes possible his own  re-birth: he is re-creating himself,  he is, as FPG  said  to Gide, "lying." The  work  of art,  an  act

6g

THE SEARCH FOR  FPG


of  will  of  the  author, defies  the  inevitability of  the  conditions of  his  life.  The synchronism of  the   beginning of  the   essay  and   an   undefined  condition  of  the "world," the  description of  which marks this  beginning, in  fact  defines  the  world as  one  "emerging from chaos" rather than one  about to  die  from entropy. This act  of definition marks the  beginning of creation, and makes of the  author, as the "creator" of the  world of the  work  of art, an alter deus, creator of an  altera natura. It is the  artist's will  which determines, symbolically, existence or  non-existence, birth or death. The essay  itself  marks the  affirmation of life  and art, and  a  nega­ tion   that the   landscape surrounding the   narrator  represents, literally or  meta­ phorically, the  end  of a world about to die from  entropy. Just  as in  the essay  the  life-art, truth-fiction  opposition is overcome by  the  form   of  the  essay  itself,  the  work  also  suggests the   writer's surmounting that   desperate phase   of  his life,  or that mood, designated by the  landscape.


NOTES

1 Douglas  0. Spettigue, FPC:  The European  Years  (Toronto:  Oberon, 1963).
2   A. J. M. Smith (ed.), Masks  of Fiction  (Toronto: McClelland & Stewart, 1961),
p. 14.
3  There is a further irony  in the apparition of the old man.  At seventy-four, he is six years older  than  the  narrator, and  thus  represents a warning as to what  his mental state  might  be six years  hence.  The  old  man  thus  indirectly stimulates the  resolve forming in his mind,  to write  his autobiography. The  longish  passage  dealing  with the  farmer's age and  that  of the  narrator may again  contain a reference  to Grove's real identity. In assuming his new identity  in Canada it was by six years that  he aged himself.
4  Andre  Gide,  "Conversation avec un Allemand  quelques  annees  avant la guerre," in
Incidences (Paris: NRF, Librairie Gallimard, 1924),  pp. 143-44.
5   Ibid.,  p. 14 r.




CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075  WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T 1W5  /228-4741






PERSONAL OBSESSION

VICTOR-LEVY BEAULIEU,  Jack  Kerouac:  a chicken-essay.  Translated  by Sheila  Fisch­ man. Coach House Press.

JACK KEROUAC  still  awaits  the  sound critical assessment he deserves, while the ranks  of  his  thoughtless emulators  swell. The  chicken-essay  is chicken criticism  for a number of reasons.
Firstly, Beaulieu  panders to the odd persistence  of  the  revolutionary spirit  of the sixties in popular Quebec culture. He zealously   tries   to  appropriate  Kerouac, the grand-daddy of the hippies,  as a Que­ becois. According to Beaulieu, Kerouac's frenzied    rapturous   "beatific"   ultra-ro­ mantic  American  Dream   was   only   a failed   escape   from    the   gloom   of   his French-Canadian  childhood.
Published   in  French in  1972, the chicken-essay    became    a   minor   cause­ celebre  for  the  Quebec  counter-culture. Three  years   later   Coach   House   Press, known  for  its  outdated  counter-cultural sympathies, seized  upon  the  book. Sheila Fischman, the translator of Roch  Carrier and  Marie-Claire Blais, apparently  chose topicality  over   excellence   in   Beaulieu's case.
The   book  proves  that   counter-culture
snobbism  can  be as  blindly  effete  as any other  kind.  After  quoting an  intense  pas­ sage from  Satori in Paris, Beaulieu bullies the  reader  with  this innuendo:
If you haven't begun to understand why I liked Jack from that minute, take this book and tear it  up.... This hommage to Jack has nothing to do with you-Understand: you aren't  needed.

This  is good advice,  for  the critical intel­
ligence  will  not  feel  comfortable in  this
 
stifling atmosphere of adulation. Note this embarrassing  bit  of  cheerleading about the  opening lines  of  Doctor Sax:  "Now that's  what  you call  starting a  book."
Like   most   disciples,   Beaulieu   suffers from the misconception that  emotional responses are more honest than reasoned appraisal: "and there's the fatigue of my weeping  eyes from   reading Jack's  books too  many  times."  He  protests  too  much, and  then  has a nightmare about  jumping off  a  building with  Jack, causing heart palpitations  and   nervous   exhaustion. Would   this  sort  of  nihilistic   goupie-ism have  pleased  Jack?
Jack    Kerouac  tried    to   write   spon­ taneously,  preventing recollected  thought or verbal  artifice  from  impeding the  rush of  idea-words.  In   his   autobiographical works he tried  to fuse  the  subject matter and  the  final  product  in  the  moment of creation.  Missing   this   essential    point,  Beaulieu   trots   out   the   trite   conclusion that  he  cannot  believe  in  autobiography because  the word is a lie.
Rather than  explicating Kerouac's  at­ tempt  to deal with  the artificiality of  lan­  guage,   Beaulieu   emulates  it  by  making the story of the chicken-essay's creation a part  of the text. The chicken-essay's neck must  be  wrung   by  his  impatience, says Beaulieu; indeed,  the  book  is  more   the chronicle of  a  personal obsession  than  a systematic inquiry.
At  most,  Beaulieu's thesis  is a  biogra­ pher's   chestnut, capable of  illuminating Kerouac's works, but  not  of  contributing to an evaluation of them. Yet it is an  ob­ vious  question,  which  must  be answered before  a comprehensive  view of Kerouac can  be  had: what  is the  extent and   na­ ture  of   the   French-Canadian  influence  upon  Kerouac's writing?
Certain facts are  undeniable. Born to French-Canadian immigrants in Lowell, Massachusetts, in 1922, Kerouac couldn't speak  English  until  the age of six.  (Beau­ lieu  gets  much   mileage   out  of   the  fact

71

BOOKS IN REVIEW



that  Jack's parents were  poor  rural Que­ becois, forced  to leave  their  homeland to "make a  few  dollars" in  American fac­ tories.)    The   home-influence  was   long­ lasting   for  Kerouac. He   lived  at   home after  a brief  stint  at Columbia University and  some abortive voyages as a merchant seaman, nursing his father until  his death in 1946. Even  during his Beat  years from
1947-61, Kerouac generally  reserved  the summer for  his adventures and  returned home  to "memere" each  winter to  write them  up.
Unfortunately,  Beaulieu does  not  ex­ plain  this  influence   fully  or  clearly. Me­  mere's   tenderness  and   resignation,  and  her  Ti-Jean's  devotion   to  her,  are  des­ cribed    as   peculiarly   French-Canadian. Much more  acute  and  relevant is  Ann Charters' observation, in her  biography of Kerouac,    that     Kerouac's   confessional  works   were   written  to  memere  in   the spirit  of  penitent to  priest.
Ann Charters' biography of Kerouac is a valuable piece of scholarship, for it is a plainly  but clearly  written correlation of Kerouac's works with his life. In contrast, Beaulieu   pretends  to   be  interpretative,
and  fails.  Yet  ultimately both  books are
pedestrian:  one   might   say   that   Char­ ters  is a  "middle-of-the-road" pedestrian whereas  Beaulieu  is a rebel-pedestrian (if either were  possible).
Beaulieu  fails  to consider alternative interpretations; for example, he attributes Kerouac's three  failed  marriages and  his moody aloofness at parties to a typically French-Canadian fear  of  women.  Beau­ lieu does not  consider  the  possibility  that  it  was  not  women   but  domesticity  that  Kerouac feared, as  the  numerous affairs  depicted in his novels suggest.
As for  Kerouac's novels,  they  were en­ visaged  as a Proustian series, relating the life-story   of  Jack   Duluoz.  There is  no need  to  doubt  the  French-Canadian in­ fluence  in  the  childhood portion of  the Duluoz  legend:   Visions  of Gerard  is  a
 Catholic elegy to  Jack's brother, and Doctor  Sax  is haunted by  parochial  re­ ligious   gloom.   However,  Beaulieu's   in­ sistence  upon  this  Catholic strain  in  the later  novels is questionable: for example, is Desolation Angels a  tale  of  mixed  an­ guish  and  "Franciscan  tenderness", or  is this  just a handy metaphor for Kerouac's Romantic  idealism,  which  was  more  in­ fluenced in later  years by Buddhism than Catholicism? Beaulieu  does not ask the question.
Beaulieu  perverts  his material to fit his ptolemaic system, a weakness  which  has saturated   Canadian   criticism   in    the works  of  Atwood,   Jones,   Moss,  Ricou, and  other  "small-Fryes." Unfortunately, Beaulieu    replaces    traditional   criticism with an approach that  is simply shoddy.

JOHN W. ROBINSON



THE SPACE OF
MEMORY

HENRY  BEISSEL,  The Salt   I  Taste. DC  Books,
$2.50·
LEONA  GOM,  The  Singletree. Sono  Nis, $4·95·
JOHN   BAGLOW,    Emergency   Measures.   Sono
Nis, $4·95·
HENRY BEISSEL  is not  only  the  excellent translator of Walter Bauer's poetry: The Price of Morning  ( 1968)  and  A Different Sun  ( 1975). The  Salt  I  Taste  is in  fact Beissel's third collection  of poems, a very good   one,  certainly superior  to  Bauer's work  that  Beissel has  so patiently  trans­ lated.
A professor of English at Concordia University, Beissel is inspired by his own space  in  "Midwinter Moon   Over  Mon­
treal," a   poem  far   less  naive   than   the usual  English  "Toronto poems"  and  not as  pompous  as  the  abstract  glorification of the land  that  is found  in French Cana­ dian  poetry. Beissel's method is an  ironic

BOOKS IN REVIEW



one, sometimes  cleverly half-veiled by the metaphorical world  he creates:

Icicles hang from  eaves
like  rows of tapered candles
each with  a star  on its wick.

What  the   poet   implies   here   is  that nature is still seen, in spite of all our "progress," through a  religiously  trained eye;  that   words  create images  still  using our  mind  while "in  the canyons  of Notre Dame   de  Grace" echoes   the  voice  of  a "police siren." The  structure of this  long poem  reveals the ability of Beissel the playwright, and  the  text  reads  like a dramatic  dialogue   in  which   the  second voice   points,   with   fine   recurrent   meta­ phors,  to man's  dream and  desire to "spin out  the  same  old  tales"  until  "the moon is trapped."
But  in  the  main   part   of  The Salt   I
Taste Beissel tries himself  to reach  for the impossible   "celestial   cocoon".  "Configu­ rations  of Sea and  Sand" is in fact  a long poem  divided  into  seventeen  parts.  In  it we  see  the   poet   struggling  against  the outside   world   with   military   metaphors. They   stress  the  paradox   that   love  and therefore life, on one hand and  hate  and therefore death on the other are  all based on nature's rhythm:

Drumbeat of waves. Slow  march of the  surf against the  coast.

And  the poem continues almost  with Homeric  harmony. The   seascape   taught the  poet "the  fury of passions." The earth resists  the  endless attacks of the  water  as the  poet looks at  the cruel  liquid  washing his feet. The sea "holding sunken  secrets" contains "other voices from  other shores" and teaches humans that "only the strongest  survive." Finally  the  sea  which is  both   a  cradle   and   a  tomb   will  not reveal to the poet the secret of his origin. Beissel associates  our  Canadian space  to the  universal  evolution in which  we are transformed.  These    are   not   extremely
 original  ideas  but  they  are  poetically felt and  poetically  expressed :
Bitter  ballads of the  sea
on  the  cold  lips of this  conch
The  wind  blows a  tune on  the cracked flutes
of salt-crusted  cliffs.

Beissel is a fine  poet  with  a great  sense of  craftsmanship and   we  should   all  pay more attention to his works. Shorter texts like "Triptych of  Woodcuts" are  really carved   on  the  surface of  words  as  even "The Deaf  mute" uses  "his  hands"  like "a  pair  of wrestlers." It is high  time  for one  of our  large  houses  of publication to come out with Henry Beissel's collected poems.

Had  she stuck with  Alberta's "dictator­ ships   of  ice"   Leona  Gom   could   have become  a poet,  but  now  her  "metaphors labour  stiffly on the page" and confessions like "had   affairs" or  "become  a scholar" give  away  a  laughable  imitation of  the already  ridiculous Erica Jong.
On  the  other   hand   John   Baglow  is a half-generous optimist:  half  of his  royal­ ties are going to "CARAL for the defence  of  Dr.  Henry   Morgantaler."  But  if  we seriously  considered the  importance and the  quality   of   Emergency  Measures  we would  urge abortionists to raise money  by selling  chocolate  bars.   Yes,  Baglow,   as you   say:   "those  Vietnam  kids,"   what "poetry" will  "put skin  back"  on  them? But  then  for  logic's  sake  let  me  ask  the pendant  question:   What   "poetry"  will "put skin back" on "unborn" children? Well, contradictions don't seem to bother Baglow. Here  is another one. The book is dedicated to  the  late  Pablo  Neruda, the great  Chilean communist poet, who, if he were still  alive,  would  probably sue  Bag­ low for impersonating both  a  Leftist and a man of letters.
Leona  Gom's  experience is simple: growing   up  on  a  farm,  discovering the world  and settling  down.  There is at  least

73

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



coherence and   unity  in  the  general  or­ ganization  of  her   book.  Her   childhood memories   have  inspired her  best  poetry. The  poems   echoing  the   death  of   her father are  sharp-edged and  the  emotions they  reveal   are  contained  with   remark­ able stoicism. Their directness and impact culminate  in   "Widow"  where  "the clothes" of the dead  man  are "the hardest to face"  for  the  poet's  mother. As for the children:

They thought of the  day
they  would   be  taking down   her  clothes, piling  his and  hers  together,
as perhaps it should be.

Only  the  first  third  of her  book, how­
ever,  has  real  human and  poetic  impact.

ALEXANDRE AMPRIMOZ



THE VINDICATION OF BEN HECHT

oouo   FETHERLING,   The   Five   Lives   of  Ben
Hecht. Lester  & Orpen, $r r.gs.

Douo FETHERLING,  whose  own  creative life   tends   to  straddle  the  gap   between literature and  newspaper  joumalism,  has always  been  fascinated with  writers who in  their  lives  and  work  have  spanned a number of  worlds.  Up  to  now  we  know Fetherling mostly  for  his  poems  and  for his criticism  in  such  papers  and  journals as  the  Toronto Star,  the Globe  and  Mail and   Saturday  Night,  but   he   has   been working  for some time on American writ­ ers  of  the  between-wars  years,  and  par­  ticularly  on those who emerged out of the Chicago  Renaissance, which  had   begun even  before  the  outbreak of  World  War I. He   is,  one   hears,   in   the   process  of gathering material for a biography of the poet   Maxwell  Bodenheim, and   in  some ways   his  most   recent   book,   The  Five Lives  of Ben  Hecht, can  be  regarded as

74
 its prelude,  for Hecht and  Bodenheim represented varying aspects of the same movement.
It - the Chicago Renaissance -was a movement of  extraordinary vitality  and, as  Fetherling points  out,  included  some of the most significant figures in modem American literature, with  Hecht as "the star of a cast that  included Maxwell Bodenheim, Floyd Dell, Burton Rascoe, Kenneth   Rexroth   and    Vincent    Star­ rett.... " It might  be argued that  Hecht was  more  a  catalyst   than   a  star  at  that  particular  time  and   place,   but  his  cen­ trality   to  the  Chicago  movement is evi­ dent,  and  also his loyalty  to it, so that  to the  end  he  never  quite realized  that  the bizarrely  violent  and  corrupt Chicago  he knew   represented   the   end    of   an   old America  rather than the  beginning of  a new one.
Hecht's reputation has  slumped in  re­
cent  decades,  and  the  impression  has spread   that   he   was  a  potentially  good writer  who deserted  the pursuit of true literature  for   the   moneypots  of   Holly­ wood.  Money  Hecht indeed  earned   and enjoyed,  but  he  was  willing  to endanger his  sources   of  income   when   he  felt   a cause was important, and did  so in pub­ licly  supporting the  Jewish   terrorists   in pre- r 948 Israel.
Fetherling also  argues,   and   well  sup­
ports   his  argument,  that   Hecht was  in fact a writer  of great  versatility, and  that his  screen-writing,  sometimes   brilliantly original   and  sometimes mere  hackwork, did   not   permanently hann  his  literary powers,  so that  to  the  end  he  retained a great   deal  of  the  skill  and   imagination which  in early days had  won the admira­ tion of the  avant  garde. After  all, in  the beginning  Hecht  combined  the  role of a somewhat    sensational   newspaper   man with  that  of  fiction-writer and  dramatist, so  that   the  change into   a  screenwriter doubling as  a  literary writer   was  not  a

BOOKS IN REVIEW



fundamental one, and  Fetherling argues that   Hecht's  dexterity in  so  many  fields
was  based  in  an  admirable adaptability and dedication  to   purpose. The  fact    that  one man    could  write,    near    the    start  of   his career, for  Mother   Earth,  Emma Goldman's anarchist  magazine, and  later for  the  Marx Brothers, indicates a strength and  not a weakness.

And he concludes:
He was a general practitioner in an  age of specialists. He  did  not  by any  means debase esthetic experiences, and   he  infused  intelli­ gence  into   the   popular  culture,  making  it more   inventive, meaningful and  important than it was before  he arrived.

It is a case  well put,  and  though  I am not   wholly   convinced  that   Hecht  was either   so  good  or  so  central a  writer  in his   age   as   Fetherling contends, I  am moved  to read  him again  and  am already convinced that  in  Hecht's career  we see mirrored, perhaps more  clearly  than  any­ where   else,  that   rending struggle  in  the heart     of    North     American   culture - Canadian  as   much   as  American -be­ tween  the  populist   trends  of  the  society and  the  inevitable elitism  of art.

ANTHONY APPENZELL


DEEP EXPERIMENT

ELDON GARNET,  Brebeuf, A Martyrdom of Jean
De. Press  Porcepic, $4·95·
ELDON   GARNET  HAS WRITTEN  a  largely blank-versed  narrative  employing  relig­ ious   and   erotic   metaphor  in   the   ripe imagery  of  fin de  siecle  decadence. For­  mal structures are, for  the most  part,  ab­  sent,  and   there   is  lively  emphasis   upon the ikonistic element of the  printed page. The   author  uses  a  minimal  vocabulary and  makes  a  valiant, if vain,  attempt to explore  this late  in the  twentieth century, the frontiers of form.
In a loose, spasmodic  way, there  is per­
sistent  reference   to  Catholic historic  en-
 counters of a missionary  nature, with  the indigenous  peoples   of   seventeenth-cen­ tury  eastern  Canada.  But  it  seldom  rises to  even  silhouette,  and for  the  pleasure  of   reading,  the   subject    matter  is  not worth  pondering. In  fact,  Brebeuf,  to be enjoyed  at  all,  should   not  be  subject   to much  by the way of intellectual delibera­ tion.  It is  best  read  aloud   as  this  treat­ ment  partially   atones  for  the  poverty  of language, and  inflection can  enrich  the simple  sounds  of  the  narrative and  im­ part  value  to  the  multiple  repetitions.
But what is it all worth  and  should Brebeuf have  seen  the  light  of subsidized published  day?
I would  say yes on  both  counts. Some
form  of experimentation, surely,  is a sine qua  non  of a  living  literature, and  there is an  innate  artistic  worth  to  the  volume too. Though unimportant at the level of intellectuality, semantic coherence, or history,  it  still  leaves  us  with  something vital,  however elusive.
Although Garnet  seems  wholly  unfa­ miliar  with  comparable  experimentation to  his  own,   over   the   past   sixty   years, something of the energy of his anger with syntactical  orthodoxy   enlightens  many passages  of  the  work.  And   where   that  links   up   with   the   erotic   pulsation  we benefit   from   a  true  literary  voice.  For example, within  the context of an  histori­  cal   account  of   the   martyrdom  of  two Jesuit  priests  of  New  France in  the  year
I 649,  we  get  the  following fragment  of verse which demonstrates both  verbal strength  in  homespun  language  and   a poetic   precision   which,  in   conjunction with  kindred  pieces scattered throughout the I44 pages of Brebeuf, makes Eldon Garnet's volume   a  worthwhile   publica­ tion:

Exterminas is a playful fellow once  in  the  dark  pit
my  ground you  become  my  toy
with  the  tips  of my  teeth
I tease

75

BOOKS IN REVIEW



prick  your  soul hold  you  under despair
& just  as you're about to choke give  up
I lift  you
give  you  a breath
& plunge you  back  into  the  pit
forever repeating the  cycle
hold  hope   before your   starving  eyes just  as  your  fingers almost touch
hear   my  hissing
as  you  reach empty air....

That  particular section   continues for  a further ten lines without losing control of mood  or quality  of expression. And  there are passages of savage obscenity  and the sexually   explicit   which   appeal  to  more than  the  merely  prurient in us.
Something of  the  same  quality, or  at least  the same  energetic drive,  pulses  the anti-God and  anti-Catholic narratives. Only  the  trouble  is that  blasphemy today tends   to  appear quaint  and   the  persis­ tence  of a  wildly  simplistic  credo  which avers   that    the   European   conquest  of North   America   was  a  moral  affront  to the  native   peoples   in  their   Rousseauian paradise   can   easily   distract  from   the poem.
At this level, of course, Garnet is hardly
being   original    in   uttering  the   cliched mish-mash of liberal  sentiment so modish in  Canada  today.   Behind   this  poem   is the   patronizing  attitude   of   the   guilt­ ridden  Anglo-Saxon towards  the   noble savage,  and  all  the  ridiculous  anachron­ ism  of  which   twentieth-century  liberal fundamentalists  are  capable. So  that  we have  here  the  wicked  Jesuits,   the  cruel and    rapacious    French   explorers,  the saintly   Indians   who   were   incapable  of moral  transgressions in  their   cosmos  of un-fallen man.
But the fact remains that  even such kindergarten concepts are  not  necessarily impediments to  poetry. Indeed, if Eldon Garnet was some kind of apollonian spirit whose  work  was  intinct with  cerebrality, he probably  never  could  have  written the luminous  dyonisian  matter   that    does
 grace   Brebeuf. The  thoughts animating this  book may  be immature,  demonstrat­ ing   a   pathetic  historical   obscurantism, but  the fire and  flame  of  its  moral  ardor compel  our  attention  and  admiration.
It is not my intention to patronise Gar­ net,    because    while    finding   myself   so strongly  at  variance with  his assertions,  I admire  the   more   disciplined   and   thus more  effective  aspects   of  his  creativity. When   his  words  rise  up  and   sing,  the hesitations   over   his   historical    myopia,  criticisms   of   his   emaciated  vocabulary, the  cute  typographical inventions, all  die away. And, paradoxically, it is in the cen­  tral  core  of his artistic statement that  he is  most  truly  experimental.
The obvious  nonconformity is the vari­ ant  uses of type sizes, the  arbitrary lineal spaces  and   the  employment of  minimal photographic  ikons:    but   these  are   not really    the    effective   constituents   of   a proper  restlessness  with  received  literary norms.  It is when  the  poet  forgets   the tools  of  his  chic  rhetoric and  allows  his deepest  artistic  instincts   to  surface,   that  he is able to still our misgivings and  carry  us off in  the  orbit  of his  undoubted im­ agination.  And  it  is  then   that   the  self­ conscious  attitudinizing is forgotten and  the  true  poetic  voice  is clearly  heard.

DAVID   WATMOUGH


ACADIAN TRIBUTE

ANTONINE   MAILLET,   Les   Cordes-de-bois.  Le­
meac.

WITH HER LATEST NOVEL, Les Cordes-de­ bois, which  recently came within  one vote of  winning France's  coveted   Prix  Con­ court,   Antonine  Maillet  has  joined   the company  of   Canada's  two  pre-eminent women novelists, Gabrielle Roy and  Mar­ garet  Laurence. Until  this book,   her seventh  work of fiction,  Maillet  was  pri­ marily  known  for  the  play  La  Sagouine,

BOOKS IN REVIEW



which  has  had  remarkable success  both here  and  abroad.
All  of  Antonine  Maillet's  works  ex­ plore   one  of  Canada's  richest   regional cultures, the Acadian. All more or less ex­ ploit  the distinctive dialect  possibilities of l'Acadie, making   them  difficult   reading  for the  uninitiated already operating in a second language and accounting, perhaps, for  some  of   the   fascination  her   works have generated in France. For the French, I imagine,  she is a kind of Acadian Mark Twain.
Maillet's first  attempt at  a  novel, Pointe-aux-Coques, was hesitant and de­ rivative.  It  is a  combination of  Evange­ line  and  Maria  Chapdelaine, telling  the story of a young school  teacher who finds her  way  back  from  the  United States  to the   land   of   her   immediate  forebears,  where she finally chooses to marry  a local lad and  remain in a small  fishing  village. Some  Acadian  vocabulary is used  in  the book,  but  nothing which   would  impede  the  average  reader   unfamiliar with  the dialect.
Compared   with 	Pointe-aux-Coques,
Les  Cordes-de-bois is audacious and  tri­ umphant,  both   in  its  handling  of   lan­ guage  and   in  local  colour.  Despite  the fact  that  the  book contains  a  number of ideas  and  themes  in  common  with  other  successful   Canadian   novels   in   English and  French, it stands as a unique  achieve­  ment,  a celebration of the qualities of the indomitable  Acadians. The  heroine, La Bessoune    (from    bessonne  -twin-al­ though   indications  are   that   she  was  a single birth), is a striking example of the new type of protagonist who has emerged  in   Canadian  fiction.   She   reminds   one particularly of Hoda  in Adele  Wiseman's Crackpot. A "fille   des  matelots"-sail­ ors'   girl -descended   from   a   runaway seaman,  probably   fathered  by  another, and  given  to accommodating a new gen­ eration  of   lusty,  seafaring  men   whose ships  are  in  port,  she  is  proud,  defiant
 and   self-reliant.  She   makes   no  excuses and  asks no pardon of God  or  man.  The community  she   lives   in   is  called   Les Cordes-de-bois, a shanty town  on a knoll above   the  town,   housing   a  whole  con­ glomeration   of   bootleggers,   smugglers,  misfits  and   outcasts  from   conventional society,   the   latter   symbolized   by   Ma­ Tante-la-Veuve- the  double   of  W.  0. Mitchell's  Mrs.  Abercrombie -and her nieces "les   sept   filles de  barbier."
Although La  Bessoune  fits the  pattern of  the  new  Canadian hero,  Les  Cordes­ de-bois also provides  an excellent example of the familiar, traditional  pretre-manque character. Like  Father  Dowling  in  Such  is  My   Beloved,  Abbe   Savoie   in   Gilles Marcotte's A  Poids  de  Dieu  and   Philip  Bentley  in  As  For  Me  and  My   House, Maillet's upetit   pretre"  is  idealistic   and earnest.  And    like   the   other  fictional  clergymen, he is eventually overwhelmed by  the   "respectable" citizens,   amid   in­ nuendoes that  his  dealings  with  the seductive and  majestic Bessoune,  as  well as with  her  "godless" cohorts,  are  not restricted  to the saving  of souls.
The   novel   abounds  in  gripping  epi­
sodes from  a somewhat bizarre  past, such as "la   vente   des  pauvres"-sale of  the poor-an   auctioning  off  of   the   com­ munity's  indigent  cripples,  orphans and chronically ill to  the  lowest  bidder. The  auction, held  in  the  name  of  Christian charity, takes  place  after  market on  the steps  of  the  church, and  the  idea,  as  in any  auction, is  to  get  a  bargain -per­ haps  as much  as  $200  for  the  keep  of a bedridden old  lady  who will  die  within  a  week  or  two.  The  auctioneer, for  his part,  tries to dispose of all items at as low a cost to the church as possible. The only comparable  episode  I know  of in  Cana­ dian  literature  is  the   procession   of  the
2 I     wheelbarrows  containing   the   gro­ tesquely  deformed  vegetable-children  of the  Laliberte family  in Roch  Carrier's Il est  par la, le solei!, in  tribute to God  for

77

BOOKS IN REVIEW



his wisdom  in assigning  the  difficult  tasks to his most  faithful servants.
The auction in  Les  Cordes   however does not  run  according to plan'. First,  the'
"petit   pretre,"  to  the  dismay  of  his  su­ perior,  M. le Cure, disrupts the  proceed­ ings  when  visions of slave  markets come into  his mind.  Finally  the  disgusted Bes­ soune and  her  friends  from  Les Cordes­ de-bois take  all of the auctioned unfortu­ nates  for  nothing-a  bid  which  cannot be  undercut. And  although  the  church saves money, the good "Christian" house­ holds lose both the chance for a profit and the opportunity to practise charity.
.	hat
JUStlce when  the  winter turns  unbearably cold and  the shanty-town dwellers  have already   burned  all   their   furniture  and floor  boards  before  the  end  of February. All  that   is  left  is  a  carved  sea-chest­ his ory                 the   Acadians  to   keep the1r most-valued belongings in something transportable. The chest  provides enough  fuel o
mormng the weather has turned mild.
Maillet's novel presents  a gallery of colourful characters, including the  Scot­ tish-born   wood-merchant    MacFarlane and a diminutive, yarn-spinning Irish sea­ man  called  Tom  Thumb, who  befriends  the  "petit   pretre" and  is sheltered by la Bessoune when  he jumps ship. In the final analysis,  however,   it  is la Bessoune who remains  imprinted on  the  reader's mind.  While  the seven  daughters of  the  barber  rock on  their  front  porch  and  Ma-Tante­ la V euve busies herself  guarding the  pub­ lic morality, the  girl  on  the  hill  does  the real  work  of the  world.  Tough, resource­ ful, indomitable, she embodies  the  quali­  ties  of   the   dispossessed   Acadians  who managed  to  endure and  prevail   against  all  odds.  Antonine  Maillet  has  written a fitting  tribute to her people.

RONALD SUTHERLAND
 TRIAL AND TEDIUM

JOHN  SANDMAN,   Declinine Gracefully. Coach
House  Press.
DAVE   MCFADDEN,  The  Great  Canadian Sonnet.
Coach  House Press.
DA vrn YOUNG, Agent Provocateur. Coach  House
Press.

ToRONTO'S COACH   HOUSE PRESS has  a reputation for  encouraging experimental work -to  the  point  of  sometimes  pub­ lishing  books which  other  presses  would consider   unpublishable.  Agent   Provoca­ teur  and   The   Great   Canadian  Sonnet might   be  classified  as  such  experiments with   literary   form,  but  their   deliberate obfuscation of  trivial  content will  prob­  ably  fatigue  most  readers. On  the  other  hand, John  Sandman's Declining Grace­ fully is all-too-simplistic while  mercifully  brief in its treatment of its frivolous  sub­ ject.
	. 	'

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



their  determination to  stay  up  late  in  a city which  closes down  early.
The  entertaining story-lines   of   well­ crafted picaresque fiction can compensate for  weak  characterization,  but the  vacu­ ousness  of  Sylvia  and  her  fellow  night­  crawlers is not offset by an engaging story. The  books   begins   with    Sylvia's    vain efforts   to  seduce  her  best  friend's  hus­ band    (rendered  impotent  by  alcohol); frustrated, she  wanders   the  streets   until she  lands  at  the  apartment of  a  homo­  sexual friend where she is again  thwarted in  a seduction attempt; finally,  she  picks up  a  middle-aged black  musician, brings him  home  and  then  throws  him  out  be­ fore  he becomes  too amorous.
It would   be  unfair   to  denigrate  the book  simply  because  it  has  such  a  weak plot;  after   all,  not  much  seems  to  hap­ pen  in  Waiting   for Godot  either.  Simi­ larly,  Sandman's lack  of  characterization is  not  in  itself  grounds  for  disliking  the book -unless  we  are  also  prepared  to completely dismiss  Don  Quixote  or  The American   Dream  for  the  same   reason. But  enduring  literary   works  which   lack characterization andjor plot are sustained by metaphors which  have  meaning in a broad  context; and  these works  may  also assume some importance because  they experiment in some way with  the  limita­ tions  of  the  form.  Unfortunately,  Sand­ man's  conventional, extended short  story generally  locks characters into situations which  neither reflect nor illumine life beyond    the    immediate  pale    of   these events.
At best, he may  be using Sylvia's shal­ lowness and  thwarted plans  in  the  same way  that  Luis  Bunuel's  surreal  film  The Discreet Charm  of the  Bourgeoisie em­ ploys   a   repeatedly   interrupted   dinner party  to satirize the hollowness of middle­ class   preoccupations  and   social   rituals. Sylvia and  the bourgeoisie  both  remain unsated  because  they  try  to feed  a moral and  spiritual hunger with  sex or food.
 The title Declining Gracefully may be intended to suggest that  this process is enervating, but  the  phrase   takes  on  an­ other   meaning  when   Sylvia   is   offered  marijuana by a  man  whom  she  is  about  to attempt to seduce.  When  he  expresses surprise   at  her  declaration  that  the  use of the drug  is a "filthy habit," she apolo­  gizes  for  her  apparent   vehemence  and  explains,  "I  just meant to decline grace­  fully."  This   refusal   may   be  connected thematically to  other instances in  which Sylvia declines  to make  genuinely human contact. At the end  of the  book, this pen­ chant   is  underscored  when  she  declines to  answer   her   telephone and   contem­ plates  stabbing it  with  a  pair  of  scissors. Angry and  frustrated though she  may  be at   her  failures,   she  does  not   bother  to actually   carry   out   even   this   obviously symbolic   expression   of   rage   against    a means  of  communication.
Unlike  Declining Gracefully, Dave Mc­ Fadden's  The   Great   Canadian   Sonnet does not pretend to be a novel. This thick,
oddly-shaped book (roughly four-inches square), seems  to  be  a  compendium of free-associations of ideas and  images. McFadden  usually  strings   out   this  ma­ terial   in   the   diction   of   contemporary poetry,  but  the  book is set  up  in chapters and  prose paragraphs. Adding to the con­ fusion,  Greg  Curnoe  has  illustrated this text with  almost  two  hundred line  draw­ ings, each  of which is a bizarre concretiz­ ation  of a phrase on  the opposite page.
To   some   extent,  this   particular   co­ ordination  of   phrases   and   drawings   is similar to the marriage of  William Blake's illustrations  to  individual   metaphors  in facing   pages  of   an   edition  of  Edward Young's    Night    Thoughts.  But    while Blake's  work  is  startling for  its  vividness and reinforcement of eschatological over­ tones, Curnoe's drawings imitate the scratchy  simplicity  of graffiti  as they  add the artist's  private  associations to those already  worked  out  in  the  text.  For  the

79

BOOKS IN REVIEW



most  part, Curnoe juxtaposes icons  of contemporary popular culture around themes  suggested  by phrases  which  would at first seem impossible  to concretize (e.g. "Why  I Am  Not  An  Anarchist," and "Science Will Find  Its  Niche") .
But   while  Curnoe's  surreal   combina­
tions  are  sometimes   striking and   clever, they accompany a tedious  text. The book is gruelling partly  because  of its parochial attention to details of life peculiar  to Hamilton, Ontario,  and   partly  because its trail  of images,  parodies and  self-con­ scious references  to art  seems  to lead  no­ where.   Of   course,   such   self-indulgence might  be expected   after  McFadden's in­ troductory explanation  that   he  is still  as depressed  as  he  was  when  he  wrote  this book.  Appropriately,  then,  the  last  illus­ tration to  the  text  is  entitled "It Wasn't  as if I'd  Come  to  Any Destination."
David  Young's  Agent  Provocateur does
not  seem  to  get  anywhere either, but  at least we can identify the tradition from which it springs. Young appropriately dedicates the  book  to  Marcel Duchamp
-a very secretive  man  who,  as an agent of    the     surrealist    cause,     deliberately courted   public  outrage. Young's  experi­ ment  also owes something to  pop  art  in­ sofar  as  the  book  draws  on  the  styles of popular  fiction   so  boldly   that   the  end result  is  as  controversial  as  Andy  War­  hol's  Brillo  boxes.
Motivation, characterization and time­
frames  in  this  surreal  story  are  so vague and   confusing  that   it  is  not   surprising that   one   reviewer   of  this   book   simply stopped reading it half-way through. The narrative begins  in  an  extreme imitation of  the  first-person argot of  194o's  detec­ tive fiction.  In  the course  of  investigating a  plot  loosely connected  with the  zipper industry,   the    agent-narrator   suddenly  blacks  out   (indicated by  a  blank   chap­ ter) :  the  story  back-tracks, switches   to third-person narration, and  then  stutters forward in fairly conventional prose laps-

8o
 ing into  the style of cheap science-fiction. On  the  last  two  pages,  the  voice  returns to the first-person, using almost  the same words  which  opened  the  book -except that   the  hero  now  indicates  that   he  is about  to embark  on an  investigation con­ nected  with  the hockey equipment indus­  try. While  all of this is at  least as tedious  as  the  other   two   books  reviewed  here, Young  does  show  a  genuine interest   in expanding  the   limits  of  the   form   and  might  well go  on  to write  prose  which  is both innovative and  reasonably engaging.

BRUCE BAILEY



BOX INTO GARDEN

CONSTANCE BERESFORD-HOWE, A Population of
One.  Macmillan, $g.gs.
CAROL SHIELDS,   The   Box  Garden.  McGraw-
Hill  Ryerson,  $g.gs.

NovELS BY WOMEN  featuring female pro­ tagonists  with  a  sense  of  humour  and  a talent  for  smvival  under   adverse  condi­  tions   are   almost   a   new   sub-genre  in modern literature. One  could  be cynical and   suppose   them   written  to   fill  the need established by burgeoning Women's  Studies   Programmes   across   the   North American  continent. Or  simply acknowl­ edge  that   there  are  currently  a  tremen­ dous  number of women  of  indeterminate ages  who  are  living  and  working  alone, or as single parents, and their  experiences  and  perceptions form  very valid  material for  fiction.  Shields'  heroine  speaks  of  "a scuttling  metaphysic  of  survival." Not  a bad phrase.
Constance Beresford-Howe is known as
the  author of  a  warm  and   witty  novel, The   Book  of Eve   ( 1973), which  relates the adventures of a sixty-five-year-old woman in Montreal whose first pension cheque  precipitates an  escape from  a middle-class suburb  and   a  boring   hus­ band.  The cover of A Population of  One

BOOKS IN REVIEW



describes  it as the  second  in a trilogy be­ gun  with  The Book  of Eve.  The  second novel  features  a  thirty-year-old  woman, and   a  projected  third   will  deal  with   a much  younger  woman, to balance a series entitled "The Voices  of Eve."
A  Population of One, while  amusing, is less successful  than  The Book  of Eve. The  new novel is marred by trite  dialogue and   superficial situations. The  heroine's naivety   is  not   always   credible,  but   the novel  has  some fine  comic  moments and its final statement rings  true.
Carol  Shields  is a  poet,  critic,  and  the author of one  earlier novel,  Small  Cere­ monies   ( 1976), winner of  the  Canadian Authors' Association  Literary  Award  for fiction.  Its  protagonist, a  biographer, is fascinated and  puzzled  by  the  mysterious  reality   of   other    people's   lives,   private  worlds  where  she  is  forbidden  to  enter. The  heroine of   The   Box   Garden   feels equally  fascinated  by  different  personal­ ities  and   equally   incapable  of  compre­ hending them.  Actually,  Shields  does manage to create one living personality, Charleen Forrest, whose  complexities  we may share. The  comparison with  a writer like Margaret Laurence -made by some critics  on  the  basis  of Small  Ceremonies
-cannot be taken  seriously. Nevertheless,
The Box Garden  establishes this Ottawa writer   as  a  promising  novelist,   a  story­ teller  with  a sense of the  human  comedy and  a poet's  command of  language.
A  Population  of  One   begins  in  1969 with  Wilhelmina Doyle,  better  known  as Willy,  en  route  to  Montreal to  be  inter­ viewed  for  a teaching job in  the  English Department of a university  not  unlike Sir George  Williams.  She  has  two objectives. The   first  is  to  get  the   job :   the   recent death   of  her   invalid   mother   has  freed Willy for a belated  career. The second  is to  get  married, "or  at  the  very  least  to have  an  affair." The  latter  plan  is new and  Willy thinks  of it as The  Project.
As you will have guessed, Willy gets the
 job.  This  gives  Beresford-Howe  a  clear field for a satiric  portrait of a modern university department beset with student demands,  petty   feuds,   private  neuroses and  public  crises. The characters tend  to be comic types and include  a lecherous apartment superintendent, a handsome colleague whose devotion to his mother plays havoc  with  his  lovelife,  and  a crotchety old chairman, still lusty as he nears  retirement.
Events  are seen from  Willy's  viewpoint and  are related  in her voice. Like Shields' heroine  Charleen, Willy  is in flight  from her  earlier   life  (an  alcoholic father and a  neurotic, prudish   mother) .  Again  like Charleen, Willy  has  an  ambivalent  rela­ tionship  with  a  sister  who  has  somehow escaped  from the traumas which continue to  shape   Willy's   nineteenth-century  re­ actions   to   twentieth-century  situations. Beresford-Howe has a talent  for comedy laced with pathos, as illustrated by her heroine's romantic trip  to the States  with Bill Trueblood, where  Willy's fumbling precautions against  parenthood turn  out to be completely  unnecessary.
Willy  herself  is more  than  a  type.  By the novel's end, she has attained a fair measure  of  maturity and  the  realization that   perhaps   The  Project   was  miscon­ ceived. She is likely to remain alone,  and decides to face this prospect with  dignity: "Loneliness is  just  a  condition, like  ar­  thritis  or  claustrophobia. Incurable. And far  from  enviable.  But  it's  my condition, and  I'm at  last prepared to face  it; even accept  it.... There is a  modest  satisfac­  tion,  even  a sort  of  art,  in  island-dwell­ ing."
The  novel is a comic put-down of romantic illusions,  an  honest  attempt at portraying a kind of loneliness  which  is experienced by many  individuals of both sexes in our modern society. It points  out that   there  are  worse  things  than  loneli­ ness; and  that  all of us constitute, at  one stage or another, a population of one.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Shields'  title symbol is apt,  and  clever. It appears  initially   as  a  literal  box  of fine  grass  seed and  sifted  earth, gift  of a mysterious Brother  Adam  with  whom Charleen is corresponding. Gradually  we realize  that  the real box is the small Scar­ borough bungalow where  Charleen  grew up  and   in  which  her  mother still  lives; its postage-stamp garden, and  the  stifling mentality of Mrs. McNinn. The box gar­ den's ultimate  analogue is the  deceptive exterior  and  complex   core  of  a  human being, full of  possibilities, ripe for growth, adaptable.  Charleen's  journey   from   the suburbs of   Toronto  to  Vancouver  and back  to  Toronto for,  of  all  things,   her mother's  wedding,   is a  journey   towards  freedom. Both Charleen and  Willy Doyle are cautious optimists  with a strong  belief in future possibilities.
Shields'  heroine   is a  thirty-eight-year­ old divorcee who lives in Vancouver with her  teenage son Seth. Through Charleen's ex-husband, a  belated  Flower  Child, and her  trendy  friends  Doug  and  Greta Sav­ age, Shields satirizes the fads and  neuroses of   the   sixties  and   seventies.   Seth,   and Charleen's orthodontist lover  Eugene, are pillars   of   normalcy  in   a   slightly   mad world.
Charleen's  forbidding  mother   repre­ sents the dreg3 of what  Hugh MacLennan would  call  "puritanism."  Her  household  is  a   place   of  anxiety   and  meagreness,  dominated by negative  proverbs such  as "A   penny  saved ... ,"  a  place   knowing  neither kindness  or  courage: "And from her  weakness  flows  not  gentleness   but  a tidal  wave of  judgment." Mrs. McNinn is a vivid caricature, a type known  to us all.
When  Charleen goes to Toronto for her mother's wedding,  the  unbalanced Greta Savage  disappears with Seth. The novel tumbles  into a chaotic climax  where  Seth is recovered safely and  the  seventy-year­ old  Mrs.  McNinn is  married in  her  own living  room  to an  ex-priest  who  is dying of  cancer. If  this  sounds   like  a  penny-
 dreadful, let  me  assure  you  that  Shields pulls  it  off quite  neatly.  The novel  con­ cludes  with  Charleen and  Eugene  flying west  into  the  sunset,  almost  keeping   up with  the  sunset,  "chasing it  down   to  its final,  almost  comic,  drowning." Another apt  metaphor for  life,  like  the  title  one. Charleen    is   suspicious    of   metaphors, property of  the Pome  People,  but Shields  knows a good  symbol  when  she sees one.

PATRICIA MORLEY



LIFE IN A SAND GRAIN

OONAH  MCFEE,  Sandbars. Macmillan, $1 1.95·

SANDBARS,  first  novel  by  Oonah  McFee and first in a cycle of four  witnessing  with an  astonishing accumulation  of sensory detail  the innocence and  experience of Hannah Watson, an ordinary girl growing up in Ottawa and  the Gatineau Hills dur­ ing the twenties  and  thirties, is a life in a grain  of sand.  And  that  life, at  the mercy of the moon  and  the  constant  yet chang­ ing   tides,   thrown    random,    sparkling, drenched, just one in the heap  catches  the light  as it sifts  through time  and  tells  us something of  the  nature of the world  our sandbars,  fed,  cleansed,   joined  and   still divided  by the sea.
It is strange  that  living several  hundred
pages of the youth  and  adolescence of Hannah gets us no closer to knowing  her, recognizing  her as that  special glint on the beach,  than  we did  in the first paragraph where  we thought we might "see what the transistor might   pull  out  of  the  atmos­ phere,  even  if it is garbled." Perhaps the sense  of  a  life  in  this  time  of  war,  un­ certain   peace  and   social  change  is  the garble,   the  shards   of   experience, hard­ edged,  touching but somehow never  join­ ing,  like Hannah's  dancing parents who stop  and   fall  apart  when   the  music  is over.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Hannah is the  medium for sensory im­ pressions, the smell of new mown hay, the peculiar saltless sound  of lake water  slap­ ping  the hull of a boat at night,  the rustle of a new dress in tissue paper. McFee has pasted   up  a  good  scrapbook of  the  era.  Turn the  pages  quickly  and  you  have  a good  silent  movie with  music,  but  no co­ herent human voices.
We   are   told   that   "instincts,  feeding their    revelations   [are]   measured,  like light   through a  lattice  fence." There  is no measuring in Sandbars but  the quality of the refracted light  is aesthetically right. The colours  are  down  on  paper side  by side as in an impressionist painting, never delineated or transformed by the imagin­ ation. These  impressions sift  through the consciousness  of a girl moving, almost  in­ voluntarily, through her  sandscape.
Apart from  the  chronological  develop­
ment   of   Hannah's  early   life,   and   the natural building of events  like deaths and weddings,  particularly the bizarre  almost comic  climax  in  the  first  chapter, where she  has  successfully  prepared us for  tra­ gedy  and  gives us the  anticlimactic spec­ tacle   of  cows  electrocuted  in   a   storm, there  is no skeleton  of ideas  or  substance to the layering  of impressions. Things live and   fade   away,   it  seems,  without  con­ tributing to  the  vast  compost of  human ideas and expectations.
Sandbars   may   be   missing    the   epi­
phanies, the  catharses that  purge  human tragedies, because  the characters have a symbolic  reality,  but,  in spite of a myriad of empirical details,  no flesh. We know Hannah and  her  friends and  family  best though the compulsive but unrealized quality of her  love for  them.  This love is impotent  because  it  lacks  the  power   to create  or to make  time stop. The father leaves, the  brother dies senselessly in war, the  mother, fine in her  youthful eccentri­ city,  surely  descends  the  Alice  tunnel to madness.  There is no glue,  just something
 undefined  out  there  that keeps  the  tides rolling  in and  out.

"Same  old   moon    looking  at  you,"  my father  said.   It was   the   first   time   I  ever thought  of   the    moon    being  in   so   many places,  all  the  places   I had been.

Disembodied  voices   stutter  over   the ham  radio  at  night, the  needle  caught in the groove  renders  the  record  incoherent, the  piano  stops  when   the  father  leaves. Yet,  in  spite  of  the  failure to  communi­ cate,  there appears to be a vast machinery operating.

"I never   thought  of   it   that  way," she said.   "A   transcendence?" I  asked   myself. What did  that mean?

Sandbars  is the  record   of a  life  form­ ing,    an    amorphous   shape    absorbing sounds   and   colours   and   the   inevitable progression   of  sand   through   the   time­  piece.  Maybe   we  should   not  expect   to see the  father  of  the  man  here,  the  ger­ mination of a  transcendence, as Hannah is still  a  child  soaking   up  notes  on  this discordant  planet.
The  sandbar sponge   has  absorbed all the  lunar offerings  of the  tide.  It will  be interesting to see  what   comes  out  when it  is squeezed.
LINDA  ROGERS






**   JAMES  CARLEY, ed.  Book  Forum,  4, no.   1 ( 1978),  $3.00.    A   special   issue   devoted  to reviews  of a number of  recent Canadian books. Ranging  from   snobbish  and   insensitive   put­ downs    to   intelligent   reflections   (by   David Jeffrey, Ian  Montagnes, David   Staines   and  others)  on  such  subjects as  Hodgins, publish­ ing,  and   Mandel, the  reviews   give   a  warped overview of the  world  of  Canadian letters. But the  editor   usefully  reminds  us  that  Canadian publishing  has  succeeded  not   by  stifling  the competition but  by producing a better product.

W.N.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



MS. WYATT'S NEIGHBOURHOOD

RACHEL   WYATT,   The  Rosedale Hoax. Anansi.

WHAT DYLAN THOMAS  DID for the inhabi­ tants  of Llareggub in Under Milky Wood Rachel Wyatt   has  done  to  the  residents  of  Rosedale's  exclusive  Chellow   Street. The "plot,"  which  doesn't really  matter any more  here than it does in Under Milk Wood, centres in the adultery and disinte­ grating  marriage of Robert Ferrand, the son  of  peach   farmers who  marries   "old money" Martha Murray and  takes up life in  a  cui  de  sac  of  posh  Chellow   Street. The appeal of the  book is in its glimpses of   the  neighbourhood's  eccentrics:  Fer­ rand    himself,   guilt-ridden  nuclear   en­ gineer,   who   has  paranoid  fears   of   the Paper  Boy's blackmailing him; Marianne Quinn, the  would-be poet  who  sees life from  the   perspective   of   Tennyson's heroines  and  prosaically propositions Fer­ rand,  because her psychiatrist tells her her poems  need  more  life experience behind  them; the  Reverend Cline,  travel  agent,  smuggler  and   Ambrose   Bierce's  kind  of Christian -"one  who  follows  the  teach­  ings of  Christ, insofar  as they are  not  in­ consistent  with a life of sin"-and others.
Because we get only glimpses and shift­ ing perspectives, from Ferrand's paranoia, to  Marianne's flights  of   nuttiness,  to  a narrator's view which  is as bewildered by modern life  as  the  characters are,  there is   a    continuously    comic    and    satiric  doubleness    in   which   people    are    seen thinking their  solitary   thoughts in  their solitary   rooms,  then  meeting to  play  at coping.  Along  the  way,  there   are  some nice touches at the expense of journalistic meddling    and    gossip-mongering,    the phenomenon  of   experts   planning cities, people  and  environments to  death, and the  cabin  at  the  lake  which  is no  Eden either.
 The  satire  has a lightness of touch  that keeps it at the genial  rather than  the scourging end of the satiric  spectrum. The book is, in fact,  a kind  of mock-romance, in which  the carryings on of the classy suburbanites are  represented in  chivalric language, values,  trappings. In   spite  of some   things   that   don't  quite   ring   true (the   twenty-year-old Marianne  Quinn may  fantasize  about   the  attractiveness of middle-aged men  who  have  "the  begin­ nings  of a fear  of death," but  she  is not apt   to  be  able   to  put   a   name  to  the quality  as   she   does-a    confusion  of writer   and   character?)   this  a  readable book  with  some  effective  comic  writing.

DAVID EVANS



COUNTRY CUTENESS

ERNEST BUCKLER, Whirligig-Selected  Prose and   Verse.  McClelland &  Stewart,  $7·95·

IN HIS INTRODUCTION to Buckler's collec­ tion  of  occasional   pieces   ("wit,  whimsy and  wisdom" as the blurb  has it), Claude Bissell  writes  that   "Whirligig  is  a  book that   Ernest   Buckler   had   to  write. It  is a more direct  expression  of  what  and  how he  thinks" than  are  Buckler's five  "seri­  ous" books. Some readers may  wonder, if that  is the case, why Buckler-and Mc­  Clelland &  Stewart-saw  fit  to  publish  the  collection.
In  his  conclusion  to  "Muse in  Over­
alls," one of the short prose pieces on the subject   of  Nova  Scotia   farm   life  in  the volume,  Buckler  writes  of his wish  never to  leave   his  farm   despite   all   the   mis­ adventures which  such  a  life  entails. "If one  is looking  for  laughs,  it  may  not  be the  home  where  the  boffolas  [sic] roam,  but-the elaborate cuteness which seems to be the occupational  disease of writers­ in - the - country   notwithstanding - I'll
'schtich' [sic] with  it."  Buckler's schtick,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



however,  transcends "elaborate cutene s" and  achieves  heights of  vulgarity and naivete,  especially  in  his  verse,  at  which his  serious   fiction   only  hints.   Examples range  from  the simple-minded -

No man  is 'equal' to a woman; no woman's
'equal' to a man.
The   only   time   they're    even's   when   they function  as a  span,
With   each   supplying  qualities  the  other's are  other  than.
Thus,  paradox   as  it may  sound,  their  only parity
Is when  they  mesh  together their dissimilarity
And  to make  them  simply  parallel, which now seems the  drum  to  beat,
Is  to have  no more  than  two  railway  tracks
which  never,  never  meet.
(Buckler's italics)

to reactionary graffiti -

Who  would  have  thought that  Adam's  rib Would  engender a  thing  like Women's  Lib? And  does  Miss Greer   need  at  this  juncture A Germaine course  of acupuncture?

to chauvinist absurdity: "Cock  treatments were   effective   long   before   shock   treat­ ments," a  suggested    "cure"  for   Emily Dickinson.
Buckler's    contempt   for   women    (of which  there  are  many  more  examples in the  book)   is  equalled  only  by  his  con­ tempt for modernist literature and  paint­ ing.  In   "Bestsellers   Make  Strange  Bed­ fellows," he surveys his years as a reviewer for The New  York Times and  museover the  curious  characteristics of many  best­ sellers.  In  a list of works  which  combine  popularity  with  "virtuosity," Buckler  in­ cludes the following:

The   Bull   from  the  Sea,  by  Mary   Renault, [which]  lifts   the   historical    novel   to   the category  of literature. Faulkner's The  Reiv­ ers, Aldom  Huxley's Island, and  the  works of   those   glittering  stylists   John    Updike  (Pigeon   Feathers)   and   Vladimir   Nabokov (Pale  Fire)  are far from conventional chaff.

One  understands Nabokov's status as runner-up more  clearly  when  Buckler  re-

86
 veals  not  only  that  his  ultimate judge  is "Joe   Reader" but  also  that   the  likes  of Joyce and  Picasso are  to be found  among the  "ultimate bores."  In  an  uncharacter­ istically aphoristic outburst, in fact, Buck­ ler declares  that  "Joyce  is the  only sleep­ ing  pill that's not habit-forming."
Closer  to Buckler's  usual  level of coun­
try  cuteness  is his statement that  during his days studying philosophy at  the  Uni­ versity of Toronto, he found  "even Lotze [sic] lotsa fun." Undergraduate humour, perhaps, but hardly the calibre of  wit one expects  to see between  hard covers, much  less from  a  respected  novelist,  author of at  least  one  "classic" work.  But  perhaps it is time  for a review of that  as well, for surely  Buckler's  style  has  never  been  his strong  point. He has achieved  recognition almost  in  spite  of  himself.  Whirligig re· veals all  too  clearly  the  nature of Buck.  ler's weakness.
LORRAINE WEIR


A VOICE SPEAKING

ROBERTSON DAVIES, One  Half of Robertson Davies: Provocative Pronouncements on a Wide   Range  of Topics. Macmillan, $10.95·
IT  SEEMS  AT  FIRST  a  monstrous vanity, this businesof gathering up and  publish­ ing  old  speeches,  addresses  and  lectures. Granted, some are  not  all  that  old;  they range   from   Ig6o  to  last  year.  But  why should   Davies  want   to  publish  them­ can  he be so taken  with  the sound  of his own   voice?  Or   does  he  consider   them such  models  of  their  kind  that   they  cry out  for  wider  advertisement?
Well no, but  also a little  of yes. In  fact this is a deeply serious work, as well as in­ cidentally   amusing.   In    it    Robertson Davies  treats  of  at  least  two  themes  of considerable importance to  him, and  the various  speeches  have  been  chosen  and

BOOKS IN REVIEW



carefully  arranged to lead  us towards his main  concerns. The  chronology of the sponsoring occasions  is largely  irrelevant, though   of   course    each    address    was tailored to its own particular venue, iden­ tified  for  us  by  an  amusing little  head­  note.  That allows  for  a  variety  of   tone throughout the whole collection, much  as one would hope for such a variation with­  in a public  speech.  And  indeed  it is pos­ sible  to  read  the  volume as  itself  a  sus­ tained  oration, beginning with the speaker "trying  out   his   voice"   in   the   Preface, skirmishing through a few winning anec­  dotes,  gradually  settling   into   his  theme (but  with  lighter  intervals)  and  so com­ ing to the whole weight  of his conclusion.
I do  not  know  if  I have   ever  heard
Robertson Davies  speak,  though I have a niggling suspicion  that  if I have,  it might have been in a CBC  programme about Ontario  newspapers. I don't  have  a  par-
 ticularly   clear   remembrance  of  it,  evi­ dently.  But  what  I do  have,  and  I  ima­  gine most  readers of Davies  share  this, is a very strong  sense of a speaking voice, a voice speaking, in  whatever he  has  writ­  ten. So that  it comes as a bit of  a surprise  when,   in   the   Preface   to   One   Half  of Robertson Davies he directs our attention to what  we are  about to  read,  and  how he would  prefer  us to read it: "when you read  this book, will you  please  try to hear it,  and   to  think   of  it  as  something said to  you."  Of  course.  How   else  can   you read  Robertson  Davies?
The  very directness of Davies'  address is a  persistent feature, whether it  is  the Marchbanksian affront, or  Ramsay's  let­ ter to the Headmaster, or whatever. Here,  it is evident from  the  tone,  the idiom,  the asides and  personal intrusions, that  he has a design  upon  us, a  design  both  kaleido­  scopic and  minatory (to  take  up  a word







The 	Antigonish	Review

A  quarterly


Publishes stories,  poems,  articles  and  rev1ews of a  literary and  cultural nature.

$5.00   per year


St.  Francis Xavier University
Antigonish,  Nova  Scotia

BOOKS IN REVIEW



he  uses on  several  occasions). He  wants us, in short,  to pay attention.
Equally it  is his  habitual manner, a deliberately cultivated manner which  has a  number of antecedents. For  all  his  in­ dividuality, Davies   works  in  a  tradition of direct  speech  that  has  not  been  much remarked, but  is  nevertheless  character­ istically   (which   is  not   to  say  uniquely) Canadian.  It   is  a   practice  which   both assumes and abandons the conventions of public speaking; in  which  the  speaker  as it were steps down  from  the  rostrum and  talks    from    the    floor.    Davies    clearly learned this technique from  Leacock   (see the  tribute to Edward Johnson: "He  had that    air    of   splendid  confidence  that marks   the  man  who  is  sure  of  his  wel­ come.  He  knew how  glad  we were  to see him  ..."), but  you can  discover  it every­ where-in, for   example,   such   an   ap­ parently dissimilar  writer   and   public speaker as  W. 0. Mitchell.  It  is a  mode by  which   the  speaker   not  only  disguises his authority, but  by adopting what  in his more  Jungian  moments Davies  calls  the dreams of the  tribe,  affirms  them   (either seriously  or  humorously, or  both)  as  the authority. The  "I" becomes  "we." When,  however, Davies  is speaking initially to a group of  experts, whether architects, psy­ chiatrists, accountants or welfare  officers, the  tactic  is to admit inadequacy, and  to present  himself as merely a man of good feeling  and   good  sense-so  that   as  we read  the  book,  it is again  a case  of "us," distinct from  "them." (And  it happens frequently. Davies'  favourite opening gambit is  to  acknowledge having   bitten off  more  than  he  can  chew.  One  senses why he resists a Freudian reading of literature.... )
One of the pleasures in reading these addresses,  then,  is in  discovering aspects of the communal "dream," half-forgotten but  immediately  recognized details   that go  toward  defining  a society.  We  delight in Davies'  sporadic recollections of politi-

88
 cal   rallies,   concert-going,  free   milk   at school   or   insanity   in   the   village.   We recognize    the   deliberate   imitations  of figures from  literary  history,  whether in a sustained spoof of the Frankenstein story, or  a mock-ghoulish story  about Dickens; or  in  precise  references to writers  of  the past  as a reconfirmation of  our  cultural traditions; or more  closely, in  the passing adaptations  of   Leacock     ("How  many Muses  were  there  after  you  had  finished your aperitif-nine, or  thirteen? I don't know.  I wasn't  there.  I'm  only asking  for information"  or   "The  Government of Ontario  must   realize   that    if  it   wants drunken  professors,  it  must  stop  pricing drunkenness out  of the  professorial  mar­ ket.-But  I have  not  come  here  to  talk economics") .
These  things begin  to locate  a particu­ lar heritage, but so does the slight edge of quaintness, the paraded and  unabashedly idiosyncratic  in   values,   language   and  range  of  information.  There is in  these addresses  a mixture of  the  pompous  and  ceremonial, with  precise  plain-speaking. The   old-fashioned   tone    (which    arises from the precise usage of vocabulary rare­ ly dusted  off),  the careful sense of cadence and  importantly the  aural determination of paragraph structure, even the tendency to  the  exhortatory-all  these  things identify   a  particular  presence   speaking, one  which   I  associate   with   Ontario  in the first place, and also with professors emeritus. It's  a prose  that  is measured; it might   pass  for   dignified  but   it  is  not really  so, because  its  tone  frequently descends  to a quasi-folksy confiding. More  important than  any of these things, however,   is  that  it  is a  speech   invested with   the   wisdom   of   unremarkable   ex­ perience.
No doubt these speeches will be read mainly   by  students  seeking   reassurance as  they  write   essays  on   Fifth   Business, etc. That will be unfortunate, unless they happen to understand that  the novels are

BOOKS IN REVIEW



not   an  end   in  themselves,   but   are   the means  of dramatizing large issues which surface  explicitly  in this book, and  which have  become  central to Davies'  thinking at  this stage  in  his life. He  has  taken  up Jung's insistence  on  a  particular type  of development in man at  middle  age, when the  early  aims,  which   are  personal and social,  shift  to  more  spiritual and  intel­ lectual concerns. And  he  seems  to  have undergone some such  experience himself, for   all  his  lectures   are  concerned  with completion, fulfilment,  balance. The in­  dividual  must   not   sacrifice   his  private self to his  professional self;  learning's use is to save  the soul and  enlarge the  mind; we   must    accomplish   intellectual   and spiritual  growth  through  contemplating and  pondering the  self,  and  so come  to understand feeling.... It is the  theme  of The  Manticore, but set out  more success­ fully because  here  it is explored and  elab­ orated rather than   boldly  asserted   as in that  novel.
As  with   the  individual,  so  with   the nation. It  too  must   come   to  maturity, must  learn   to  identify   itself  through  its dreams.  (As  recently   as  I972,   however, he was complaining that  "Canada, in the national sense, does not dream. Our con­ dition  is stuporous; dully  contented  and stuporous.")  Much   of  what  Davies  says is about   the  proper  education of the  in­  dividual, but   just  as  much   is about the education  of   public taste-hardly new territory  for   Davies   to  strike   out   into. Canada  must  cease  to  be  parochial, it needs a world-view  of itself. Perhaps what  is new is  the vision he offers  (in  the  final and  most  recent  of the  speeches), of the Canadian as the new hero, a hero  of  con­ science  and  spirit,  and  in  one  sense the whole  series  has  been  directed   towards  urging  Canadians to  trust  their  feelings, and   their  heart, as  he  himself  has  done in   publishing   these   speeches,   bringing tongue  and  heart  into  an  equal  partner­ ship.
 The  other  major theme  is concentrated in  a  section  called  "Masks of  Satan," a series of four lectures  in which  he wrestles with the problem of evil, discussing the images  of evil  in  nineteenth- and  twen­ tieth-century literature  but   moving,   as always,  from   literature  to   what   it  can reveal  to  us about life.  The  explanation that  he comes to is again based  on a con­ cept  of wholeness. He  is not  really  assert­ ing  a  necessary  dualism,  but  argues  that  we  may  discover  wholeness  of  character (Davies, for  all  his admission to  being  a kind of  moralist,  is much  more  interested in  character than  morality)  in  the  diffi­ cult  attempt to  comprehend as  best  we can  glimpse  it,  that   larger, cosmic  con­ cept  of  wholeness.  "It is  a  benign  con­ cept,  though  many  terrors are  in the path  of  those  who  seek  it.  But   because   we recognize  evil,  and  confront  it  as  wisely as  we  may,  we  do  not   necessarily   suc­ cumb  to it."
That is as  far  as  Davies   takes  us  to­ wards  an  understanding of  something of the  dark  side  of  the  self,  another of the many  halves  that   make  up  man.  As we read  these transcripts of  public  occasions, they    more    and    more    establish   their affinity with the Drama, for which  Davies claims   the   same   cultural  antiquity  as Prophecy  and  Epic.  And  increasingly, as
he  takes  up  "the battle with  troll-folk  I
In   the  crypts   of  heart  and   head,"  we
detect  in  him  what   he  has  esteemed   in men like Sir Ernest  MacMillan: "To say they  teach   us  is  a   poor   description  of what  they  do,  for  in  reality   they  reveal to  us things  that  we  are  eager  to  know, but which we cannot understand unaided. Their work  is not  education, but  revela­ tion,  and  there  is always  about  it  some­ thing   of  prophetic  splendour."  We  are glad  to think  of  ourselves  as belonging to the   audience   addressed   by   Robertson Davies.
ADRIAN MITCHELL

8g

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



LAYTON'S QUARREL

IRVING LAYTON,  The  Covenant. McClelland &
Stewart,  $4·95·
REVIEWING A NEW BOOK OF  POETRY by Irving Layton is a challenge of a certain kind. Reviewers  have so often  fallen into scolding    the   man    that    someone    who knows   him   only   from   what   has   been written of  him  in  the  last  decade might not  recognize  his  stature as  poet  and  as the  creator of some  of  the  most  striking lyrics  that   we  have.   Indeed,  the   same sort   of  reproofs   have   been   directed at him   with   such   regularity  that    Layton now  anticipates  his  critics   and   subverts them  by providing his own  review  in one of  the  closing  poems  of  The  Covenant, the   review   we  even   sense  he  somehow longs for:

In this  book  Layton has  stripped away
all  the  trappings of restraint and decency and has  revealed himself  to be
the  uninhibited megalomaniac we always suspected he was.
. . . this  rowdy  silly  tortured tender feisty  outrageous posturing egotistical
and  somewhat pathetic excuse  for  a poet.

If we do  sometimes   feel  that  Layton's poetry   is,  if  not   precisely   all   of  these things,  often   dominated by  the  postures of its creator, the question we must ask ourselves  is why  then  we  read  each  new book that  he offers us, their  appearances coming   at   a  frequency  which   at   times seems to bespeak  a genuine ferocity. The answer,  of course,  is that, since  the  very first published volumes, we have been accustomed  to   approach   his   steadily­ appearing  collections as  sites  in  a  poetic quarry: a great  deal  of rock  lying about,  some   shale   to   be  mined,   perhaps,  but always  the  promise  of  precious stone  that  makes  the  endeavour  worthwhile. E. K. Brown  said it for  us long ago: "Mr. Lay­ ton,   it  is  clear,  has   been   one   of  those poets  who has to write  too much  in order

go
 to  be able  to  write  at  all."  Although he has not included it in his self-review, probably    Layton    would    himself    give assent to such a statement. Unfortunately, however,  it  is difficult  not  to feel  that  in The  Covenant, as with  the  companion volume  that  preceded it (For My  Brother Jesus), we  have  come   to  a  particularly rocky part  of Layton's quarry, one  where the   rewards   for   our   labours  are   much rarer.
It  is easy to suggest  that  it is the argu­ mentative  nature   of   both   books   that  makes  so much  of their content less than  successful as poetry:  that  Layton's eager­  ness  to  display   his   iconoclastic  and   at times    willfully    sacrilegious   arguments against   Christianity,  to   show   it  impli­ cated  for  the  blood  spilt  in  its  name,  to remind  us  that  it  spawned the  attitudes that  led  to the German atrocities against the   Jews-that all   this   seems  to  out­ weigh   the   poetic   structures  invoked  to give   these   arguments   voice.   And   it   is hard  not  to  quote  Yeats  against Layton, reminding him  that  "we  make  out  of the quarrel with  others,  rhetoric, but  of  the quarrel with ourselves, poetry." However, even   as   poetic   rhetoric,  much   of  The Covenant  does  not  work; the  field  of its language is so entirely that  of common speech that even the most elemental of oratorical devices, much  less poetic, would be welcomed.  Instead Layton seems often to  have   given   away   his  whole   bag  of tricks,  willingly  writing like  this  instead:

Every  unbelieving Jew
puts  another nail  in  our  Lord's cross;
you're all  guilty  for  his death each one of you, now  and  always

So the  young  Anglican priest  told  me, fresh  out  of the  seminary
his features clean-cut but  severe
and his frank  Anglo-Saxon eyes loving  and clear.

It does not seem to be merely that Layton has  deliberately chosen   to  deny  himself

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the traditional range  of his craft, either. Instead his  mind  seems,  at  times,  simply to be elsewhere  than  on his poetry.  Here, for  example, is the  conclusion of one  of the  more  lyric poems in the  volume:

a leafed  twig
tap3 on  the  windowpane and when I turn my head rthe world  moves  into  it
on  panes  of green light.

The  repetition  in    "windowpane ... panes" is not  effective,  but  still  the  lan­ guage  has some of the old attraction. The vision   is  familiar,  perhaps  a   little   too much   so.  But  what   is  most  troubling  is the  vague  way  that   "it" in  the  next-to­ last   line  functions. Is  it  twig,  window­  pane,  or  head? The ambiguity  is bother­ some,   not   poetic -in   fact,   surely   not intentional. A poem  created out of reflex, the  poet's  attention  wandering.
 Ultimately there  is such  a sparsity of poetic   language  in  The  Covenant, that we are  in  danger of overvaluing the  few vivid or picturesque moments that  Layton gives us, as in lines about "yellow  butter­ flies/ weaving    invisible   mends/ between  hedge and  hedge." Although there is here a kind  of reappearance of  what  might  be called    the    "insect   vitality"  of   certain earlier   poems,  there  is  lacking   still  that  magnificent  language  that  we know  Lay­ ton   capable   of,   the   kind   of   powerful imagery  he gave  us long  ago in "Portrait of Aileen"  where,

Though an  incredible wound in  the  air the  bowl of apples on  the  garden table sustained itself  with  simple  being.

Still  there  are  some  successful  poems  in The Covenant, poems  that  repay reread­ ing,   like    "Sylvia,"  or   "The   Tamed







Fiddlehead Poetry Books

(from  the current list)

A SNOWMAN, HEADLESS, by George Swede, $3.50
CHANGING PLACES, by Penny Kemp, $5.00
LOVESONGS AND  OTHERS, by Ralph Cunningham, $4.50
NOVENA TO  ST. JUDE THADDEUS, by M. Lakshmi Gill, $5.00
MOVING INLAND, by Diana Hayes, $4.00
POINTWISE, by Derk  Wynand, $4.00
SYNTAX OF FERMENT, by Liliono  Welch, $4.50

Order  from FRED  COGSWELL P.O. Box 4400
English  Department, University of New Brunswick
Fredericton, N.B.  E3B 5A3
(CATALOGUE SUPPLIED ON  REQUEST)



91

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Puma," or  perhaps "The  Bald  Tartar." And  there  is, besides, an  energy  under  all the  posturing, perhaps derived from  it: an   obvious   enjoyment  of   the   gestures made   that   may  speak  well  for  the  time when  Layton resumes  his arguments with himself.
In  "The Bald  Tartar"  Layton pauses
to threaten us:

I'll roll  the  sights  I see into  a  hard pellet
and  with  it knock  out  your  eye you must  see what I see
or  not  at all
you  have  one  more  chance and  one  more  eye.

But  in  the   last  lines  of  The  Covenant Layton  makes   a   less  coercive   promise, one  we  should   like  to  hold  him  to.  He has turned his poems into weapons, he acknowledges, but,

When I have  a large  enough arsenal
to  protect me from  the  murderous goons springing up  everywhere around  me
,I shall  start over  again
and write  a simple   joyous  lyric
extolling my love's  black  eyebrows.

It is not  necessarily  that   we  would  wish to  limit  Layton only  to  poems  about   his love's   black  eyebrows,   but  clearly   there has  been  a  loss of  an  earlier   vision  that seems   to   have   left   these   latest   poems deflated and   unmusical; in  consequence we are ready to see Layton "start over again." His real quarrel in The Covenant is, after  all,  not  simply  with  Christianity, but  with  the  God  of both  Christians and Jews, and  with  the created order  that  He must take responsibility for:  this is the quarrel that   Layton has  always  engaged in,  but   what   is  missing   now  is  his  old defiant challenge to this life-consuming universe-that   absurd but   wonderful affirmation that  the poet will therefore be "the  worm/ who  sang  for  an  hour  in  the throat of a robin."
RUSSELL BROWN

92
 NOTHING BUT THE BEST

POEMS  SELECTED BY   NINETY-ONE  POETS,   This
Is My  Best. Coach House Press,  $4.75.
GREG GATENBY,  ed.,  Whale Sound: An  Anthol­
ogy  of  Poems   about   Whales and   Dolphins.
J. J. Douglas, $6.gs.
CANADIAN   AUTHORS     ASSOCIATION,    Spirit  of
Canada. A Jonathan-James  Book.

THIS   IS  MY    BEST  would   have   been  a better  book if it had presented nine poems each   by  the  best  ten  of  the  ninety-one poets  to  whom  it  allows  instead a  single poem  apiece. The selected  method was simply  undiscriminating house  cleaning, a   getting    of   ninety-one  aspirants   off Coach  House  Press'  back  by giving  them each a solitary go. It seems generous, but, in  fact,  it  isn't.   Nor  is  it  much   use.  It would   have  been  much   better   to  have looked  harder at  those  ninety-one  manu­ scripts,   picked   the   best   ten   and   given those  ten  poets  a  real  chance  to  present  their  nine  best  pieces.  Of  the  ninety-one poets  my choice  based  on  a  single  poem would  have  been  Lynne  Alvarez,  David  Andrus,  Eric  Ivan  Berg, Pier  Giorgio Di­ Cicco, Judith  Mccombs, J. McLeod, Mary M. Oliver, John  Sullivan, David  S. West and  Ian  Young.  The best  two  poems  in the   book   are   by   Eric   Ivan   Berg   and  Judith   Mccombs.   Both   are   able   to  get beyond  self-indulgence  and   present   the world    outside    the    self.   In    "Harbour Lights," Eric  Ivan  Berg writes:

An iron  drummer is this  dizzle  (sic)
.rattling on the  hulls  of morning anchored here in  our  raincoast harbour full  of tramps  and  grain freighters
all  riding at anchor in the  early  morning rain
of a wet Vancouver winter awakening to
mist sweeping
·in and  ghostly  foghorns unable to  blow it
out  again.

while   in  "The  Habit  of  Fire," Judith
Mccombs  gives us:

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Smell  of horses
from  somewhere, then gone; no horses  out
here,
anything that  big is probably bear. New prints today  on  the  logging road,
in  the  place  where  I backtracked for  water, bear  crossing
over  the  prints of my Vibram soles,
full-grown.

Both   poets   have   a   sense   of   language, rhythm, and  precise, dramatic detail  that takes  them   past  the  navel-gazing that  is the besetting vice fully and  unfortunately evident  in  many  of the  solitary  pieces by the  ninety-one. Through  lack  of  critical discrimination Coach  House  Press missed the  chance  to  introduce  ten   new  poets and  create what  might  have  been an interesting group  anthology.
Whale  Sound is better  than  This  Is My
Best. The  quality  of the verse is generally higher and  the  presentation and  some of the  illustrations are  excellent. Of  course, there's nothing there  to equal  M oby Dick and not much to rival D. H. Lawrence's "Whales Weep  Not." E.  J. Pratt's "The Cachalot" is  dull  compared  to  Melville and    "The  Cachalot"  is   the   volume's centre piece.  P. K.  Page's  "Leviathan in a Pool"  is the  best poem  in the  book and Robert  Finch's  "Dolphins"  shows   well how  we  have  reduced   the  creature that once  stood   for  Christ,   the  human  soul, and  has even been known  to save drown­ ing men:

The show  is non-stop, all but  in  the  morning
When the  stage-doors that hide  on Soho
Square
Vomit the  rock-and-rollful rancid air.
1Look, in  the  greenish tank, at  rest from earning,

Still  forms  that for  an  hour need  jump  no hoop
Nor  shake  a fin with  sirens  of the  troupe.

Two  pieces by lesser known  poets are equally   interesting. Tom  Howe's   "The Whale  Killers," though reminiscent of Newlove's   The   Pride  and   Purdy's "La-
 ment  for  the  Dorsets"  nevertheless gives us thi  :

Nootka men  who killed  the  whales
were  lucky  to get five in their life-times some  killed  none  for  all  their
careful preparations in  sacred long-houses

unscientific men
the  Nootkas believed whale  allowed his death
to spare  people  from  hunger so  they  had  to be  worthy.

And  Jan  Kemp in  "Great Fish  at  Muri­
wai Beach, New Zealand" asks

What requiem
did  you sing,  mighty herd,
,what  whale-talk, what music
sang  in your  minds
.as you followed maps forged more  ancient in  you
than the  land  you struck instead of  water.

In  both  cases  there  is a  real  sense of the speech  rhythm of good  verse. I wondered whether any  of the  profit  from  the  book was going to help  the whales?
Problems arise when  we come  to Spirit of Canada, the Canadian Authors Associ­ ation's  publication. This is the  most  am­
bitious  undertaking of  the  three.  Unfor­
tunately,  Spirit   of  Canada   reads   more
like  propaganda  than   art.   What  it  at­ tempts  is specious  reassurance. All's right  with  the  world   (or  at  least  Canada)  if we quote  the  Prime  Minister, spin stories about   people   being   nice   to  immigrants and   listen   to  Robert  Choquette  tell  us about   "Edmonton au   milieu   des  bles." Yet  we  suspect,  indeed   we  know,   that  there  are  large areas  of Canadian experi­ ence  excluded  from  this  book,  the  inclu­  sion of which might  not have  made  Spirit of Canada reassuring, but would certainly have  made  it  more   real.   Canada  won't overcome  her  present  difficulties  because the   C.A.A.   tells   us   there's  nothing  to worry  about. We'd  do  better to face  the facts.
The    best   story   in   the   book   called

93

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



"Gaelic Gospel"  is provided by Joyce C. Barkhouse  who writes:

Many   legends  survive  about   Dr.   Mc­ Gregor; a  favourite concerns a  woman  and a  sick  cow.  She   insisted that  the   minister could  cure   the   beast   if  only  he  would   lay his hand upon  her. Finally, he went into  the barn, slapped the   cow  upon  the   flank   and  said,
"If you  live, you live; if you die, you die!"
The cow  recovered.
Sometime  afterward  Dr.  McGregor  lay
-seriously   ill   with    diptheria.  Deeply   con­ cerned,  the  old   lady   came   and  forced   her way  into  the  sick  room.  She  gave  the  doctor a  resounding smack   and   shouted,  "If you live you  live;  if you  die  you  die!"
III  as  he   was,   Dr. McGregor burst   out
·laughing-and  broke    the    abscess    in   his throat.
He,  too,  recovered.

Perhaps, the Canadian cow needs  a good slap on the side. It would  certainly be reassuring if our  present academic, liter­ ary  and   national ills  could   be  cured  as simply  as  that.  As it  is our  cultural doc­ tors are  lying abed  with  blocked  throats. There  is  now  no  absence  of  Canadian poets,  as  these  three   anthologies  amply testify.  What  is  missing  is vital  criticism that  will set real  standards for  Canadian literature.
JOHN FERNS


PIKE'S PEAK

J. MICHAEL  YATES, Esox  N obilior. Fiddlehead,
$4·50.
IN A RESTAURANT IN   VANCOUVER, a wait­ ress once  tonelessly  offered   me  this  cau­ tion   about  a  Greek   wine   I   had   asked about:  "It's  not   for  everyone." So  too
with   J. Michael  Yates'   Esox   Nobilior,
the latest  volume  of poetry from  this pro­
ductive Can-American poet. The book contains some fine  poems,  but  it also ex­ hibits  a  baroque complexity which  might  appear   forbidding  to   some.   Although Yates   has   consistently   nodded   respect-

94
 fully in  the  direction of his  reader, there are  moments   in  Esox  when   he  may  be asking  too  much.   The   following  excur­ sion   into   synesthesia   may   serve   as  an example:

Who  cannot taste the  bells of light  will never  hear
·the ochre organ of inland tide.

The meeting  place,  surely,  of  ingenious­
ness and  absurdity.
Nevertheless,  there  is much  that  is  re­ markable  in   Esox,   beginning  with   its elaborate   structure,   something    worth mentioning in  the  case  of a  poet  who  is thought  to  hold   up  only  for  short   dis­ tances.  The title,   Esox   N obilior,  is  the zoological   name   for   the  muskelunge  or great   northern  pike,  an  epic  symbol  of northern experience for Yates  and  not  to be   confused   with   your   ordinary  pike. Flanked   by  other   northern  appendages like  the  loon,  the  cougar, and  the  polar  ice, the  muskie  becomes  both  the  subject  of and  catalyst  for  a fundamental explo­  ration  of  matter and  spirit,  somewhat in the  way  in  which  Wallace  Stevens  oper­  ates  in  "Thirteen Ways  of  Looking  at  a Blackbird."
Variant spellings of  "muskelunge," drawn  from  different languages and  dia­ lects,    including   those    of    the    native  peoples of North  America, form the titles of individual poems.  Moreover, different sounds  in  the  variant  spellings  give  rise to  variant views  of  the  muskie  and  the particular phase  of  being  which  the  fish generates a view of in each  of  the poems. Parts  of the muskie, the snout, scales, and fins, for  instance,  serve  as  points  of  de­ parture for  Yates'  endless  and  absorbing studies   of  analogies  in   the  shapes   and essences  of  things,   all  of   this  being  in turn  one  poet's  analogy  for  the  philoso­ pher's   conception   of   the   one   and   the many.
Motifs  for  the  drama of  the  one  and the many  include  the mirror, the incision,

BOOKS IN REVffiW



the   bone,   and   the   finger.   On   even   a purely visual level, their use in Yates' cumulative pattern  of  analogies is often strikingly  beautiful: "the bones of fish against   a  sky,  broken. Black  lightning." The  mirror is the most insistent  of these motifs,   and   is  charged  with   the   book's most  important meanings. As various creatures begin to mirror each  other, they coalesce   into   a   satisfying  unity   in   the mind. Sometimes the mind  resourcefully discovers   resemblances  by  being  inven­ tive,   by  taking   evolutionary   time  into account,  for   example,  in   order  to  see "elephants not  yet  suspected fish."
The role of consciousness, Yates' most passionate  interest, is central to an under­ standing of Esox. As prodigious and  lithe as  the  muskie,  consciousness   is  also  and  analogously predatory-as  indeed   is its instrument, language, which seeks to con­ quer   with  "each  territorial  trope." The  thrusting of  consciousness  is given  vivid­ ness in  one  poem  through the  witty  jux­ taposition   of   the   pupil    of   the   eye  of consciousness   and   the   vulva,   with  con­ sciousness   lustfully    "dilating  to   inhale  more   light." Esox   is  poised   between   a celebration  of  consciousness  and   a  dis­ trust  of its abstractionist  ingestion  of the world  around it,  not  to  mention its can­  nibalistic  devouring of  itself.
Opposed  to   the   domination  of   con­ sciousness is the  anti-world, a  mysterious "nowhen" of obverse  forms  and energies which   recedes  steadily  before  the  grasp­  ing  of consciousness:  "Winter again  and  again  not  yet."  Yates' own  consciousness, having  been   disciplined  no  doubt,  ex­ plores  the  membranous regions  between light   and  darkness  and   movement  and  stillness,  a   perimetric  world   which   lies between  the known  and  the  unknowable. Indeed,   the   border  regions   become   a paradigm   for   successful   life,   an   ever­ moving   balance   of  forces   which   resists the  temptation to rest against  the strength of absolutes:

g6
 I have  travelled an  indigo distance to elude what
the fugue of syllabic  bubbles becomes.

Consciousness   in  fact  is asked  to  adjust to the humbling but  not despairing recog­ nition  that  its careful  measurements and  divisions  are  of  the  "exactity of dream." It is in  his analysis  of perception with
its fine refractions that  Yates  is strongest
and   most  convincing. His  weakness  de­ rives from  his strength, his cleverness and  his    somewhat     self-indulgent    dabbling with   words,   even   at   the   cost   of  some awkward  puns    ("poison/Poisson").  In addition,  some   of   the   poems   tend    to fragment  under  the  weight   of  their   di­ verse   materials,   as   in   "masquinonge." Yates  obviously  works  for  the  line,  and  although the overall structure of  Esox  is impressive,  particular poems  are  not  al­ ways  as  unified  as  one  would  like  them  to be.
These   are  incidental  blemishes,  how­ ever, and  the writing  is generally incisive and  evocative,  as in  the  delicate opening
lines   of   "masquelinge" :   "Wind   chips
litter   the  water.   Silencing light." Then there  are  these lines from "mickinonger":

Digits of ice test  the  texture of pectorals as combs
of wind  catch  the  velvet  of antler.

In  such  lines one  gets a memorable whiff of  that   northern  universe   of  mind   and matter which  has become  Yates',  for lack of a better  word, home.
ROSS  LABRIE


BRAVADO & WIT

SEYMOUR   MAYNE,   Diasporas. Mosaic Press/ Valley  Editions, $IO.oo, $4.95  paper.

IN  SOME WAYS, READING THROUGH  Dias­ poras is like turning the pages of a photo­ album  of the deceased: here  is the prom­ ising young student-poet, dead at  twenty­  four;   the    eccentric    John    Richmond,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Montreal's "shiker laureate";  Melech Ravitch, the  uncompromising  Yiddish poet; Mayne's motherly Aunt  Jennie, Queen  of   the   Kishka    stuffers,   skilled glazer of honey cake. In one remarkable poem,  "Zeydeh," Mayne  tells of the  time his grandfather took him  as a young child to  witness  a  mortician preparing a  body for  burial:

and  remember  who took
me by the hand  thirty  years ago
explaining  how Yarushevsky's
wide corpse was to be washed
then  clothed  again  and  watched  over.

The   incident  must   have   been   what   a Freudian would  term  "a   primal  scene," one  that  has the  power  to determine sig­ nificantly  the  future poet's   psychic  con­ cern; for  most  who  read  this  volume,  or his  previous  one,   Name,  will   note   that  Mayne  at  his best is the poet  of lamenta­ tions-conjuring  up  verse  to  beat  back the Angel of Death.
The  elegy is a  difficult  poetic  form  to
work   with   and   let   me   say  here   that Mayne  displays  no small  degree  of  cour­ age  (madness?)  in attempting it as often as he  does. One  might  think  that since death is a grandiose subject, the  poet  has the   advantage  of  carrying   heavy   duty emotional ware  to unload  on  the  reader. But  because  the  subject  is  grandiose, the poet is obliged  to build  up a goodly power and  speed  to  set  the  whole  work  flying. Largely   it   is   Mayne's   bravado  that  helps  him  succeed.  The  most   common  trap   for  an  aspiring   Jeremiah is  to  fall into  the  sticky sentimental. Mayne  leaps over  that  hazard   by  being  defiantly   ele­ giac;  by cursing   (as  in  "For J-C.  Robi­ chaud"), by  his  humour  (as   in   "Beg­ ging"), and  by his talent for  portraiture. Mayne   has  the  uncanny  ability   to  cap­ ture   the  essential,  singular  qualities of the  departed and  to  render that  human­ ness in vivid and sympathetic terms, mak­ ing  the   reader  forcefully   aware  of  the
loss.
 The  most effective  elegy in the  volume is  "Lamb."  In   it,   Mayne  relates    the death, not  of a  person,  but  of  the  lamb which  belonged  to  his  mother when  she was a  little  girl.  What makes  this  piece work so well is the fact  that  the  true sub­ ject    of   the    poem,    the    mortality    of Mayne's  mother,  is  conveyed   subtly  via the  death  of the  creature she once  cher­  ished as a child.
I  do  not  wish  to  leave  the  impression that  Mayne  can  write  only elegies. About the commonplace he can  be comical  and sensuous,  as  in  the  poem,  "Fantasy  Of The  Chickpea." Mayne displays  an  eru­ dite  playfulness  with  words,  unseen  (and  unfortunately, largely  unattempted)  since the  late  A. M.  Klein.
Laughter   and    wailing    are    Mayne's forte. When  he attempts to be purely imagistic -as  in  many   of  the   poems stemming from his travels in Israel -he often ends up with a sort of wishy-washy surrealism  lacking  the  wit and  passion  he is capable of.
In   a   large   collection  like   this   (I 24 poems)   one   can   expect  a  few   weaker pieces. Mayne  however, has  the  reputa­ tion  of  being   a  good   editor   and   it   is ironic  that  the  main  criticism  one  could level against   Diasporas  is that  it  lacks  a strong  editing job. But  that  is certainly a minor    criticism    when    faced   with   the powerful   effect  so  many   of   the  poems achieve.
KENNETH  SHERliiAN




lOJ




97

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



L'AME ET L'ABSOLU

GUY   LAFOND,   Les    cloches    d'autres  mondes.
Illustrations de Gilles L'Heureux. Collection
sur parole. Hurtubise, HMH.
GUY DESILETS, 0 que  la  vie  est  ronde. Collec­
tion sur parole. Hurtubise, HMH.
J. E. RACINE, Poemes   posthumes. Collection  sur
parole.  Hurtubise, HMH.
EN  LISANT Les  cloches d'autres  mondes de Guy  Lafond, j'ai  eu !'impression de penetrer dans  un  univers .a la fois sum!a­ liste et  ideal  ou le poete  n'ecrit  plus  pour etre  compris ou  aime  mais  par  besoin de se connaitre et de s'affirmer.
En  effet,  il  ne  s'agit   pas  d'une poesie
traditionnelle mais  d'une poesie  ininter­
rompue  qui  cherche a exprimer  le  tn!­
fonds  de  l'etre   par   l'intermediaire d'un
langage libre. Par  dela le temps, la vie, l'amour, la  mort,   cette   poesie  reproduit les sensations  du  poete.  Nous y retrouvons une  influence  mallarmeenne ou l'ecrivain tente   d'apprehender les  rapports  caches de l'harmonie universelle.
Ce   recueil,   qui   est  divise   en   quatre parties   "Entre lire  et  Orphee," "L'aube livree," "Les  cloches  d'autres mondes," "Dunes," se lit  un  peu  comme  une parti­ tion  improvisee et incantatoire. Les noces de  l'homme avec  la  nature se  traduisent par  un  alliage  d'images et  de  mots  emp­  runtes    au   domaine  vegetal.   "Tout  est aerien,"  libre   et   l'homme   voyage   dans ces beautes  accompagne  d'une "musique sans   fond"  et   dote   d'un   "amour  sans parois." La  nuit  s'avere un  element im­ portant.  Apaisante,  sereine,   fertile,   elle permet  la  creation et  se presente   parfois comme  un  refuge   pour   le  poete.   L'en­ fance,  la  lumiere, l'amour, la  mort  s'inc­ rustent aussi  dans   le  poeme  qui  s'efface

dans  Ia signature de l'oeil fugace comme l'eau
pli  instantane.

En  effet,   tout   est  fugitif, sans  cesse  re­
commence et  porte  .a la perfection.

g8
 Au  point  de  vue  stylistique, on  trouve une  recherche  de  langage bien  que  par­ fois  on  peut  s'interroger  sur  la  relation  des   mots   entre   eux;    leur   signification  n'est  pas  toujours  tres claire. Cependant, les illustrations de  Gilles L'Heureux sont interessantes,   symboliques   et   traduisent assez bien !'esprit  du  poete  dont  la "voix s'ancre dans le clair  soupir  des eaux."
Tout comme Les  cloches d'autres mondes, 0 que la vie est ronde  de  Guy Desilets  est  une  oeuvre   avant  tout  for­ melle  et  stylistique.   11 s'agit   ici  encore d'un langage  libre.  L'accent  est  mis  sur la  place   visuelle,  sur  !'architecture  des poemes. Le monde  est  reduit .a la simpli­ cite du  poete en  quete de "mots ouverts" qui  pourraient  tout  dire  et  done  briser la solitude.  Ce recueil  nous donne une imp­
ression de liberte et de  joie ou les mots de sang et de chair  se transforment en "mots qui  agitent  des alles."  Le  poete  lui-meme est cet "oiseau-lyre," ce "Tremble/ Aux mille mains de feuilles en lumiere," anime de "pulsations profondes."
Cependant, le lecteur  eprouve une cer­ taine   lassitude   devant  des  images  exa­ gerees. 11 existe  une  obscurite bien  reelle au   niveau   de  l'ecriture et  parfois  on  a
!'impression  d'etre devant une poesie enigmatique.
Neanmoins,  ces deux  recueils  nous pre­ sentent  une  poesie esthetique et  incanta­ toire  qui  tente  de  traduire le  langage  in­ time de l'etre  par  l'intermediaire de sym­ boles, de  mots  et  d'images. Cette poesie, bien  que  paraissant parfois  artificielle  et confuse, exprime  l'ame du  Poete en quete d'identite et d'absolu.
Lorsque  je Ius Poemes Posthumes, j'y decouvris   l'ame   souffrante d'un  homme
et  a  travers  celle-ci,  le  malaise  de  toute une generation nourrie d'interdictions qui ne sut ni se revolter  ni se liberer.
Bien que ces poemes s'·etalent sur une periode   de   1 1  ans,  de  1958  .a  1g6g,  ils
recelent   tous  le  meme   drame:  celui  de
l'etre   refuse.  "Cette absence   de  la  main

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tendue est une constante dans  rna vie psychologique,"  ·ecrivait   J. E.   Racine,
dans  son recueil  precedent  (Souvenirs en
!ignes brisees-ecrits intimes) . En  effet, ce refus, cette  indifference, ce mepris  qu'il  a sentis  autour de lui, l'ont  meurtri. Ce cri dechirant qui  s'insinue dans  tous  ses poemes,  a sa source dans  l'enfance meme du poete  qui, loin d'avoir ete aime authentiquement,   s'est   vu   accable  de
"mots sans chairI paroles  dans  I'air I vent
dans   le   sable"  par   ceux   qui   disaient
l'aimer. En   parallele  a  cette   amertume d'etre  ignore,    repugne,   J.  E.   Racine
souffre  de ne pas s'aimer. Ne s'aimant pas lui-meme, il cherche  a combler  ce vide en lui  par  la  presence  d'autrui: "j'ai besoin
de vous"; "Ou etes-vous, I Vous dont  j'ai
un   tel  besoin ?"  repete-t-il. L'amour  se
presente alors,  pour  le poete,  comme  une conquete ou  il faut  prendre et  posseder: "je  vous  prendrail je  possederai."  Pour­
tant,    lorsque    parfois   J. E.   Racine  se
decouvre et devient  pleinement lui-meme,
deposant sa  peur,  il  reconnait le  visage de !'autre et !'amour devient  invitation, partage, communion, un  courant rec;u et donne,  audience dans  le silence: "j'invite celui  qui  passe," et il ajoute que ces elans

qui  nous  poussent
Ies uns  vers  Ies autres
... [nous donnent] envie  de  prendre
toute Ia terre et  toute  Ia vie
dans  nos bras  comme  une  amante

Mais  la solitude  l'accable de  nouveau et le martyrise. Toutes ces tentatives d'app­ rocher   les autres  sont  vaines  car  ceux-la  lui  paraissent des  "Labyrinthes  impenet­ rables,"  des  "figures  de  bronze,  marbres froids  etl Deliquescents" qui  n'ont pas le courage d'etre  eux-memes,   portant sans
cesse des  masques.  Le  poete  heurte a la
solitude "ou  chacun chemine sans  com­
pagnons" ·etouffant  de  ne  pouvoir  com­
muniquer:

Qui! -forcer cette  porte close de Ia vie
Liberer ...
A paiser  cette soif. .•.
 Ne trouvant pas d'echo a son appel dechirant, il  se  refugie  dans  le  passe  en quete de ce paradis perdu  dont  il a la nostalgie  et  qu'il  ne  cesse de  vouloir  re­ trouver. Cette  terre n'etant pour  lui qu'un cauchemar, un "monde hostile  et  refuse"  il  va  tenter   de  le  fuir   dans  l'espoir   de trouver  "une  terre  moins   obscure," d'autres "rives  plus sereines qui l'accueil­ leront   avec   plus   d'amitie."  Cette  soif d'etre ailleurs exprime ce refus du monde  ou  il vit  en  meme  temps  que  cette   nos­ talgie  du  paradis perdu. Ce  desir  de fuir est  exprime  par les nombreux verbes de mouvement. Parfois,  le desarroi du  poete se change  en exaltation lorsqu'il entrevoit un  monde   ideal  ou  regnent !'innocence,
!'amour, la  joie, la  paix,  l'eternite. On  y decouvre

Des freres  de  d!ve, des soeurs  aimantes

... des coquillages merveilleux
... Ies tresors  de  (I')   enfance.
Mais  J. E. Racine, malgre ses velleites de fuite,  ne reussit pas a partir. Le revoila "dans  les  fers,"   n'ayant  "plus   d'espoir que  dans  le  sommeil." Le   poete   se  re­ trouve alors dans le silence  (mot repris 30 fois)   sourd   et   pesan t  et   dans   la   nui t ( repris  48  fois)   qui  est  sa  compagne la plus  proche   car  il  peut   s'y  cacher et  y etre  lui-meme. D'autre part, si elle revele
l'etat de  torture dans  lequel  J. E. Racine
est  prisonnier, elle  est  aussi  representat­
rice d'un  certain  echec.  La  mort,  ( 25 fois vepetee)  semble  ainsi  clore  cette  vie dechirante qui emporte inevitablement chaque etre.  Tout ce qui  nait,  ce qui  vit, doit  mourir. Cette  amertume est traduite d'une fac;on poignante dans ce poeme revelateur de la resignation du  poete  mis a l'ecart:

Au nom  de tout  ce qui  nous  lie,
Au nom de tout  ce qui  nous  separe
II nous  faudra abandonner,

Dechirer taus  Ies liens

99

BOOKS IN  REVIEW




Rentrer en silence, Rentrer en solitude
Quitter les hommes au  seuil  des coeurs, Aller,  partir
La ou seuls  nous  devons aller.

Cette  solitude  devant ces chemins  qui "s'allongent," "s'eloignent" "ne  menent nulle  part," "contraignent" lui  est  d'au­ tant  plus  tragique qu'il  n'a  pu  trouver  le mot  essentiel  qui  aurait pu  tout  dire.  Ce verbe  est  d'ailleurs  dominant dans  toute  son oeuvre   (33 fois  repris)   revelateur de cette  soif de  communiquer et  de  trouver  son  identite:  "Reconnaitre/ Ce  qui  est/  Qui   nous  sommes!"  La   frequence  des points  de suspension  souligne cette  impos­ sibilite   de   trouver  le  MOT  et   permet aussi de saisir l'insaisissable indefinissable.
Cependant, J. E.  Racine a  en  lui  ce
"dur desir   de  durer" qui   lui  donne   la
force   de  ne  pas  ceder,   etre   pietine,   se laisser  car,  pense-t-il, il  y  a  trop  d'etin­ celles en chaque etre  pour  que ces eclairs d'amour ne soient  qu'  "un  tourbillon de
feuilles   mortes."  C'est   ce   desir   et   cet
 Le  vent,  qui  emporte tout  sur  son  pas­ sage,  est  un .element  egalement  courai_lt, symbolisant   ce  temps  rongeur  de  la  v1e. De meme,  ces nombreuses vagues  vers les rives, les rivages, concretisent le flux et le reflux des existences.
Au  niveau  de  la forme,  ces poemes  en vers libres,  ne presentent aucune origina­ lite.   Peu   d'images,  peu   de   musicalite, aucune audace dans  la creation. Ses plus beaux poemes sont sans doute  les derniers. On y sent aussi !'influence de deux grands poetes: Baudelaire et Eluard.
Poemes  Posthumes  demeure pourtant
une  oeuvre   interessante car   il  ne  s'agit pas  d'une  poesie  cloitree   mais  ouverte, reflet d'une generation d'individus ecrases, exiles  se debattant dans  un  combat  soli­ taire.'Elle est le miroir  de  ces etres  dont  le drame fut d'etre mal aimes, confines en eux-memes,  incapables de s'exprimer. La revolte   qui  anime   ces  poemes  est  cette  volonte  de se liberer  et  meme  si le poete
ne parvient pas a trouver le mot qui.per­
mettrait de  tout  dire,  il  a  le  pouvmr  de
rejoindre l'humanite, de  se reveler  a lui­

amour  que  !'auteur  a  pour
 1a  v1.e,
 "Je
 meme  et aux autres grace  a un alliage  de

vous  aime   pourtant /  terre   vie,"  qui  le
sauvent et  le conduisent vers  cet  Amour
Ultime qu'il  n'a  cesse de chercher dep.uis ses  premiers poemes.  Mais  J. E. Racme
sent  que  !'amour vrai  est  exigeant et  il
est  pris  de  peur  devant cet  engagement total.   Pourtant, cet  exile  se livre  a Dieu
tel qu'il  est et connait enfin  cett7  pa.ix ;t cette   joie  d'aimer et  de  se  sentu  a1me: "Vin  de    vie/ ... / C'etait   l'ivresse/ C'etait la joie" car enfin, il est reconnu, accueilli  par  cet  Etre  qu'il  desirait depuis si   longtemps.   La    couleur   "bleu"   qui revient le plus souvent dans  cette  oeuvre montre !'importance du  divin,  symbolis­ ant  aussi cette soif d'eternite.
La  terre   demeure  un  element  impor­ tant  dans I'oeuvre  de J. E. Racine, comme elle  le  fut   pour   toute  cette   generation
d'une part, enracinee au terroir et d'autre part, frustree de ne pouvoir s'en  delivrer.

100
 
mots. Ces poemes  nous  revelent  aussi une quete  de  l'absolu  a travers  les vertiges  et
les  chutes  de   !'auteur. Son   merite   est d'avoir su  exprimer le  trefonds de  l'etre en meme  temps que  le sens mysterieux de
!'existence  qui   a   son   fondement  dans
!'Amour.
MYRIAM RECURT

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



WHERE POETRY IS

ANDRE FARKAS  and  KEN  NORRIS, ed., Montreal
<English Poetry   of  the   Seventies.  Vehicule
Press,  $g.gs, paper $3.95·
THUNDER  CREEK  CO-OP,  Number   One  North­ ern,   Poetry    From   Saskatchewan.   Coteau Books.

EXPO YEAR    WAS  A  GOOD  YEAR   for  odys­ seys. 1967 was the  year  George Bowering  went  east   from   Vancouver  and  Robert Kroetsch went  west  from  New  York. To  these   two   odysseys  the   above   regional anthologies owe  a  great  deal.  As writer­ in-residence  at   Montreal's  Sir   George Williams   University,  Bowering  brought with   him   the   liberating spirit   of  Black Mountain  and  his own  innovative, ener­  gizing   presence.  Kroetsch's  year  in  Al­ berta was one of many  subsequent returns to   his   native    prairie.  To   the   writer's school  at  Qu'Appelle,  Saskatchewan, he has  brought the  prosodic innovations of W. C.  Williams and a  new  prosaic, anecdotal, and  colloquial poetry  which Kroetsch ascribes  mostly  to AI Purdy and his followers.
Two  schools  of  poetry  were  born,  and from   them,   two  interesting  anthologies.
The   editors   of  the  Montreal  anthology,
Andre    Farkas  and    Ken   Norris,   begin their  introductory essay with  a quotation from  Louis  Dudek: "It is the  destiny  of Montreal to show  the  country from  time to  time  what   poetry  is."  They  go  on  to sketch   a  brief   historical background to Montreal poetry   (unfortunately omitting any  mention  of  A.  M.  Klein)    claiming that   "Montreal  is ... once   again, after the  lull  of the  sixties,  beginning to assert itself."  These  grand  claims  are  only  par­ tially  confirmed. Their  book  is the  more urbane  collection  of  the   two.  And  the range  of forms  and  techniques is impres­  sive,  a  testament to  the  editors' eclectic taste. The  range  from  traditional to free verse  forms   is  most   obvious   and   most rewarding in  the  versatile work  of  Peter
 Van   Toorn. His   sonnets   resonate  with lyric  sound,  his  free  verse  odes,  eclogues and   ironic   pastorals are  exuberant  with word  and  sound   play,  his  "Love Song" is  as  fine  a  panegyric  as  one   will  find since   Cohen's  Spice   Box   love   poems. Still,  Van  Toorn's left  hand   margins, in all cases, remain  resolutely  straight and inviolate.
Less versatile  but  every  bit  as  reward­ ing  are  some  of  the  poems  of   Richard Sommer.  He   often   chooses   potentially morose   subjects   like   suicide,   death  or tragic   violence  which   have  a  dangerous capacity for  pathos.  But  the  poems   are carefully   crafted  in   two   or   three    line stanzas  in  which   the  sounds,  instead of rhyming, echo  hauntingly. The  emotions are   beautifully  controlled   and    orches­  trated. "24  october" is  one  of  the  finest poems in the anthology.
Rewarding, too, is the wit, polish and prosodic deftness of David Solway. "New England Poets"  is worthy of  the  best  of F. R.  Scott,  though one  is not  convinced Solway is entirely  free of the kind of disciplined primness  he lampoons so well. "Trolls"  and   "Surface"  are   more   dis­ turbing, "Stickhandler" more  fun. All of his  poems  in  this  anthology  demonstrate Solway's  healthy   perspective  on  his  sub­ ject matter and  on himself.
I found  other  things  of interest in  this collection:   Bob    McGee's   rural    land­ scapes,   Fraser    Sutherland's   memorable "Madwomen," Claudia Lapp's short  ero­ tic  pieces.  And  there  is  some  interesting poetry   beyond   what   I   have   described, but  much  more  that  is  pretentious, self­ indulgent, obscure,  cliched  or  excessively egocentric. In  the "Black  Maria" of Ken Norris   or   the   long  poems   of   Stephen Morrissey  (his concrete poem  an  impres­ sive  exception)   we  have  a  kind  of  sur­ realism  rechauffe. Guy  Birchard's long poem "Some Notes on the Colors of the Cosmos"  is  a  drab cliche   in  an  avant­ garde    costume.    Artie    Gold,   when    he

101

BOOKS IN REVIEW



stoops to coherence (as in the impressive closing lines of "Five for Bruce"), shows promise.  But  usually  he  offers  us merely an obscure,  self-indulgent and  subjective code  of resignation of dubious conviction and  a  quasi-surreal bombardment of random verbosity  to go with  it.
Saskatchewan's poets seem,  by contrast to their  colleagues  in Montreal, more elegiac    (in   spirit,    not   in   technique),
chaste   (almost   acutely so) ,  rural,  collo­ quial,  anecdotal and  prosaic.  I say elegiac m spirit  because  about half  the  poems  in Number  One   Northern  look   back  with affection   and   humility to  the  settlement days  or  the  thirties. The  poets'  subjects  are   often   old   people    (many  of  these, immigrants),   or    the    poets'    vanished  childhood, or a retrospective look at farm  and  village  life. Perhaps the  editors  have consciously  gone  about  paying   an  emo­ tional  debt  to the generations of buzzard­ tough  survivors   of  both   sexes  who  suf­ fered Saskatchewan into  existence. There are  no tourist  poems  about this region  by outsiders who  attempted  to  impose  pic­ turesque  notions    on   it,   no   poems   by writers  who  lived  there  once  and  fled its agoraphobic  spaces   because   they   could not come to terms  with  them. And among  these many backward-glancing anecdotes, the   Wood   Mountain  sketches   of  Andy Suknaski,  in   spite   of  awkward  endings  and   gangling,   rangey    stanzas,    are   as powerful   as any  poems  in  the  book.
Prosaic   poetry   is  no  more  an  offense against  poetry,  necessarily,  than  poetic prose  is  an   offense   against  fiction.  But one  does  bring  different expectations to it  than  one  would  to poetry  that  is richer allusively,   metaphorically,   linguistically. In   this  volume   there   is, for  instance, a very   graphic  sense   of   place.   This   has several   interesting manifestations. The first is the  overwhelming sense of infinite space  but  sparsely  finite  growth. Terry Heath's untitled winter garden poem and Ed   Dyck's   "Fall  Days"   are   beautifully

102
 crafted examples.  A second  manifestation of  place  is the  mindscape, a  more  com­ plex   response   to   this  same  sparse   and  spacey   terrain. John  Hicks'  "By  Night, Looking   Down" offers  one  map   of  the psychic space of a prairie watcher. Lorna Uher's "Inner Space" offers another. But the    most    important    manifestation   of place   in   this   collection   is  the   prepon­ derance  of   colloquially   told  local  anec­ dotes.  There are  some  good  ones:   some local  colour  sketches  by  Denis   Gruend­ ing,   a   touching   conversation   after    a funeral  ("Fred, It's  Still  All  Right")   by Don  Kerr,  a Mennonite mother's lament over  her  son's  new  world  profligacy ("Tante Tina's Lament") by David Waltner-Toews, some  boyhood  memories by Robert Currie, Gary  Hyland and  Ken Mitchell,  and   some   marvellous   mono­ logues  by  Anne  Szumigalski, as  great   a force   in  Saskatchewan  poetry  over   the last decade  as Kroetsch himself. And  this list   of   arresting  anecdotes   could  be extended.
I  favour   the  Saskatchewan  book  for layout.   It is  the  more  attractive of  the two.   Richard Gustin's  photographs do much  to set off the  poems in a pleasingly folksy context  as do the  preliminary notes on   grain   grading  and   Marquis  wheat. And  although there  are lots of "damaged kernels"    in   this   collection,  the   claims made   by  the  editors   are  ironic  and   less grandiose  than   those   of   the   Montreal
editors.    The    editors    of   Number   One
Northern have  failed,   however,   to  limit the  number of contributors to a  manage­ able  size. There are  forty-one  poets  rep­  resented   here.  By contrast,  in  the  Mon­ treal   anthology   there   are  half   as  many poets   and   twice   the   number  of   pages allotted to each contributor.
Both  volumes  are  to be recommended,
but  for  different   reasons.  Among  the  63 poets represented in these two collections, there  is only one  established poet,  Eliza­ beth   Brewster,   whose   representation  in

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Number One  Northern is disappointingly small.   But   there   are   several   emerging poets  in each  collection who  bear  watch­ ing:    Peter    Van    Toorn,   Lorna   Uher, Richard  Sommer, Andy  Suknaski, Terry  Heath, David   Solway  and Anne  Szumi­  galski  to  name   the  most  obvious.   It  is reassuring   to    witness    the    continuous poetic  activity  going  on  among the  Eng­ lish writers  of  Montreal. It is remarkable, however,    to   see   such   a   collection  of devotees  of  equal  talent  in Saskatchewan, a   province   which   could   scarcely   have produced    anything  more    than    wheat,  hockey players  and  a handful of novelists a few short  years ago.

DAVID CARPENTER


MOVE OVER, MUSGRAVE

FRED coGSWELL,  Against   Perspective.  Fiddle­
head, $3.00.
MICHAEL  BULLOCK,  Black  Wings  White  Dead.
Fiddlehead, $4.00.
KATHLEEN MCCRACKEN, Reflections.   Fiddle­
head, $4.00.
ROBYN SARAH,  Shadowplay. Fiddlehead, $3.50. ANN J. WEST, The    Water   Book.  Fiddlehead.
$4.00.
ROBERT  HAWKEs, Spring  That Never  Freezes.
New  Brunswick Chapbooks.

TIME  AND   SPACE   ARE   the   "false   com­ passes"  against which  Fred  Cogswell  in­ veighs in Against  Perspective; "Art  is the true  pole"  which  "lies  within." In  finely crafted, rhymed  and  unrhymed verse the poet elaborates on this theme,  with  para­  doxical  evocations of lost youth  and  love expressed   in  terms   of  natural   imagery. Cogswell's  continuing technical  resource­ fulness reinforces social criticism address­  ing  itself  to  the  human  condition with now Blake-like, now existential overtones: "we  are  caught  between/   monitor  and
 madness."  For   me,   the   most  successful poem  in  this volume  is "Miracle":

that  a love  like ours so late  begun
should fly above  age and  fear

be a mating of eagles that quiver with  sun high in  the  stainless air.

Michael Bullock's  Black  Wings White Dead  is surrealistic,  employing  vivid colour  imagery  and  ironic  juxtapositions. A dream-like atmosphere pervades this book. Sometimes one is reminded of Browning's "Childe  Roland  to  the  Dark Tower Came":

The mouths in  the  wall  whisper as I  pass words  to which  I do my  best to close my
ears
evil  messages  enticing me to crime ...

and  again,  of the later  Goya:

A giant
empty-headed and  gauche devours me with  lava  jaws

and,  inevitably, of Salvador Dali:

At the  eastern window the  sun  grows  big
gives  birth  to a ball
of worm-eaten light.

Bullock's  is a  poetic  world  of  nightmare and  nameless  menace: "I sense  the  aura of some suburban Cain."
Kathleen  McCracken is as  much   of a
sixteen-year-old prodigy as the Ontario school   system   is  likely   to   produce. (I write  from  experience.)  Reflections is her first  book  of  poetry.  The   poems  are  in fact,   reflective,   dealing  with   "recollec­ tions"    and    "silent   retrospects"  ("The Attic"). Digging  in  the  garden and  turn­ ing up an  Indian arrowhead evokes poig­ nant  feelings about  the fragility of human relationships.  Seeing   her   reflection   in  a mirror  becomes  for  the  poet  a symbol  of the search  for identity:

BOOKS IN REVIEW



in spring
she  wears  dandelions milk  running
n
believes  she's  Yeats'
Kathleen
fragments of Ireland
in  need  of shape.

McCracken can  evoke  a  myth  unobtru­
sively, as in "Gull":

he ascends on  ivory-waxen wings the  path to purged perfection.

"Dog" deals  with  the  experience of  cut­ ting  away  the  rope  from  a howling dog's "raw and  torn  neck,"  then  enduring the thankless  sequel:

the  remembrance is always red amber eyes glowing white  bone  fangs  glinting my gesture of friendship
drowned in  a lake  of blood.

"Of  Deer" deals  with  the  poet's  ecologi­ cal  awareness.  Her   wider  perspective  is also seen  in  a  love  poem  portraying her­  self  as  "a  nation  apart"  and  in  a  poem about  the death of  the sun.
Several   of  the   poems   deal   with   the motif  of  masking and   unmasking,  dove­ tailed   with   the  poignancy of  love.  Still, the   poet   comes   to   the   realization that
"only   the  sun I is a  perfect lover."  Per­
haps  one  can  interpret the  change from the  modish  "i"  to  the  honest  egotism  of "I" in  the  last  poem  as  a  sign  of  Mc­ Cracken's nascent   poetic  maturity.
Robyn  Sarah's Shadowplay, as the title suggests,  makes  effective   use  of   chiaro­ scuro   in  its  portrayal  of  trees  and   twi­ light.    Evanescence   is   the    essence   of Sarah's verse,  which   employs  long  lines interspersed  with   shorter  ones,  building  up rhythmical counterpoint. The imagery is unerringly accurate:

As water trickles out  through cupped hands
so words  cannot hope  to hold
Marion.
 The   wind  becomes  a  primary metaphor for  mutability, and  the  motif  of  flowers or  leaves  trapped  under  ice,  or  a  face seen through glass, a leading symbol of existential apartness. Sarah  writes  about seeing puddles as sky-holes in a way that reminds  one  of  Traherne, and  she  coins a  new word,  "treelove," for one  of her primary preoccupations. One  of her  most successful poems, "Broom at Twilight (Another   Way   of   Drowning),"   deals with  the  Nature-as-Monster theme.
The Water   Book,  by  Ann  J. West,  is
thematically integrated,  as  the  title  sug­
gests,  most  of  the   poems   having  to  do with  the  sea. Complete with  illustrations, the booklet presents a poetry of limpid surfaces  and  fluid  reflections. There  is a poem about  Grendel's mother and  one entitled  "Bouillabaisse." West   writes   of
"the I  Wailing   of  whales" and   of  "the
rusted  scent  of  sea."  Most  of  the  poems
are   quite   short,   but   they  linger   in  the mind,  like  the  sound  of  waves  breaking.
Robert Hawkes' Spring That  Never Freezes  deals  with  such  matters as  kite­ flying  and   Columbus,  metronomes   and madness.   The   poetry  is  written  in  free verse   with   short   lines   of   usually   not more  than  three  or four  words  to the line. There  is  little   imagery,   and   much   in­ verted   rhetoric  of  understatement  con­ stantly bordering on prose.  The most effective  poem  is probably "Vonetta Chouinard Ufologist," a quasi  documen­ tary:

They told  me  to convince mankind to stop  pollution and  testing  bombs and  to  repent  to Almighty God.

WARREN STEVENSON

BOOKS IN REVIEW



LINGUISTIC TRENDS

A.     SEGUINOT,   ed.,    Emphatic   Stress.   Studia
Phonetica 12, Didier.
HENRIETTE  WALTER, ed.,  Phonologic  et Societe.
Studia Phonetica 13, Didier.

THESE  TWO VOLUMES  are  a  welcome addition to the series "Studia Phonetica," directed by Pierre  Leon  of the  University of  Toronto.  Although written  primarily for   phoneticians,   linguists    and    socio­ linguists,   most   of   the   articles   provide enough   background information  to  con­ stitute  interesting reading  even   for   the non-specialist. The   volume   on  emphatic stress  contains  four   articles.   The  first, Andre   Seguinot's "L'accent  d'insistance en  fran  ais
literature dealing with  stress  in  French, and shares the author's perceptual and acoustic  studies.  In  the  light  of  these  re­ sults, one cannot any  more  maintain  that
French  is  strictly   a  language a  "accent
fixe."    The    prosodic    features   of    the
French language are  in  the  process of considerable change, to the extent  that "emphatic stress" cannot be considered only as a marginal system to "!'accent tonique." In  the case of radio announcers, for instance,  "emphatic stress" constitutes the  rhythmic pattern  itself  of  a  style  of speech.  It  is not  impossible   that   the  ex­ tension  of  this  phenomenon might  con­ fer  more  mobility  to  the  accentual  pat­ tern  of  the  French  language.
Most   of   the   articles    of   the   second
volume,    Phonologie     et   Societe,   have agreed   to  a  common  theoretical   view­ point:  the  phonological  aspects  of   lan­ guage   must   be  envisaged    and   studied in   the   setting   itself  of   communication. Phonological   differences   and    uses   are often  conditioned  by  the   nature of  the community and  the social group  where communication is taking  place.  The first article, "Communautes de langue  baynuk et  enquetes  phonologiques,"  exemplifies the  difficulty   of  phonological  investiga-
 tion  in  linguistic  communities which  do not  always  correspond  to  ethnic  groups, as it is the case for  the  baynuk  communi­ ties  in  Senegal.   Two   articles  deal   with certain   features of  French  as  spoken  in Canada, "La  diphtongaison en  Estrie" by Normand   Beauchemin    (Universite  de Sherbrooke) and   "Harmonie  et   condi­ tionnement consonantique dans le systeme
vocalique  du  fran ais             a Montreal"
by M.  Yaeger,  H.  J. Cedergren, and  D.
Sankoff.
The   French  of  France  is  the  subject of  the  next  three   articles; included are an investigation of the vocalic system of modern   French which   questions the  no­ tions of "fran ais
standard,"  a   socio-linguistic  survey   of
the  phonological  systems  of  twenty  wo­ men  from   Parisien   parents, and   a  very interesting  study   which   outlines  several phonological trends  in  the  pronunciation of loan  words  from  various  languages by French   speakers.  Three  further  articles deal  with  phonological diversity  in  Eng­  lish, Italian, and  German.

BERNARD SAINT-JACQUES


PRAIRIE IMAGES

HELEN   HAWLEY,   Gathering Fire. Thistledown
Press,  $g.so,  paper  $4.00.
PETER CHRISTENSEN,  Hail Storm. Thistledown
Press, $7.50, paper  $3.00.

LIVING  ON THE WEST  COAST and  reading these  poems,  I  am  struck   by  the  way in which  the  climate   and  geography of  the prairies  dominate the  imagination.
Hawley   describes   the   landscape.   In­ deed,   she   itemizes   its   features;   like  a literary   train   conductor,  she   whisks   us across  the  plains,  singing  out  Saskatche­ wan's   train  stops-Kenaston,  Lanigan, Mozart,    Netherhill,	Outlook,   Piapot. Christensen, too, wants  us to know exactly where  we  are  in  Alberta: in  "Atop  the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Prairie," we  are   at   the   junction  of  the St. Mary and Oldman rivers near Fort Whoop-up, with all its fur and  whiskey trading history.  A quick  glance  at  a map confirms all this. (And  I admit to being hooked  by the  gazeteer. Dog  Pound,  Al­ berta?  And   Saskatchewan, not   content with   Mozart,  has  a  Handel   too.  But  I digress.)
What  is "sparseness" in  this  landscape
for Hawley  is "starkness" for Christensen, who  observes  that  "it  is dangerous/ living too close to the earth/ And  standing up/ one sees too much/ of the distance." The hostile  climate glares  out  of  Hail  Storm. Winter  cold   stops   the  lungs,   pains   the skin;  frost pushes winter into the house, breaks   the  latch; hail  wastes  the  crops; winds   scar.   In   one   poem,   Christensen barely holds himself together against the wind  and  in another, "the wind  [tears]/ a   relationship  with   a   woman    to  bits." (But  he is indirect here. Is he writing obliquely of his own experience or chron­ icling  a  friend's? The force  is  clear,  but the  indirection cuts  the  poem's  impact.) Wind  is only  one  of several  motifs  in his poetry:   the   derelict   house,   loneliness,  isolation,   the   rural    to   urban  shift,   the farmer  tied  to  the  values of  life  on  the land,    and   man's   hopes    pitted    against  nature's seeming hostility  are  here  too.
Gathering  Fire clings  more  closely  to landscape itself.

Fact: I am.     Prairie.   The wind  has hammered my flesh,
it has  not  stopped shaking me.

And  Hawley  glories  in  that  shaking. In "Winds of  My  Country," she  even  apos­ trophizes   the  wind   "that  roars  rumours of life"  to  turn  her  about "like  a  leaf  in its currents." But if Hawley  is a debtor in this   respect,  it  is  more   likely   to  Anne Marriott, Sinclair Ross and  other prairie writers  than   to Shelley.  I'm  not  suggest­ ing   that    the   wind   poems   are   heavily derivative. For  the most  part, they are  as

ro6
 far   from   Baiae's   Bay  as  London  from Swift   Current.  I  come   away   from   this collection   believing   that   Hawley   has   a feeling,  if  not  a  totally  coherent,  answer to the question  "Who has seen the wind?" Hawley   works   the    prairie   elements (wind,  sun, earth, grass, roses, and metal­ lic   sky)   into   two   major   themes:   the passing  of  time  and   the  quest   for  self. The  seasons,  migrations,  a  consciousness of historical  change  (particularly for  the Plains  Indian  although her  allusions  are obscure) , and  of personal change -spe­ cifically her  own  move  to London where
she now lives-illustrate. Sometimes her concern   with   time's   passing   is  coupled with  a  diction  vaguely  echoing Eliot's  as
she  moves  from   "the  thing   itself"   to  a
kind of philosophical musing couched in prosaic  phrasing. But  her  concerns   with time  are  tied  to  the  prairies  as surely  as her   concerns   with   identity.  While   she may  say  that  she  "revels   in  sparseness," it's clear that  locating the self in this sparseness  is a problem.
Gathering Fire shows a poet  trying out
the  tools  of the  trade,  verse's  technicali­ ties. Hawley  tries  for  a  balance  through measured  lines   and   recurring  rhythms  ("Walking") and  uses  strong   repetition, usually  as a  unifying device.  The repeti­ tions may be in stanza  forms  ("Fences"), in   the   stanzas  themselves  ("Prairie Song") ,   in   repeated  phrases    ("Spring Thoughts,"  "Migration"),   in    refrains ("Cycle"), or in images.  In  "Migration," for  instance, the  first  stanza   begins  with the  generalizations of  a  family's   moving to a land  of promises; the  second  moves to personal  statement  about  crossing bor­ ders;  and   the  thirc;l. to  the  migration of birds.   Then  the   pattern   is   repeated: family,  poet,  bird-with  the  images  of birds  migrating as  a  counterpoint to  the human  movement  throughout. Here,  the careful    structure   and    the   varieties    of repetition  succeed.  This isn't  always  the case. Sometimes  Hawley   uses these  tech-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



niques  to  conceal  a lack  of  resolution or coherence; sometimes  the  structure is merely a mechanical solution to the prob­ lems of  the  undeveloped or  disconnected poem,   as  in  "Cycle,"  "Six   Suns,"  and  "Prairie  Song"   which   seem   little   more than  formulaic. Further, Hawley has  the knack  of writing endings  that  sound  con­ vincing,  final.  They  may  bring  the  poem full  circle  by  tying  opening and   closing lines   ("Time and  the  Roses,"   "Concer­ to"), or  tying  motifs  ("Migration"). Yet while  many concluding lines are  wonder­ fully   resonant  and   interesting  in  them­ selves, I feel uneasy, practised upon by a verbal   sleight   of   hand,  for   these   lines aren't always firmly  connected to the  rest of the poem.
Christensen's  Hail  Storm   shares   with
Gathering  Fire the  prairie setting,  but  he has other  uses for  it. While  she is looking at  inner  weather, he  is looking  at  outer.
Christensen casts  a  sharp eye  on  prairie life-the    everyday    events,    encounters real  and  imagined, and   natural  happen­ ings. His  stuff  of life  is the  hail storm  of the  title, a boyhood  hunt for pigeon  eggs, shooting tin  cans  in  the  dump, and   the curious   pastime    of   drowning  ants.   In "Homecoming,"  he   makes   us   feel   the polite  but  blunt  exclusion  he  must  suffer as a local  boy  become  an  alien  from  "the  world  out  there" -a  world  of city, edu­  cation,  and   mountains  which   holds   no interest   for   the   sons   of   the   farm.   In "Dam   Site"  he   creates   the    poignant plaint  of   a  farmer whose  land   is  to  be flooded: "I lived here  all my life/  Where will  I  go?/ I  promised   my  children  this land/ This   is  all   I  have   to  give."   The simple   monologue  is  eloquent,  forceful.
But   to   say   merely   what   the   poems record  and  not  how  doesn't give  a  good
enough  idea  of the  range  of subject, tone and  stance. Love  and   politics  find  their way in too.  (Even  renting. But he doesn't quite   do   for   the   basement  suite   what

108
 Atwood   and   Page   have  done   for  land­
ladies.)
Frequently,  he   is  conversational. He confidently assumes a ready listener and rewards   with  a  fine  narrative. Also,  he ably delivers  the  impression of direct speech,  but  pares  it.  Generally, his  style is  lean.   Not  overly   concerned  with   the formal  features  of verse,  he  moves easily from   loose  stanza   forms   to  free   verse, from  straight rhymes  to subtle  assonance.
An undercurrent of violence  and  anger imparts  a   peculiar   energy   throughout ("Deserted  Houses,"  "Ants,"  "Coutts Border  Crossing") . Often, an  image crys­ tallizes  this  violence  but  on  occasion  he pushes the image at  the cost of the poem, as in "Deserted Houses." Here  he gives a quick  background to get  us to the closing image  of himself  holding  young  birds  by their  wrung  necks-"like a ceiling  hold­  ing a barren  light  socket/ at  the end  of a twisted wire."
Fine   images  abound  and   Christensen doesn't  belabour them  although I feel he could   work   out   extraneous  material - all  the  "like's" and  "as  if's"  that  deaden images,  rob  them  of the  power  in simple juxtaposition. Consider:

Crow on a fence post hangs like a black  rag in  the  wind.

I  admire the  image,  think  loosely of Pound's petals on a wet black bough,  and hope    that    Christensen  might    take    to heart  the imagist  dictum of no word  that does not contribute. Certainly, he's work­ ing  in  that   direction  in  "Osprey." Un­ fortunately he doesn't  always  rely on  the image   to   communicate  but   resorts   to social or moral  comment. And  he has the irritating  habit  of summing things  up  in a  one  or  two  line  closing  which  reduces  instead  of  expands   ("Fall Ends," "Stone Voice").
Christensen's language is usually  clear, vigorous and   unaffected. He   is  bold

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



enough   to  take  convention and  give it  a new   lease:  his   "Hail  prancing/ like horses'  hooves"  gives,  at  one  stroke,  the action  and  the sound.  The  play of words isn't   always   felicitous,   however. He  af­ fectedly   says,  "Sun   wind   has  dried  the tiers/  of   earth,"  playing   with   enjamb­ ment.    In    the   sombre   "Three   Winter  Songs"   he  writes,  presumably  not   pun­ ningly,  that  "the flatness is beyond  relief" and    tries   for   a   noun-verb  effect   that  doesn't  come   off   here-"new grass  blades  the air" -although he does better with   the   same   technique  in   "Fences." But   these   are   minor   objections  to  an otherwise   lively  and   enjoyable  work.  I look  forward  to  Christensen's  next  col­ lection.
JANE  FLICK


OLD WINE, BROKEN BOTTLES, CUT GLASS

EARLE  BIRNEY,  Ghost   in  the  Wheels:  Selected
Poems. McClelland & Stewart, $4·95·
JOHN    OWER,   Legendary Acts.  University of
Georgia Press, $7.50.
RALPH  GUSTAFSON,  Corners in  the  Glass.  Mc- Clelland & Stewart, $4·95·
AFTER   EARLE BIRNEY'S   Collected  Poems and   the  slim  offering   of  selected   poems in   the   NCL   edition,  there   is  at   last  a more  substantial selection. Ghost  in the Wheels contains eighty-four of Birney's best poems. Near False Creek  Mouth is substantially represented, and other poems  cover  the years  betweenI 930 and
1976.  Thus,  the   new   poems,   while  in­
cluding only one  from  The  Rugging and
Moving Times  ( 1976), are  represented, as  is  the  more  traditional Birney  of  the early years. As a pleasant surprise, Birney has included only a few of his concrete poems, and  the collection is strengthened by this decision.  One  finds more  of what one  wants,  a  wide  range  of Birney's  best
 and  most  poetic  work.  Also of interest  is the Preface, where Birney shares several anecdotes  about    the   incidents  that   in­ spired  such  poems  as "Meeting of  Stran­ gers,"  "Twenty-third Flight,"  and  "Epi­ daurus." But  there  is also a  hint  that  the series  of  collections and  selections  is not over: "Anything missing here  and  not  in the  Collected Poems  is  either sunk  with­  out  trace  or  floating  about waiting for  a boat." Whatever  follows,  this  collection has been long needed.
It is harder to  recommend Legendary
Acts, a first book of poems  by critic  John Ower. As implied  by the title, Ower  is concerned with myth and  mythmaking. Classical and Biblical allusions insinuate themselves  like snakes  into  the  matter of his  poems,  and   like  an  adder  bite,  the result  is often  fatal. Ower  is interested in psychology, witty satire, and religious meditations. This   mixture invites  imme­ diate   comparison  with   W.   H.   Auden,  master   of  urbane   wit  and  sophisticated thought, but  unfortunately  Ower   suffers by  the  comparison.  Like   Auden,  Ower uses traditional forms,  and one of his best efforts  is a  villanelle. But  if  the  effect  of many   of  his  poems   is  to  create  in  the reader  a desire  to read  Auden  instead  of Ower,  there  are   also   poems  where thought,  wit,   and   poetry   fuse   success­ fully. And  in  these  poems,  when  they  do occur,  are flashes of  inspiration and  tech­  nical skill.
The   problem   with   the  weaker   poems
is illustrated by the too occasional, too ordinary, and  too  humdrum "Phoenix in July"; one suspects the poet never stepped off  the  airplane, so superficial is his  re­ sponse to desert  heat,  where  "People grill their  toast/ In the  morning sun."  Natu­ rally  one  encounters  references  to  mad dogs  and   Englishmen. Although  techni­ cally   competent,  this   poem   never   rises above  the mundane.
Quite often   Ower's wit  and   humour,
touted   on  the  dust-jacket, trail   off  into

109

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



irksome  jokes or  annoying puns.  In  "Ant in  September," Ower  finds  a  verse  form to match the content-both approach doggerel:

It's true  that our  beloved queen
Will  positively wax obscene,

•Moaning on  the  lost  delight
Of  some silly "nuptial flight";

0, she  will prattle endlessly
Of fresh  horizons she could see, And  penetrating ecstasy.

By  contrast,  Ower's  good   poems   are very  good  indeed. His  best  poems   deal with  graphic memories and  incidents, or are  based  on  concrete objects. Ower is a traveller, having lived in New Zealand, Canada,  and    the   U.S.   But   often    his poetry  suffers  from  his  travels.  His  sense of place, as in the poem about Phoenix, seldom  achieves  strong   expression. Even his view of Canada is that  of a  traveller, of  a  temporary visitor,  and  "From  Can­ ada   to  New  Zealand"  is  unsatisfactorily superficial:

Twenty years  after my fall,  I sometimes remember the  garden,
Though an  angel once  tilted my world, and now  I live in  winter

The metaphor is strong, but  the insight  is shallow.  At his best, Ower  is capable of flashes  of  brilliant  imagery. But  seldom can he sustain  the effort.
One   poem  where   the  combination of
Ower's interests  actually works is "The Suicides"  where   he   creates   a   working myth  for  psychiatry. Beginning with  a tension  of  opposites,   the  poem  develops its   initial  metaphors  into   a   sustained analog of the analytic process:

In the  cold  Humboldt current of my dreams, Night after night, I fish for  three suicides That angle  for me also.

Glittering with  sweat from  head to toe, One  by one,  I haul my horrors home.

I 10
 There are  other  poems  worthy  of  atten­ tion,  all  of  them  serious  but  not  overly­ ambitious; one  such  is "A  Bowl  of  Ripe  Fruit" where   the  gloom  of  an  expected death  is  contrasted  with   the   life-and­ light  symbolism  of  a  bowl  of  fruit.   The poem  is well controlled, the  serious  tone is sustained, and  there  is  plenty  of room for   Ower   to  exercise   his   nearly   meta­ physical  imagination.
Corners  in the  Glass is an  apt  title  for Ralph  Gustafson's latest  book  of  poems. There is a  sense  of  crystalline structure. Like  glass, the  poems  suggest  the  artifice of  man's   handicraft,  the  essential   rela­ tionship   between   man   and   nature  with which  Gustafson, in  this volume,  is con­ cerned.   Further,   as   with    the    fragile beauty   of  glass,  the  poems  are  different from  each  other  in shape  and  texture - they  range  from  the  personal revelation, through  landscapes and   domestic interi­ ors,   to   the   thoughtful,  where    twisted syntax   creates   an   intriguing  obscurity. The  distinguishing feature of  this  book is its intensely  reflective  tone. The majo­ rity of poems are introspective, concerned with  seeing  the  individual as  representa­ tive  of  the  race,  and  placing him  within the   context   of  astronomic  space,   time, and  nature.
The sense that  emerges  is curiously Canadian. For built  as they are out of fragments of Gustafson's experience, the poems  explore  the  delights  and  mysteries of  existing   here  and   experiencing now. The first poem,  "Wednesday at  North Hatley," serves  to set  the  scene  and  out­ line  the  concerns  of what  follows:

The heart endures, the  house Achieves  its warmth and  where He  needs  to, man  in woolen Mitts, in muffier, without
A deathwish, northern, walks.

Here,  in  the space  of a few  lines,  is that blend of thought and  poetic immediacy which   John   Ower   so  often   approaches

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



but   never   sustains.   Gustafson  carries   it off well, and  maintains the dignified tone throughout.
The poems are thematically linked, and a  strong   sense  of  Gustafson's warm  hu­ man   presence  adds  to  the  impression of structure. There is  a  feeling created  by the conversational intimacy between  poet and   reader   that  both   are  in  agreement about  the   problems    of   life.   A   simple heart-felt  domesticity is  the  key  to  these poems.  They   centre around  the  hearth, around   the   writer's  study,   then   spread out  from  the  quiet  centre to explore the world's   tangled   web.   In   the   course   of the  book,  Gustafson weaves  together several  major motifs  which  include  reli­ gion,   love,  art,   and   being;  he  explores these  through images  of flowers,  garden­ ing,  stars,  and  graphically  described in­ cidents.  There  are   poems   about  love (conceived   domestically),  about  travel, about  music, and  about poetry.
The only  poems  that  do  not  maintain the  high  poetic  standard are  those  about music.  It  is difficult  to  make  the  names of composers  or the  terminology of music carry  the  weight  of metaphor; they  sim­ ply  are  not  images,  and  Gustafson  can­ not  make  them  so  no  matter  how  hard he tries:

Pound pitched
,In a loony bin  and  Liszt  betrayed­
The Saturday sundry of this  world, Schumann mad,  hearing A, Schubert turned to the  wall  to die.

("Diabelli Variations")

But   at   least   not   all   the   poems   about music   are   like  this.   Gustafson  has   the sense  to  vary  his  pitch,   thus   one   finds such  delightful poems  as "Of  Cordwood and  Carmen" where  music  enters  the picture, but  is  not  the  only  image.  The poem  concentrates on an  incident and  an action, the  music  is  in  the  background, but  the  poem  could  not function without it:
 Arranging wood, She  hums  offkey  with  Bizet

Up  through the  floor  I listen
To  clunking cutwood birch  stained with snow.

The travel  poems are  also rather weak, but they are not many and fit well with Gustafson's  concerns,   for    they    clarify what  he  is attempting in  this  book:

The globe  is where I study. Guerillas prevent my seeipg
Angkor Wat. I have  been  down
The Chao Phya  River, though,
Where the  poor  are  happy-or  seem happy-
Pounding laundry on  the  bank  stones, And  jumping in  the  river, the  kids.

I'm drifting
Down  the  river  on  a sugar boat. I travel  this way, my own
Sweet  way. I don't like
Guided tours....

( "Mothy Monologue")

Gustafson,  at   home,    is   aware  of   the world.  He is both  detached and  involved. In  many  ways,  he  is  Matthew  Arnold's ideal   critic,   for   he   is  cultured,  he   is aware  of the  best  things  in  life, of music and   flowers,  and   he   makes   use  of  the entire  spectrum of thought and culture available   to  him  in  interpreting his  ex­ perience.
The  love  poems  are  simple  and  asser­ tive.  They  combine   the  best  elements of Auden's  lyrics, and  even acknowledge the debt,   for   Gustafson   quotes    "we/ Must love   one   another  or   die"    in   "Partial Argument." And   as   one   might   expect  from such a blend  of  thought and  poetry,  there  are  a  number  of memorable apho­ ristic phrases: "Love means  dying. Who's  aware/ Of  the anonymous flaw who's  not in  love?"   ("Improvisation  on   Lines   of Somebody  Else"), and  "Forever's now  to those    who    love"     ("The   Two   Cate­ gories"). Nor  is wit  lacking. But  in  con­ trast   to  Ower's,  Gustafson's  is  at  once


I II

BOOKS IN REVIEW



striking and   subtle,   as  demonstrated  by this line from  "Ladies Lovely'' : "London bridge  as well as ladies," a pun  on falling made   explicit   in  context. And   on  con­ templating  Nefertiti,  he   again   rises  to the  high  poetical, and  states  the  place  of beauty  among his  themes:
I watch  elegance, all else
Vulgar  time.
She smiles or seems to smile.
Inscrutable as grace.

("Agyptisches Museum")

Also related   to  the  themes  of  this  vol­ ume  is "Poetic Poem," a  defence of  this kind   of   poetry.   Gustafson  explores   his world,   inner   and   outer, for  it  is  full  of material for  poetry; in  it  sensation and  thought are  inextricably mixed: "A  han-
 kering   after   the  feel  of  peeled   hickory/ Or  the  feel  of  a  sudden axiomatic thought."  And   the    final   discovery   of poetry  is treated in  images  characteristic of   these   poems:    "Coming  across   real poetry, owls hoot,/ Potatoes break ground, and  coffee smells."
Corners   in  the   Glass  is  a  significant work. It presents  a unique blend  of the personal   and   the   philosophical.  It   is  a great   pleasure  to  read.  It seems  unlikely that   it  will  be long  overlooked, for  it  is a  strong   personal   rendering of  thoughts and  responses  that  have  been  left  mostly as abstract themes  in  the  works  of other poets who have  not Gustafson's voice, his gift  for  conversational elegance.

DAVID S. WEST













SUBSCRIPTION RATES




Owing to  increased costs,  CANADIAN LITERATURE  is  ralSlng its  rates,  starting with  the  next  issue, number 81  (Summer, 1979). The new rates  will be as follows:
4 issues: 	$18.00  in Canada
$21.00  outside  Canada (includes  postage)

single issue: 	$5.00

Renewals received  before  June 30, 1979 will be charged at  the  old rate.




112





THE MASCULINE IMAGE IN
Lives of Girls and Women

" ••• MEN WERE SUPPOSED  TO  BE  ABLE  to go  out  and   take  on  all  kinds  of  experi­ ences   and   shuck   off  what   they   didn't want   and    come   back   proud.  Without even  thinking about it,  I  had  decided  to do  the  same." Del  Jordan's brave  words at  the  end  of the  title  chapter form  one of the  ironic  cores central to both  theme and  technique in  Alice  Munro's Lives of Girls and  Women. Though the  males  in the  novel  do  not  correspond to Del's  de­ scription, and  though  Munro's male char­ acters are often  criticized  for being vague and  remote,  the  masculine  image   is  of crucial  significance in understanding Del's development as a woman  and  as an artist, a  process  which   culminates in   the  last chapter, entitled "Epilogue: The Photog­ rapher." This  curious  chapter,  in  which Munro says she "was  trying  to deal  with something fairly  complex,"1   is  the  only one  that   breaks  the  chronological struc­  ture  of the  novel and is the one in which Del's imaginary and  real worlds suddenly  coalesce,  not  through the  Photographer, her  fictive  creation, but   through  Bobby Sherriff,  the  insane   son  of  the  Jubilee family  around whom  Del  is writing her first  novel.  Del's  final  "yes"  marks   her (even  if still  unconscious) acceptance of a  complex  concept of the  self which  has many  implications for the artist.  Munro's view of the  self and  its relation to others shows remarkable  similarities to  Carl Jung's  theory of  individuation. Both Munro and  Jung conceive  of the  self in
 such a way as to make Virginia Woolf's conclusions,  in  A  Room  of One's  Own, about  the   nature  of  the   truly   creative mind   pertinent. Woolf   argues   that   the "great mind  is androgynous" and  thus women  must  achieve   this  "token of  the fully  developed   mind" if  they  are  to  be­ come  first  rate  writers. In  Lives  of  Girls and  Women, Munro  demonstrates  that  the   masculine   image   as   understood   by Jung is as much  a  part  of  the  growth of Del's creative  identity as it is of her  physi­ cal and  sexual  nature.
One   of  tl1e ironies   of   Lives  is  that
throughout the  stories  the  male  portrait is  at  variance with   the   assumption  of male superiority and  freedom held  by Del and  her Jubilee society. Only  at the  level of  the  persona   (the  mask  which  accord­ ing  to Jung the  ego assumes  to meet  the world)    do  positive   male  characteristics appear. From  this level of  perception Del sees  in  her  father,  her  brother, and   in Uncles  Benny,  Craig  and  Bill a  content­ ment  that  contrasts  to the  striving which characterizes  her   sense   of   the   female.  Furthermore, the men  appear to be  hap­ pily independent of women,  in contrast to the females who, like the elderly  Aunts or increasingly even  Naomi,  are  totally  de­ pendent upon the other  sex for  their  own definition,  while  ironically, as  Del  notes, they view  the male  as childlike, weak,  to be tolerated, used, or protected. The free­ dom of place and  action  demonstrated by the males is another point  in their  favour for Del who, without admitting it, shares her  mother's frustration  at   the  physical limitations  on   the   lives   of   girls   and women.  As a  child   Del  recognizes   that what   makes  Uncle  Craig "so  restful   to be with" is "masculine self-centredness." Years  later,  Jerry  Storey,  the  male  of the future,  impresses   her    with    the    same quality  and  she  admits that   she  "whose natural  boundaries were  so  much   more ambiguous, who soaked  up protective col­ oration wherever   it  might   be  found,  be-

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



gan  to see that   it  might be  restful  to  be like  Jerry." That  the  ostensible   control over   their   own   lives  exhibited  by  the males  in  her  acquaintance includes  vio­ lence,  aggression,  and  a  will  to  power  is something  that   Del   also   observes   and  apparently approves. While Garnet, jailed for   the   assault   on   a   man   who   conse­ quently lost an eye, is the obvious  example of  this  trait, Jerry  Storey's conversation dwells on war: "Cheerful, implacable be­ hind   his  brainy  boy's  glasses,  he  looked ahead  to  prodigious  catastrophe."  Mr.  Jordan and Mr.  Chamberlain discuss war whenever  tl1ey  are   together,  and   Del notes  that  "even Uncle Benny  so skinny and  narrow-chested, with  his damaged bronchial tubes,  had  some look or way of moving  that  predicted chance or intended violence, something that  would  make dis­ order; my father had  this too, though he was so moderate in his ways."
While Del accepts the masculine world
thus projected as "the real world," Munro manipulates the  different  levels  of   per­ ception in  the  book  so that  the  reader  is aware, as Del  at  the  time  is  not,  of  the shadow side  of  the  strong  male  persona.  From  this angle  of vision we see examples of  males  characterized  by  suppression of spontaneity  (as   Uncles  Craig and   Bill, and  Garnet), by  passive  resignation  (as in   Uncle   Benny   and   Mr.   Jordan), by rigidity   and  sterility of  thought  (Craig, Naomi's  father), by  deceit   (Mr. Cham­ berlain), by incompetence as fathers (Uncle Benny,  Mr.  Jordan, Garnet's and Naomi's fathers),  and   in  every  case  by unfulfilled  lives. Regarded from  the level of social realism in the novel, the male characters present  a bleak  outlook  for society and  social change.
In addition, however, to functioning on the realistic  level of the  novel, the mascu­ line  image   projects  in  its  duality Del's own  unresolved dichotomy  between   the physical  and  intellectual spheres  of being which  correspond  closely  to  the  Jungian

I 14
 dichotomy between  masculine and  femi­ nine   powers.  Jung  considered   that   the healthy    individual  of   either   sex  must unite within  the self the masculine powers (which   he  termed   the  Logos  ones)   of cognition, action,  and distinctiveness with the  feminine ones   (termed Eros)   of  re­ latedness,   sensation   and    intuition.2   In Lives of  Girls and Women, Munro dem­ onstrates what happens when  the gulf between   the  sexes  is  such   that   each   is isolated  into its own chauvinism inwardly as well as socially.
In the   males   who  lack,  or   have  re­ pressed,  the feminine qualities, the Logos ones  are  perverted from  initiative,  cour­ age,  objectivity  and   wisdom3    into  their opposites: sterility,  violence, egotism  and  death. The childless Uncle Craig with his incomplete  genealogy,  Jerry who  thinks  he can  attain the  Nobel  Prize  before  the world  is  destroyed  and  Uncle Bill dying of  cancer  and  consumed  by nostalgia  for his  lost mother despite  the  lush  presence  of  his  young  wife,  Nile,  all  demonstrate the   consequence  of  the   imbalance  de­ manded by society of the successful male. The males wirh the most developed femi­ nine  qualities are  Uncle  Benny  and Mr.  Jordan, but  they  have  lost  the  masculine power   of   purposeful  action   and   self­ determinism and  are  failures  in  society's eyes  and  indeed, perhaps,  even  in  their own.
In none  of the  males  does Munro por­
tray  the  balance of masculine and  femi­ nine powers necessary to achieve a change  in society  equivalent to  that  which Mrs. Jordan envisages  for  women. The female  characters also, however, reveal  a similar imbalance and  a consequent lack of crea­  tivity. Their masculine powers are stunted by a  society  that  makes  an  ideal  of  not doing things. The Aunts  are  childish  and  sterile   in   their    dependence  on   Uncle  Craig and  Naomi's  femininity becomes  a purely physical  and  predatory one locked in   the    material   tomb    of   her    "hope-

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



chests."  On  the other  hand, Mrs.  Jordan in espousing  her masculine qualities faces ridicule  by her society, while in repressing her  feminine  powers  she  becomes  as Del sees her, brittle,  eccentric, "in  no way content" and  no longer  "the  priestess"  of the  Flats  Road  days. Fern  Dogherty with a  more  highly  developed sensuality  than Mrs. Jordan achieves  a partial inner  bal­ ance  greater than   that   of  Del's  mother  but  she  must  leave  Jubilee and  remain  unfulfilled   as  an  artist. Fern  becomes  a pathetic, lonely,  though  courageous, wo­ man,  at  the  mercy  not  only  of  her  own nature but  also of males like Mr.  Cham­ berlain  and  women  like  Del  herself  who betrays   her   by  spying   on   her   at   Mr. Chamberlain's  request  and   Naomi   who dismisses her  as  "a  joke."  In  contrast to Fern,   Munro  shows  in  Del   a  develop­  ment, occurring in  the  last  two  chapters of  the  novel,  which  offers  hope   that  in her  case  an  individual creative  balance  and  union  between  masculine Logos  and feminine  Eros may  be reached. Del's de­ sire  for  such  a  union   is  comically  pre­ sented  in  her  dismay  over  the  psycholo­ gist's statement that  when  looking  at  the full moon  boys think of the universe,  girls of washing  their  hair. "Frantically upset" that  she "was  not thinking as a girl,"  Del feels "trapped" because she "wanted men to love  [her]  and she wanted to think  of the   universe   when   she   looked   at   the moon."
Although   her    mother's   "virginal
brusqueness,  her innocence" is one of the reasons   Del   rejects    her    as   a   model, throughout the novel Del  is clearly moti­ vated    by   the   masculine   powers   with which  she  identifies  and  which  are  best exemplified    in   her   mother.  Like   her mother she is fearful of the feminine ones of   relatedness. But   she   also   struggles against    her   mother   who,    along    with Naomi,  often  appears  in  relation to  Del to  correspond  to  Jung's concept of  the shadow  in which  the ego projects its own
 unaccepted  traits.  The  shadow with whom the self must come to terms before individuation can occur appears in dreams  as a figure of the  same sex as the ego.4     The   first  stage   of  Del's  develop­ ment,  the  first  two-thirds of  the  novel,  is dominated  by  women.  It   is,  however,  especially  her  mother  against whom  Del struggles  even as Mrs. Jordan did against hers. From  this often painful struggle  Del profits in a manner like that  suggested  by Jung when  he  noted that:

The   woman  who  fights  against   her  father still has the  possibility of leading  an instinc­ tive, feminine  existence,  because  she  rejects only  what   is  alien   to  her.  But  when  she fights  against   the  mother   she  may,  at   the risk  of  injury    to  her   instincts,   attain  to greater  consciousness  because in  repudiating the  mother   she   repudiates  all  that   is  ob­ scure,   instinctive,  ambiguous,   and   uncon­ scious  in  her  own  nature.5

As the dependence of Del's  developing consciousness upon her mother begins to wane, Mrs. Jordan's strength deteriorates. Just   before   this  development,  however, Del   is   startled  and    uncomprehending when  to  her  speech  about the  changing lives of  girls  and   women   (which occurs at  the  apex   of  Mrs.  Jordan's strength) her mother adds  the apparent non-sequi­ tur   "you   will   want    to   have   children though." Del's  vehement rejection of this idea is a part  of her mistaken assumption that  physical  being  and  persona is equi­  valent  to identity. She is not yet in a posi­ tion  to  understand that  what  her  mother means  by a  woman  having a  life  of  her own   and   self-respect  is  the   fulfillment rather  than  the  denial of feminine  Eros­ relatedness  that   occurs   only  when  it  is linked   in   an   inner   marriage   with   the Logos powers.
In  the  next  story,   "Baptizing,"  how­ ever, Del's struggle  against Garnet French is occasioned  in part  by the  lie that "was  not  a lie"  that  she  would  like  a baby­ the dream  symbol,  according to Jung, of the soul's  re-birth.6  Del's struggle  against

I 15

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



Garnet's insistence  that  she  must  submit to  baptism before  she  can  be  a wife  or mother  is  a   symbolic   struggle  against male dominance and  loss of self. Yet after she  has  broken   away  from   Garnet, her dream of  real  life  is again  of  the  purely masculine quest for re-birth without feminine relatedness. She  dreams of  her­ self  as  "at   last  without fantasies  or  self­ deception, cut  off from  the  mistakes  and confusions of the  past, grave  and  simple, carrying  a  small   suitcase   getting  on   a bus."    Munro,   however,    undercuts  this vision  as  a  vision  of  real  life  by  adding "like girls in the movies" and  juxtaposing this  illusionary image  with  the  italicized words  that  end  the story, "Garnet French, Garnet   French,   Garnet   French.   Real Life."
The  final   chapter  which   centres  on Del's  initial  attempt to write  a novel, pre­ cedes  "Baptizing" in  temporal  sequence: Del   is  still  awaiting  the   results  of  her exams-which we know from  the earlier story  she  passes, though  without the  dis­ tinction  necessary   for   a   scholarship  to university.  The  over-lapping  chronology suggests  that  it  was  the  activation of the deeper levels of  her  unconscious through her  attempt at  writing fiction  which  al­ lowed  Del  to  free  herself  from  what  her mother  would  have  called   her  "distrac­ tion" over  Garnet, and  to see beyond  his physical  presence  into  herself. Del admits she has "re-arranged" Garnet to fulfil her own   need.  She  says  "I loved   the  dark side, the strange side of him, which  I did not  know,  not  the  regenerate Baptist; or rather, I saw the Baptist, of which  he was proud  as a mask he was playing  with  that he  could   easily  discard." She   does  not know   this   side   because   as   she   admits "words  were  our   enemies." Yet   as  she fights  with  Garnet in  the  water she  feels amazed   that  "he  should   not  understand that   all  the  powers  I granted him  were in  play,  that   he  himself  was-in  play, that   I meant to  keep   him   sewed   up."

II6
 Del's  great   danger   lies  in  her  power  to deny  reality  and   instead   to  create   and live in imaginative worlds  whose mystery she can  control.  The water in  which  the struggle  takes place,  however, is an apt symbol for the  depths of the  unconscious where  truths cannot be  avoided by  con­ scious  control   of  the  will.  At  this  point for  the  first  time  in  the  novel  the  male appears as a projection of the  animus­ the  third   and  most  creative  level  of  the psyche   where   especially   for   the   artist  "real  life" begins.
Jung used the  term  animus to describe the  contra-sexual "soul  image" of the woman  in whom she meets  her  other  self
-the image  of maleness  created in part by her  environment and  in  part  by  her own nature. As Del struggles  with Garnet her  real   impression   of  masculinity  sur­ faces as a violent,  aggressive  demand for submission of her  identity and  the renun­ ciation  of her  Logos  powers.  In  the  Epi­ logue,   the   Photographer,  her   invented  character, represents the  same  dark,  hid­  den   and   sinister   aspect   of   masculinity which  does  not  allow  for  a  true  repre­ sentation of  life.  There was  a  "wicked, fluid energy  about  him,  a  bright  unpity­ ing  smile."  His  "unusual, even  frighten­ ing   pictures"  age   people   or   transform them.  "Middle-aged people  saw  in  their own  features   the  terrible  growing,   ines­ capable likeness of their dead  parents ... brides looked  pregnant." Instead of shar­  ing the general  fear  of the  Photographer however,  Del's   heroine  gives  herself  to him, is impregnated by him  and  commits suicide  the  day  after   he  leaves  town.
Garnet and  the  Photographer closely resemble  the  way  that   the  Jungian  psy­ chologist von Franz  describes  the first two stages  of  animus  development  in which the  male  "appears as  a  person  of  more physical  power,"  and   then  as  possessing "initiative and  capacity for  planned ac­ tion."7   Both   figures   seem   to   represent  what   von   Franz   terms   psychologically

OPINIONS AND NOTES



negative figures who "lure women  away from   all  human  relationships" and   like the robbers,  murderers and  Bluebeards of myth  and  fairy tale "personify all those subconscious cold, destructive reflections that  invade a woman  in  the small  hours, especially   when  she  has  failed   to  realize some  obligation of feeling." Bobby  Sher­ riff,   the   real   brother  of  Del's   heroine,  represents the other distinct aspect  of the masculine-the    weakness    which     has characterized  so  many   of   the  males  in Del's  experience. He  is  another animus  projection  but   unlike  the  Photographer or  any  other  male   in   the   novel   unites Del's imaginative and real worlds.
In  Bobby Sherriff  one of the most powerful of the  archetypes of the female consciousness   appears,  that   of  the  Wise Man   or  the  fourth stage  of  animus  de­ velopment which  according to von  Franz  "sometimes connects   the  woman's  mind with   the  spiritual  evolution  of   her  age and  can  thereby  make  her  even  more  re­ ceptive    than    a   man    to   new   creative ideas."  In  true  archetypal  fashion  Bobby Sherriff  contains both  negative and  posi­ tive possibilities.  His insanity  may, on  the social  realism  level  of  the  novel,  be  that of  the  masculine  world,   but   in  his  in­ sanity,   he  may  be  the  Wise  Fool.  Con­  fronted  by  Bobby  at  a  point   where   she "had   lost    faith"   in    her    novel,    Del wonders:

What happened to  Bobby  Sherriff  when   he had to stop baking cakes and go back to the asylum? Such  questions persist,  in spite of novels.  It is a shock,  when  you  have  dealt so cunningly,  powerfully, with  reality, to  come back  and  find  it there. Would  Bobby Sherriff give  me  a  clue  now,  to  madness?

The clue  Bobby gives Del is to remem­ ber  that  the  brain  needs  to be  nourished. Addressing her  as  the  clever  girl  "who's going  to  university,   on  scholarships" he warns  her  that   he  was  destroyed   in  his years  at   College   by   undernourishment. He  talks  on  while  Del  eats  the  cake  he
 baked  for  her  and   muses  that   "people's lives in Jubilee,  as elsewhere, were dull, simple,    amazing  and    unfathomable­ deep  caves  paved   in  kitchen   linoleum." Previously   Del   says   she   "did  not   pay much  attention to the real Sherriffs, once [she J   had  transformed  them  for fictional  purposes." Through Bobby she makes  the connection  to   reality   that   characterizes Munro's art. Furthermore she remembers that  as she left:

he  did   the  only  special thing  he  ever   did for  me.  With   those   things in  his  hands, he rose on  his  toes  like  a  dancer, like  a  plump ballerina. This  action, accompanied by his delicate  smile,   appeared  to   be  a   joke   not shared with  me so much as displayed for  me, and  it  seemed  also,  to  have  a  concise  mean­ ing,  a  stylized  meaning-to  be  a  letter, or
a   whole   word,   in   an   alphabet I  did   not know.

The  feminine  metaphors of baking  and pirouetting,  incongruous  though  they make   Bobby's   actions,  imply   that    the inner nourishment must be that of the feminine powers-a physical  and  spirit­ ual   relatedness  essential    to   offset   the sterile   Logos   orientation   characterizing society.  Instead of  the  passive  feminine "Thank-you"   implying   connection  and obligation, Del's response  to Bobby  is the "Yes" characteristic of her  strong  mascu­  line   powers.   Nevertheless  the   response signifies recognition and  acceptance, even if still an  unconscious  one,  of the  obliga­ tion  of the  artist  to speak  for  the  Bobby Sherriffs-and for  all  the  males  and  fe­ males  in  Jubilee  and  elsewhere   who  are prevented  from  achieving an  integrated harmony within  the self and  thereby  with society. The  androgyny suggested   in  the portrait   of    Bobby    Sherriff    has    been created by  disharmony and  insanity. Yet in  its   positive  state   within   the   psyche, androgyny   represents  the   ultimate   bal­ ance  and   union   between   the   two  great  contrasts, masculine and  feminine. If Del can  achieve  such  a  state   and  learn  the new  alphabet she  may  be  able  to  trans-


117

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



late  her  novel from  the  "pictures" in her head  (its present  state) into a work of art for others  to experience. The  evidence  of the novel suggests that  she does reach  the state  of  being  able  to  write  as  Virginia Woolf  recommended, "as  a  woman, but as a woman  who has forgotten that  she is a woman, so that  her  pages  [will  be]  full of   that    curious    sexual    quality   which comes only when sex is unconscious of itself."  Paradoxically of course  this is the state  in which  the  woman  artist  can  most fully  convey  the  feminine experience. Woolf   argues   that   "some   collaboration has to take place in the mind between the woman   and   the  man   before   the  art   of creation can be accomplished. Some mar­ riage   of   opposites    has   to   be   consum­ mated."
In  the  similarity of name  and  the sug­ gestion  of androgyny Bobby appears as a double  of Uncle  Benny  whose  misadven­ tures  form  the basis of  the first chapter of the  novel  which  Munro told  John   Met­  calf  was  written  after   the  others.   How­  ever,  whereas   Uncle Benny  represents a real  though  eccentric part  of Jubilee life, Bobby Sherriff  is closer to a symbolic representation of the  deeper levels of the unconscious from  whence  characters  like Uncle Benny are  created. One  of the characteristic  effects  of  Munro's  fiction (like  that  of  writers she  calls  influences such   as  Welty,   O'Connor  and   McCul­ lers)   is the  sharp twist  her  endings take into  what  is often  termed the Gothic. The  explanation for  this  effect  may  lie in  the pattern  which  appears in  Lives  of Girls and  Women  where  we  begin  with  char­ acters   who  actually  have   been   created after   the  narrative voice  has  taken  and returned  from   its  inner  journey   of  dis­ covery.  The   perils   of  this   journey   are many, as Jung pointed out,  and  the char­ acters and  effects  (the  truths) of the end­ ings  are   those  emanating  most  directly  from  the  unconscious where  artistic con­ trol is least possible. This may be the rea-

II8
 son  Munro remains dissatisfied  with  the
Epilogue  yet says:

You  realize  where  the  cracks  are  but  you can't    do   much   about   them.   I'd   like   to change   the  last  section   which   I did  over and  over  again.  It doesn't  satisfy me at  all. It doesn't  express what  I wanted  it  to and yet  maybe  because  I was  tired  and  it  was
the end  of the  book, it was the  best I could  , do,  but  maybe  it  just  is the  best  I can  do with  the  material.

The  source  of  this  material may  also  be the  reason  Munro feels that  the  "middle and  later   parts  of  the  book  . . . are  the best parts" while the ones she wrote  after the  sweep  of  composition which  carried her  from  "Princess Ida" to  "Baptizing" have "less vitality."
Despite  the vitality  of the works closest to  the  unconscious, to  remain   in  the  in­ nermost  world exclusively  would  be mad­ ness. Though not  necessarily  untrue, the photograph would  be distorted because  it would  not  include  the  conscious  level  of the  persona  where ego contacts its world.  Jung suggested  that  a  minimum accom­ modation  between   the  persona   and   the world   was   necessary   before   the   inner journey to individuation could  be under­ taken,  and  that   without such  a  connec­ tion  the   psyche  was  prone   to  neurosis. Munro's art is like a documentary photo­ graph   of  the  external world  that  shows why   accommodation  to   it   is  difficult, which  then  enlarges to  reveal  simultan­ eously  and  suddenly an  inner  image  of reality.  This  image,  like  a  photographic negative,  is often  in  reverse  and  domin­ ated  by black, but  the final picture is im­ possible without  the  negative. Yet  unlike many  modern  writers  who  seem  content to slip into  a subjective solipsism, Munro continues to affirm  the ancient role of the artist  to  connect. She  answered affirma­  tively when John Metcalf  questioned her as to  whether, though in her  writing  she gloried in surfaces and textures, she felt "surfaces   not  to  be  surfaces." Similarly

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



during the  stage  of her  career  when  Del wants  merely  "to  write  things  down" she refers  to  herself  as  "voracious and  mis­ guided   as  Uncle   Craig   ...  writing   his history." The  security  of  surface   report­ ing  is  not   enough. The  danger  to  the artist  as a  person  lies in  the  necessity  for him  to pursue  his own  inner  nature. The  challenge lies in integrating the subjective inner  level  to  the  objective and  external world  of  experience and  persona  in order  to  communicate what  Munro calls "the magic," the  "feeling about   the  intensity of what  is there."
When the novel begins, Del as a child observes   the  "troubling  distorted  reflec­ tion" of Uncle  Benny's  world  but she can still regard it as "the same  but  never  the same at all."  It was not in her world  that  "people could  go down  in  quicksand, be vanquished by ghosts or  terrible ordinary cities."  At the  end  of the  novel in Bobby Sherriff  she faces  the  distortion of Uncle Benny's  world  as  now  that   of  her  own, the real world, in which  the self must seek to right  the inward balance in order  to be able  to view  the world  and  act  creatively  in it. At  this  point  the  irony  provided by the discrepancy between  Del's  vision as a child and  as  a  narrator subsides.  In  the new  narrative voice  there  appears a  sig­ nal  of a change coming  in the life of  Del Jordan which  will free  her  from  her  un­ questioning admiration and  adulation of the   masculine  persona    and   her   initial  physical  and  sexual  animus  image.  The painful and   continuing  struggle   toward  consciousness  and individuation on which she is now  embarked contrasts sharply  to her   dream   of   boarding  the   bus   "like girls  in  the  movies."  But  it  is the  inner  journey  that will enable  Del to record  the surface truths of Jubilee in such  a way as to  communicate  their   inner   reality   and thereby  to  realize  her  desire  for  "every last  thing,  every  layer  of speech  and thought, stroke  of light  on  bark  or walls, every  smell,   pothole, pain,   crack,   delu-

120
 sion,  held still and  held  together -radi­ ant   and   everlasting." This,   in  effect,  is what  she has done  for us in the preceding chapters.
While,  according to Munro, "not  very many writers [except] the great ones can create  characters of both  sexes," the mas­ culine   portraits  in   Lives   of    Girls   and Women are  sound  demonstrations of the way   the   female   consciousness   interacts with  the male at different levels of being. If properly understood by the  reader, the masculine  image   enlarges   one's   percep­ tion  of  Del  Jordan and  one's  admiration for  the art  of her  creator.


NOTES

1 John   Metcalf,  "A  Conversation  With  Alice
Munro," Journal of Canadian  Fiction,   1, no.
4  (Fall  1972), 6o.
2  Carl Jung,  "Woman  in Europe," in Collected
Works  10: Civzlization  in Transition, pp. 254
If.
s M. L. von Franz,  "The Process of  Individua­ tion,"  in  Man  and  his Symbols  (New  York: Dell, 1g68), p. 206.
4 Ibid. p. 175.
5  Carl   J ung,   "Psychological  Aspects   of   the Mother   Archetype," in  Collected   Works   g, Part I: The  Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious,  p. 186.
e C.  Jung,   "Psychological   Types,"   Collected
Works  6, pp. 561 If.
7  Von  Franz,  p. 206.
NANCY I. BAILEY



CARRIER'S FICTION

RoCH CARRIER IS  A  BORN STORY-TELLER, a   raconteur    whose   verve   immediately grips   the   reader.  As  critics   have   been quick  to  point  out,  he  uses all  the  tech­ niques  of the raconteur:  grotesque exag­ geration, caricature and  a wild  imagina­ tion which  still leaves  room  for a kind  of fantastic realism.1 Some critics have com­ pared  his work to Brueghel's, while others

OPINIONS AND NOTES



have  commented on  its epic  and  folklore qualities.2  Add to this a variety  of  dream­ like sequences  mingled  with  a  great  deal of  violence   and   cruelty, and   it  can   be seen  that   Carrier's  work  is  a  rich  mix­ ture  of  techniques designed  to  seize  the reader's attention.
Carrier himself  would   seem  to  agree with  those  who  emphasize the  grotesque and  exaggerated side of his work,  for  he has  said:   "Mes   romans   aiment  l'invrai­ semblance; j'aime  la demesure,  j'aime  la force,    j'aime    l'epopee."3     But    another statement  of  Carrier's  should   warn   us against seeing his work as  just  one  of im­ agination  and   entertainment.   Imagina­ tion,  he  says,  is  not  opposed   to  real  life and   real  life  problems:  "Quand  je  dis
imaginaire, je  n'oppose pas  ce  monde   a
celui  que I'on nomme  le monde  reel;  par
imaginaire,  je  veux  dire  le  monde   reel perc;u plus globalement avec toutes ses possibilites et ses significations par  le roman."4  Carrier's techniques are,  of course,  used  with  the  intention of  enter­ taining, but  they are also used as a means of conveying a view of the world, and  of commenting on  it.  He  says  that, in  La Guerre, yes  sir!  "J'ai  essaye  de  trouver  une  certaine verite  de  vie."5 The same  is true  of his other fiction.6
Beneath the grotesque adventures of Carrier's  characters is  another "truth." This is supported  by  his  statement that his interest in literature, and,  in  a sense, his career  as a writer,  date  from  the  time when   he  first  read  Candide.1    Voltaire's novel  recounts the fantastic adventures of grotesque characters, but  through the in­ credible  events   described, through   the parody of  the  adventure novel  and  the caricature of human types,  Voltaire  was attacking certain   explanations of  reality current at  his  time,  and  commenting on a  human  situation he  found   intolerable. Like  Candide,  Carrier's novels  exist  on more  than  one  level. They  exist  on  three distinct  yet  closely  integrated  levels  be-
 hind  the literal  one, for his fiction  is a commentary on  the  situation of Quebec, on the problems  of living  in modern capitalist society,  and  on  what   Malraux calls "la  condition humaine."
On   the  first  of  these  levels,  Carrier's novels correspond closely to Candide. He writes  that,  when  he  read   Candide, "je decouvrais avec  Voltaire tout  ce qui em­ poisonnait la  vie  au  Quebec. Mon  pays m'apparaissait comme  un pays du XVIIIe siecle  et   Voltaire  ·etait   le   grand  frere
m'indiquant la  voie  a suivre."8   Carrier's
novels are  a protest  against all  the  forces
that  have enslaved  Quebec and  prevented her from  freely fulfilling  her  destiny.  It is in  the  context   of  this  protest  that   one must  understand his attack on a  particu­ lar   type   of  religion   once   practised  in Quebec. It is  not  so  much  the  Church itself which  Carrier attacks as a symbolic representation of  all  the  forces  of  dark­ ness, superstition and  fear   which   would hamper the  development of  a  people.  It is all  "official"  explanations  and   justifi­ cations of Quebec's misfortunes which Carrier pillories,  just as, in Candide, Vol­ taire  attacked an  over-optimistic  and  al­ most  "official"  explanation of  reality.
In  Carrier's fiction,   the  Church   pre­ sents a view of man  which  denies his full humanity. He  is seen  as  a  plaything of his  appetites, almost   an  animal,  and   in Floralie, ou es-tu?  his  appetites are  sym­ bolized  by  Anthyme's  horse.  Riding off with  his  bride,  Anthyme whips  his  horse into   a   frenzied   gallop,  while   Floralie, frightened by the speed of the horse and apprehensive  of  Anthyme's  sexual   pas­ sions, thinks  of the  times  horses have run wild  in  her  village,  causing  havoc.  The beat of Anthyme's heart is compared to a galloping  horse,   and   Anthyme brutally consummates the  marriage as  the  horse drags  the buggy through the forest. These  passions  are  seen  by  the   Church  as  a potential   cause  of  damnation,  and   are directly  linked  to  Hell.  Hence  Floralie's

121

OPINIONS AND NOTES



fear  of  them,  and  hence  the  reaction of Berube  in La Guerre, yes sir! when  he contemplates the  naked   Molly  and  sud­ denly  seems  to  hear   a  clock  from  Hell ticking   and   saying   "Toujours,   jamais."  The  act  he  was  about   to  perform seems to  him  a  prelude  to  damnation, and  he trembles   in   terror.   Molly   herself,   who represents sex and  the enjoyment of sex, appears  in   the   midst   of   the   villagers "comme  une   autre  incarnation  du   di­ able."
The religion  of Carrier's characters represents the  world  as  the  battleground of God  and  the Devil.  This view is neatly summed up in Flaralie, au es-tu? by the mediaeval-style scenery used by the travelling actors,   which   depicts, on  one side,  smiling   angels,   and   on   the  other, demons   stoking   the  flames  of  Hell.  Ac­ cording to  the  Church, man  is  only  too inclined  to gravitate towards the demons'  side   of   the   scene.   The  priest   informs Anthyme:  "Tu  es  un   homme,   et   tout homme  est un  pecheur," and  tells  Flora­  lie that  "l'homme corrompt  tout  ce qu'il touche." The   priest   in   La   Guerre, yes sir! tells  the  villagers  that  many  of them are  on the road  to Hell, and  talks of "ces
flammes   auxquelles VOUS  serez  Soumis a
cause  de  votre  nature  pecheresse et  vo­
luptueuse."   But    the    priest     struggles against  the Devil for the souls of men and this  struggle   is  represented  symbolically in  Flaralie,  au  es-tu?  when   Pere  Nom­ brillet  chases  away  the actors  playing  the Seven  Deadly  Sins, and  drives off Neron, the  travelling seller  of   medicines which cure  by the  help  of the  Devil.
Any view of life which  inhibits the  in­ dividual's (and  a people's)  expression  of life and  strength is bound  to  have  disas­ trous  effects. It produces a childhood like Philibert's, full of images of death. Phili­  bert,  as a child,  spends  much  of his time helping  his father dig  graves  (symbols  of death), and   playing   in   the   graveyard, where   he  imagines   he   is  sounding  the

122
 trumpet of  the  Last  Judgment, and  ex­ pecting  the dead  to rise from  their graves. It makes  him  lie awake  at  night  imagin­  ing  the  ducks  caught in  the  ice  of  the river,  their  heads  severed  by a  hunter. It produces   in  Floralie all  kinds  of  night­ mares as she runs  through the forest look­ ing for Anthyme, convinced she is a "fille damnee" and  imagining  Hell gaping  be­ neath  her  feet.  It  produces in  Anthyme similar  fears  as  he  wanders through  the night,  thinking   his  horse  has  been  stolen by  the   Devil   and   imagining  it   riding  across  the  sky.  Significantly, it  is  while making   love   (i.e.,   expressing   these  life forces)    that   Carrier's  characters  often find  themselves  thinking of death. When Arthur is about   to  make  love  to  Amelie in   La   Guerre,  yes   sir!,   he   finds   the thought of  the  dead  Corriveau obsessing him.  Berube,  as we have  seen,  is assailed by thoughts of Hell  in the same situation.
This  religion  also  stifles the  life  forces by its  attitude to  marriage. Sexual  rela­ tions are  allowed  only when sanctified  by the  Church, which   is  why  Berube   asks Molly  the prostitute to marry him  before he has  relations  with  her.9 It is also why Anthyme  is filled  with  dismay  and  anger  when  he  discovers  his bride  is not  a vir­ gin. He condemns her  as "fille  damnee," and symbolically  loses his virility,  for it is at   this  point   that   his  horse   disappears and  passes  (together with  Floralie)  into the  hands  of Neron. "Un homme  qui  ne sait  pas  se faire  aimer d'un cheval  n'est pas  un  homme," he  concludes   when  he thinks  his  horse  has  bolted,  implying  at the  same  time  that   a  man  who  has  not received  a  pure   wife  is  no  man   either. But if Anthyme's attitude to his own vir­ ility is distorted, his attitude to his wife is worse. He  has been  taught to see women as   temptresses,    except    after   marriage, when  they  are  to  be  taken  brutally. The  wife's  task,  he  believes  (as  does  Floralie  herself)     is   to   obey,   for    "marier  un homme,  c'etait le suivre  pour  lui  obeir."

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



Such  a relationship between  men and women  stifles love, and  Floralie finds her­ self unable to tell Anthyme she loves him. Instead, all  she  can  say  is:   "J'ai  peur, Anthyme." It is  through  this  forest  of misunderstandings,   misconceptions   and superstition, represented by the  real  forest in which  they wander, that  Anthyme and Floralie  have  to  find  one  another.
The  forces   which   separate  Anthyme and    Floralie   divide    the    whole    com­ munity.10   Religion  comes   between   the men,  who  barely   accept  its  restrictions, and  the  women, who  seek  their  consola­ tion  in  it.  It comes  between   father and son,   causing  Arsene   to   beat   and   kick Philibert because  he  has  blasphemed. It comes   between   parents  and   daughter, preventing   Esmalda  from   entering  her parents'  house   because  it  is  against   the rules  of  the  religious  order   to which  she belongs.   It   divides   men   within    them­  selves,  causing   them   to  deny   their   own instincts. It  separates English   from French, causing the  latter to marvel  that the  English   can  even   pray   before  Cor­ riveau's coffin,  but  never  allowing  them to  doubt  that   the  English  God  is a  false one,   and   that    "Eux,  les  Anglais   pro­ testants  sont  damnes."
The  constant strife  within  the  French­ Canadian   community  is   symbolized   by war,  which   lurks  in  the  background of ll est  par  la,  le  solei[,  still  lives  in  the memories  of Dorval  in  Le  Deux-millieme etage,   and   is  the   very   subject   of   La Guerre,  yes  sir!.  Even   before   the   war comes  to  the  villagers  in  La  Guerre, yes sir!, they  are  at  war  with  themselves.  As Carrier puts  it: "Mes   personnages ne se sentent   pas  concernes  par   cette   guerre,  au  tout  debut, ils vivent  en  marge,  mais ils sont  en  etat  de  guerre  permanente en eux-memes,   contre   les  autres,   ils  vivent
au  niveau  de  l'instinct."11
But  if war  represents the  strife  within the French-Canadian community, it even more  obviously  represents strife  between
 French  Canadians and  English. The Eng­ lish are  depicted as another force oppres­ sing  the  French   Canadian, and  the  war they  foist  on  French   Canadians  is  ex­ ploitation  at   its  most  cruel.   The  char­ acters  in the novels make  it clear  that  for them,   the  war  is  waged   by  "les   gros," and,   although   one   of   them   condemns Germans, English,  French, Russians, Chi­  nese and  Japanese as all  being  "gros," it is   obvious   that   they   hold   the   English mainly  responsible.  They   cannot  under­ stand  why their  sons are  sent  to fight  for a  land  which,  one  of  them  says,  is "au  bout  du  monde." They  know  nothing of that    country, and   Corriveau's  mother does not even realise that  the Union Jack  on her son's coffin is also "her" flag. Even those  who  seem  to  go  to  war   willingly have no choice, since, for the likes of Cor­  riveau   and   Philibert,  the  army   is  their  only  means  of escape  from  a community which  stifles and  inhibits them.
The war  clearly  demonstrates a  rela­ tionship  already  established  between  the two  communities:  that    of   master   and servant.  The    attitude  of    the    French Canadians  to  their  "masters" seems  at first  one  of  servility,  represented  by  the villager   who  welcomes   the   English   sol­ diers  bringing  back  Corriveau's body  by saying:  "I understand English,  boys. You may  speak  English,   I  learned it  when  I was  in  the  Navy  ... Royal   Navy." But the real feelings of this man  are  revealed when  he curses  the  soldiers   (albeit  when they  are  out  of hearing)  for  leaving  the door  open.  He  assumes  that   the  English must  use French-Canadians in  the  Army to close their  doors,  and, of course,  he is right.  Even in the  Army,  the  French Canadian is used to perform menial  tasks. His  position  is summed  up  by  Berube's task,  which   is  to  clean   the   Air   Force latrines  at  Gander (together with  a  mot­ ley crowd  of Polish,  Italians, Hungarians and  Greeks). As for Corriveau, when  his body arrives  at  the station, it is treated as


123

OPINIONS AND NOTES



part    of   the   English    soldiers'   baggage. This  does  not  mean,  of  course,  that  the Army  is not  willing  to  make  a  national hero  out  of Corriveau for  the encourage­ ment of the French Canadians. In reality, Corriveau's death   was  not  so  glorious: he  was  blown   to  pieces  while   relieving himself  behind  a  bush.
The   effect   of  war   is  often   to  dehu­ manize,  and  this is seen in  the soldiers  in La  Guerre, yes sir!,  who  are  depicted as robots.   As  one   character   puts  it,   "Un soldat  ne fait rien,  ne pete meme  pas sans un  ordre." The  English  soldiers  are  dis­ ciplined   to  the  point  where  they  are  ex­ pressionless, and  only able  to give vent  to their  feelings  when  ordered to do  so. As for the villagers, they are  all mutilated in some  way  by  the  war,   mutilated  men­ tally and spiritually. Joseph, who cuts off his hand  to escape  being  drafted, is sym­ bolic of  them  all. The war  can  even  turn  men  against  themselves,  as is the  case of Henri, who  hates  himself  for  fearing  the war.  It turns  them  against one  another, as when Berube,  unable to turn  on the sergeant who  issues orders   to  him,  vents his hatred by humiliating Arsene.  It is, in fact,  Berube  who  best  represents the mu­ tilation  and   humiliation  of  the  French  Canadian. As a soldier,  he obeys  the  ser­ geant's orders  and  fights  beside  the  Eng­ lish  soldiers   in  the   brawl   with   the  vil­ lagers.  When   he  later  attempts to  pray beside   Corriveau's   coffin,   the   villagers naturally reject  him,  but  when  he  turns to  pray  beside  the  English  soldier  killed in  the  brawl,  the English  reject  him  too. This  scene  sums  up  succinctly the  situa­  tion  of  the  French Canadian fighting  for the  English:  he  has  no  place   in  either community.
Carrier depicts  French Canadians as outsiders in  their  own  land. This  is  con­ veyed   in   the   scene   where   the   English soldiers,  tired  of the  unseemly conduct of the  villagers  at   the  "veillee  du   corps,"  eject  them  from  the  Corriveau house.  It
 is also suggested  in  Il  est  par la, le solei[ when  Philibert, newly  arrived in  Mont­ real, finds himself  in an  English-speaking district   where   nobody  understands  him, but  where   everybody  assumes   (presum­ ably  because  he  speaks  French)  that   he is a beggar. When one lady does take pity on  him,    she   decides   he   must   be   an Italian,  and  is shocked  that   Italians are arriving  in Canada without even  bother­ ing  to learn  the  language of the  country.
French-Canadians  in   Carrier's  works are   villagers,    farmers  or   proletarians. They  are the exploited section of the population, and   the  exploiters are  Eng­ lish. "Elle  parle  quelle  langue,  la voix du capitalisme," asks  Dorval, and  answers: "It  speaks  English." It  is  because  he  is French Canadian that   Philibert  is  re­ duced   to  a  series  of   degrading ways  of earning a  living,  and  it  is  also  why  he cannot understand  the  financial pages  of the  newspaper,  even  when   they  are   in French. Carrier  protests  against  this state  of  affairs,   but  at   the   same   time   he  is protesting    against   the   exploitation   of masses  of   people  in  any  modern indus­ trial  society,  and   against   the  fate  of  all individuals in modern cities. The "little man" in modern  society is represented  by Boris Rataploffsky, who allows himself  to have  blows rained  upon  him  by anybody who  will pay him.  Boris is an  ironic em­ bodiment of  the  "little man," for  he  is, in fact,  a giant  with  great  strength, but  it is a purely  passive strength, which  allows him  to  endure ill-treatment  rather  than  impelling him  to  rebel.
Carrier  protests   against   a   system   in which heartless employers, like the one in "L'Ouvrier  modele," wear  out  a man  in their   service,   then   dismiss   him.   More often,  the  exploiters are  distant and  an­ onymous,  like  the  ones  who  use  the  im­ migrant worker  in  "Le  Pair." The  cities where  these workers  live are  also anony­ mous and  inhuman, and  a man can waste his life away  in  them,  like  the  character

OPINIONS AND NOTES



in  "Le   Metro,"  who   grows   old   as  he travels   to  work.  In   these  cities,  despite the  teeming  masses around him,  the indi­ vidual  is condemned to  solitude.  Dorval  meditates on  the  absurdity of  men who build  cities  in  order  not  to be  alone,  but who then  surround themselves with  walls. The  machine dominates these  cities, and the  ease with  which  men  can  become  its slaves  is  demonstrated  in  "Le  Reveille­  matin," where  a  man's  life is taken  over by an over-zealous alarm clock which  will not  let  him  do  anything of which  it dis­ approves, or  in  "L'Invention," where  a man    builds    a    machine   which,    once started, cannot be stopped. The best sym­ bol of  the  machine's power  is the  brute, senseless and  inhuman  bulldozer which comes  to demolish  Dorval's house,  "cette masse de fer sans intelligence qui, au commandement,  chargerait  et   saccage­ rait  sans  jamais  savoir  pourquoi." Dor­ val's  purely   human  solution   of  pouring beer  into  its  fuel  tank has  no  effect,  for the  machine is  not  susceptible to human solutions.
The  life of individuals in modern cities is the subject  of Le Deux-millieme  etage, which  tells how a remote city authority decides  to destroy Dorval's home  to make way  for  "progress" -an  immense   block of apartments. As one  minor  official  puts it: "L'avenir est dans  la deconstruction." The  authorities, unable to appreciate the vitality  of life in districts such as Dorval's, only  bother   to  send  delegates to  explain their   actions,   and   these   delegates  meet with  delegates  of the  unions,  delegates  of the  police,  delegates of  the  bank,  dele­ gates  of the  political  parties, delegates  of the  American Consulate, and  so on.
There are,  in  this  novel,   various  re­ actions  to  the  threat of  demolition,  and to  the  problem  of  life  in  the  city.  Mar­ chessault,  for example, is the man of pea­ sant   origins   who  accepts  the   need  for progress   and   repeats   parrot-fashion  all the  mindless  cliches  about scientific  and
 technological	advancement.    He    even says, and  here  he hits  on  the  truth: "Un
homme   a  notre    epoque  c'est   pas   un
homme,    mais   un   esclave   s'il   sait   pas
dominer la machine." So he sets to work
and  tries to learn, by correspondence course,   how   to   handle  machines.   Un­ fortunately, when  he tries to drive  a bull­ dozer,  he  has  no idea  of how  to  make  it work.  He  is beaten by the  machine, and  it  is as  though his  very  manhood is des­ troyed,  for  his wife  turns  on  him,  taunt­ ing him  as "impuissant."
Marchessault  tries   to  come   to  terms with  progress; Dupont La  France rejects it. His is the  utopian dream of destroying the  city,  returning to  nature, and   living off apples  (an ironic  response  from  a character from  France, presented as the representative of  a  sophisticated and highly   developed  civilization).  His   an­ swer is no  more  effective  than  Marches­ sault's,  for  when  Dorval and  his  tenants decide  to cultivate the land, the  best they can  do  is scratch  around  the  demolished buildings  with  knives, forks,  nails, screw­ drives  and   broom  handles, and   then   to urinate on  the  seeds  they  plant.
Mignonne Fleury's response  is to  seek an  outlet   in  sex,  but  it  is  just  commer­ cialized sex, for she is nothing but a pros­ titute,  and,  at  one  point,  turns  Dorval's house  into  a brothel for  the construction workers.  It is  presumably  because  of her commercial  view  of  sex  that   she  refuses the  advances  of  Dorval, who  sees sex in an  entirely  different light.  Cowboy  looks for  an  answer  in song,  but  songs  too  are commercialized,  even   songs   of   protest. The  Old  Woman spends  her  time  think­ ing  of  death,  while   the   Negro  gets  by through simply  ignoring all  around him. Dorval's  response   is  the   most   active  one,  as  befits  a   Communist.  His  com­  munism  is,  however,  of a  rather simplis­ tic  variety,  and  it  never  seems  to  occur  to  him  that  it  is incongrous for  a  Com­ munist   to  be  a   property-owner  and   a


125

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



landlord. It is clear  that, in any  case, the Revolution he preaches will change noth­ ing,  and, as  one  character  says:   "Apres  Ia   Revolution,  mes   maudites   pommes  vont  encore  pourrir!" Yet Dorval does at least fight  the  authorities, and  at  first, he even  has  some  success.  He chases  away those  who  come  to  evict  him,   but,  un­ fortunately,  these  are  only  the  humblest representatives of  the system, and  the real heads  are  too  distant for  him  to  reach.  He  has to admit: "Mais les gros Boss, les Big  Boss,  on  dirait qu'i'ont pas  de  face. On  les a  jamais  vus."  His fight  begins  to flag,  and  he  can  only  revive  it  by  such grotesque   schemes   of   caricatural  ven­ geance  as  sending out   his  tenants on  a "chasse aux Anglais," promising a reward  for  every   pair   of  English   ears   brought back. He  relies  more  and  more  on  beer to  keep  up  his  spirits  and   to  encourage his  tenants. He  drifts  frequently into memories  of  the   past,   when   he  fought with  the  French Resistance, a  real  resis­ tance   movement  which   makes  his  own seem puny.
Destruction  continues  to  advance  on
Dorval's house,   senseless,  absurd,  seem­ ingly   impelled  by  a   momentum   of  its own.  He  meditates:  "Qa  marche  parce  que <;a marche, <;a marche pour  marcher. Qa pete  de certitude tandis que  notre  vie d'homme  boite,  pietine, hesite,  avec  les jours,   les  nuits,   les  maladies,  les  nuits blanches,   les  coleres,  Ia  fatigue, le  reve, les  reves."   But   the   worst   blow   comes when  Dorval  has  to recognize  how  easily the  capitalist system  recuperates the  ex­ ploited   and   uses  them   against   one  an­ other.  The  construction  workers  go  on strike,  not  against   the  absurd  conditions of  work,   but   for   more   pay.  They   are about  to smash  up the  building they have been  making when  the  union  tells  them they  have  won  a victory,  and sends  them back  to  the  same  senseless  jobs. Dorval's lodgers  desert  him one by one,  Mignonne Fleury  even  moving  into  the  new  apart-
 ment   block.   Then  Marchessault   reap­ pears,  having  passed  his  examinations at last,  driving   a  bulldozer  he  is  going   to use  to   demolish   Dorval's  house.   Even Dupont  La  France   is glimpsed   cleaning the plastic  flowers outside the  new apart­ ments.   Dorval   sums   up   the   situation: "Dans chaque  culotte de  maudit pauvre
. . . y  a   un   cui   de   capitaliste  qui   se cache."
The Laterreur Brothers and  Mignonne Fleury are the best examples of how the system  uses  people.  The Laterreur  Bro­ thers  canalize   the  discontent of   the  ex­ ploited   (and  especially  of  French Cana­ dians)   into   harmless  demonstrations  of anger   when   they   lose   their    wrestling  matches   to  English  and   foreign   oppon­ ents.  They   have  prostituted  themselves  and  earn  a fortune  by regularly allowing themselves   to   be   beaten.12      Mignonne Fleury   even   more   obviously   prostitutes herself. It is significant  that, when  at  last she  does  offer  herself  to  Dorval  in  the gaudy  luxury  of  her  new  apartment, he refuses  to  take off his dirty  shoes, refuses to   compromise  with   her   surroundings, and  refuses  her.
Yet, for all his defiance,  Dorval's strug­
gle is hopeless, and it seems that  he will finally  capitulate, for  the  novel  ends  as he  walks  out  of  his  house,  which  Mar­ chessault's  bulldozer  is about to demolish,  trying  to  remember  the  words  of  Cow­ boy's  last  song.  The  words,  which   indi­  cate  the  need  to  capitulate  and   accept, are:

Dans  les airs
Sur  Ia  terre
II  faut  se  taire
Et !'on  se terre
Dessous  Ia terre.

Philibert's plight  is  just  as  hopeless  as Dorval's. He  is doomed   to  failure by his education,  which    has,    as   he    himself points   out,   taught  him   how   to  get   to Heaven, but  not  how  to get  to the  bank. In one important scene, he reads  a news-

OPINIONS AND NOTES



paper   article   which  explains  how  young men    from    certain  social   backgrounds seem   to   be  fascinated  by  failure,   and spend   their  lives  preparing for  it.  Phili­ bert   is,  of  course,   one   of  these.  He   is forced   to  take   the  sort  of   employment nobody  else  wants,  and  spends  much  of his time  working  in pits:  digging  holes in the  road,  working  in  the  grease  pit  of a garage, peeling  potatoes  in  a  dark  base­ ment.    He   is  here   repeating  his   early training,  which   was   done   helping  his father  dig   graves.  These    pits   are,   of course,  symbolic  of  the  hopeless,  absurd situation in which  he finds himself, and Carrier comments: "Philibert creuse sa propre fosse."
At one  point,  Philibert works in a fac­ tory  making boots,  and  he  has  a  dream  which  sums  up  the  absurdity of  his life. He  has  become  so dehumanized  by work in the factory that,  in his dream, he turns into  a boot. One  day, he rebels and  kicks the foreman. At that  moment, he says, he felt  that, "J'etais plus  une  bottine, mais un  homme." Clearly,   only  by  rebelling  against   an  absurd   situation  can   he  be­ come  a  man  again,  so  he  abandons his employment in  the  factory.
There  are   two   symbols   of   hope   in
Philibert's  life:   the   sun   and   girls.  He soon learns  that  attractive young girls are not  for  him.  The  bank  clerk  he  assumes will  fall   into   his  arms   drives  off  in  a beautiful new car, while Philibert gives chase  in  a  taxi,  until  he  has  to  give  up through lack  of money  for  the  fare.  The only  type  of  woman  available to  him  is the   restaurant  owner's  wife,   whom   he pays  for  a  cold  and   joyless coupling. As for  the  sun,  although he  glimpses  it,  he rarely   sees  it   from   the   pits   where   he works.  As he  lies dying,  he  imagines  he sees the sun,  but: "II  est  par  la, le soleil
... ," in  other words,  out  of  reach. Philibert  has   no   hope   of   changing
things,  and  feels  so  politically  powerless that  he does not  bother  to vote. When  he
 inherits  some money,  he dreams of going into   politics,  but   death  cuts   short   that dream. Death   is,  in  fact,   the  only  way out. A Portuguese worker  on Philibert's construction site  deliberately blows  him­ self up. Philibert approves this act, saying it is the only form  of protest  the man  has left, and  it is less ridiculous  than  digging  holes in the  road.
The   absurdity  of  life  in  the   modern
city,  and  the  fate  of  men  like  Philibert, are  also an  image  of the  absurdity of life in  general, for  Carrier's work  also  exists on  a  third  level,  where,  like  Candide, it is a commentary on and  a protest  against the   incomprehensible absurdity  and cruelty  of man's lot. Sometimes this meta­ physical level is intimately connected with the  commentary on  life  in  the  modern city,  and   Philibert's   dream  of  being   a boot,  for  example,  can be  seen  both   as an  image  of his life  in  the  factory, or  as an  image  of  man  ground  underfoot  by powers   over  which   he   has   no  control.  Other  times,  only  the  metaphysical level seems   appropriate. The  strange  things  which  happen to  characters in  Carrier's short  stories,  where  apples   spill  out  pe­ culiar destructive forces  ( "Les  Pommes,"
Jolis   deuils) ,  characters  suddenly  grow
old  ("Le   Metro") 13   and   men  are  faced
with   inexplicable  changes  in   their   life ( "Les  Cartes  postales" and   "La  Cham­ bre,"    Contes    pour   mille   oreilles),  are probably  best seen on a metaphysical level as allegories  of man  in  a world  where  he is subject   to  inhuman  and   cruel   forces, such as death  and  the passing  of time.
Carrier rejects  as  cruel   and   despotic, not  only  the  God   foisted   on   his  char­
acters  by a particular type of religion, but any  God  who  would  impose  such  forces on man.  It is no coincidence that, having watched    the   procession    of   twenty-one little monsters in their wheel-barrows, followed  by an  assortment of  lame  and halt,  Philibert starts  pulling the legs off grasshoppers:  he  is  merely   imitating a


127

OPINIONS AND NOTES



God  who allows, or  practises, the mutila­ tion  of  men.  Such   a  God   would   never listen  to man,  and  never helped  Anthyme  when,  as a child,  he  lay  awake  at  night,  terrified  of  the  dark.  Now  that   he  wan­ ders  alone  in the forest,  Anthyme realizes that  it is no use seeking  God's  help,  for:  "Dieu  n'aurait   jamais   allume  le  solei! pour  un  homme  comme   Anthyme."
Since  he permits the existence of the social   system   which    crushes    Philibert, God  must  presumably be responsible for that  too. As one character tells Philibert: "Le   responsable  ... c'est   le  bon   Dieu, qui  a  fait  le  monde comme il  l'a  voulu avec  des riches  et  des  pauvres, des  petits comme   nous  et  des  gros."  By  the  same logic,  God   must   be  responsible  for  the war and, if war and  the social system are forced  on  men  by "les  gros,"  God  must be, as one  character says, "plus gros  que les gros."  Philibert says:   "Le   bon  Dieu, il  est  comme   le  patron, on  le  voit  pas souvent. II frequente pas notre  genre de monde,  le  bon   Dieu." It  is  significant that,  in  Floralie, ou  es-tu?, God's  repre­ sentative,  the  priest,   is  depicted  as  fat, that    is,  literally    "gros."  God   and  his priests   oppress   mankind,  and   it   is  no wonder   that   Philibert  says,  when   pray­ ing,  in  a  truly  Freudian  slip  of  the  ton­ gue:  "Au   fond,   tu  m'abimes,  Seigneur, Seigneur."
The veritable litanies  of blasphemy which flow from  the lips of Carrier's characters can  be seen as a revolt  both against  the   kind   of  God   their   religion forces   on  them,   and   against  any  God. The  women  tend  to accept injustice, and Corriveau's mother, standing before  his coffin,  seeks  consolation  in  prayer. The men  usually  rebel,   which   is  why  Corri­ veau's  father prefers  to retire  to the  barn and  blaspheme. In Carrier's  work  it is a sign  that   a  boy  has  grown  up  when  he blasphemes. Philibert, as a  child,  sits be­ fore  the  severed  head  of  the  pig  his fa­ ther  has  slaughtered,  imagines it  is bias-
 pheming, and  longs for the time  when  he is  old  enough   to  do   the   same.   In   La Guerre, yes sir! that  time arrives,  and  his father tells him: "Maintenant tu es un homme.     Tu    sais    parler     comme     un homme."
Philibert learns  later  that  this is not so. Blasphemy  implies  belief  in  God,  or  else it is meaningless; revolt  implies  revolt against  something or someone  whose  ex­ istence   one   does   not  doubt.  Men  only become   men  in  all  senses  of  the  word when  they  reject  the very idea of  God, as Anthyme  does  when   he  climbs  a  tree, challenges God  to come  down  and  settle matters like  a  man,  and,  when  nothing happens, realizes  God  is  afraid  of  men who  do  not  fear   him.  Philibert himself says:  "Un jour,  je me suis apen;u qu'il  y avait  pas plus de bon Dieu dans le ciel que
de serpent a sonnette electrique au  Que­
bec."  He  concludes  that,  since  God  does
not  exist,  he,  Philibert, does.  Rejection of God is seen, then, as the step which liberates  man,  and  makes  him assume  his own  freedom  and  identity. The  frequent blaspheming  by   Carrier's   characters   is only  the  first step  towards  this  freedom, and  it is in this sense that  one must understand Carrier's statement that  blas­ phemy  is "la  premiere affirmation  d'une conscience  individuelle."14
Yet,  even  free  from  the  burden of  be­ lief  in  God,  Carrier's characters  still  in­ habit   a   cruel,   oppressive   world   where they  have  no power  over  their  fate.  The short  stories, for example, frequently have unpleasant  endings,   and   ]olis  deuils  is subtitled "Petites  Tragedies  pour   adul­ tes." From  the very beginning of Floralie, ou es-tu? we  are  made  aware  that  trou­ ble  is in  store  for  the  main  characters: Floralie  is  made   to  wear  a  black  dress ; she  is   warned:  "La  route   sera   dure"; and she is terrified  by a grass snake, which she  thinks   is  really   the  Devil.   But  no­ where  is  the  dark   fatality  hanging over men  conveyed  so well as in  "La   Main,"

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



where   Carrier  describes   a   giant   hand descending from  the  sky, hanging over  a city, pressing  down  on it, and  then  dying. Carrier's characters are  very conscious
of  the  futility  of life,  and  are  nearly  all, at  one  time  or  another, sickened  by the thought of  it.  "La   vie  d'un homme   ne vaut  pas un pet,"  says Dorval; Philibert's grandmother  asks:   "A   quoi a
vivre ?"   while    Philibert   himself    com­
plains: "On  m'a  donne la  vie sans  que
je la demande, comme   un  coup  de  pied au  derriere."
But,   if  life  is  absurd,  death  is  even
more so. Henri in La Guerre, yes sir! has a dream  in  which  he sees the  whole  vil­ lage, followed  by many  other  people, the sea,  and   troops   of   marching   men,   all enter  Berube's  coffin. The message  is ob­ vious:  death is the fate  of all men.  What  is the  point, Corriveau's parents wonder,  in  rearing children, caring for  them  and bringing  them  to adulthood, if  they  end up,  like  their  son,  in  a  coffin?  Death   is ever-present  in  Carrier's  novels:   in  the violent  end  of  Philibert and   Corriveau, or  in  the  symbolic   form   of  the  graves Philibert digs,  the  pits  he  works  in,  and the  huge   holes  excavated around   Dor­ val's  house.  Yet,  mingled  with  images  of death,  are   symbols  of  hope  and   lifeY  The   sun  is  one  such   symbol,  and,   al­ though  it shines  mainly on  others,  Phili­ bert  does at  least  glimpse  it.  Then there are  the girls in  the short  stories:   the  one who  walks  naked  through the  streets,  so that  everyone   drops   what   he  or  she  is doing  to  follow  her  in  a  joyous  proces­
sion   ("La  Jeune   fille") ,  and   the   one
whose  footsteps   a   man   follows   in   the
snow  ( "Les  Pas") . In  both  these stories, the girl flies away, symbolizing  hope, and, although one  of them  is shot  down  by a policeman, hope is kept  alive, symbolized this time by the bird  which  flies from  the policeman's severed  head  and  perches  on the  guillotine.
 There is hope  for  the  individual if he will  affirm   himself   and   the   life  forces within him, just as there is hope for the community which  will not let its life be smothered  by  forces  representing death. Carrier's  characters  instinctively  affirm life in the face of death, as, for example, in the  famous  "fete sauvage" around Corriveau's coffin.  As the  villagers  pray, then slip off to eat,  drink, blaspheme, eye the women  and  tell salacious  stories,  they are  affirming life. Even  their  prayers  are a  kind  of rejoicing that  it  is not  they  in the   coffin.   The    English    soldiers,   with their   silent,  straight  faces,   their   refusal of  food  and   drink, and   their   contempt for  the  villagers,   represent death. They are   death   because   they  wage   war,   but also the threat of death to the community because, as well as being soldiers,  they are English  soldiers.  It is against these  men too  that   the  villagers  affirm   themselves, and  when  they are ejected by the soldiers from  the  Corriveau  house,  the  old  man still insists:  "Nous savons  vivre."
It is in  the  act  of  love,  however,  that Carrier's characters most obviously affirm the   forces   of  life.   It  is  true   that    the thought  of  death  sometimes interrupts their  love-making, but  at  other  times  the love-making is presented as  a  revolt against  death. As Molly and  Berube  make love, "C'est la  mort  qu'ils  poignarderent violemment." Molly  herself represents the forces  of  life  as  she   suddenly appears half-naked  amidst   the   villagers,   a  kind of  antidote  to  Esmalda's  dramatic   ap­ pearance at  the  window  and  her  morbid  talk   of  death  and   damnation.   In   the midst of the ruins and  destruction Dorval discovers  a  young   couple  making  love, and   the   boy  informs   him:   "Nous,  on
cherche un  sens .a la  vie."  Even  the  Old
Woman  in  Le  Deux-millieme etage finds
consolation in sex, and  is working  in Mignonne Fleury's  brothel when  she dies. Dorval, although he dismisses  romantic love as "du  vent," cannot deny  the forces


129

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



of life which push him towards Mignonne Fleury.   Indeed, his  very  communism  is the  result  of his love for  a woman Com­ munist  he  knew  in  France.
Carrier's  message   is  that   men   must cling to the earth and  to life. Both Flora­ lie and  Anthyme learn  during their night­ mare  experiences in  the  forest  that   they must  tum their  back  on  visions of death and  Hell,  and  must  cling to life. Floralie, when  she  regrets  not  having been  "mar­ tyred" in   the  fire   which   destroys   Pere Nombrillet's  chapel,  is  told   by  an   old man:  "Crois-moi, petite  jeunesse, il vaut  mieux  etre   une  fille  en  chair et  en  OS qu'un  saint   en   cendre  et   fumee." An­ thyme, assailed  by visions of Hell,  grasps the earth and  pulls  up a handful of grass, which    tastes   sweet   in   his   mouth.  He realizes  that   "Le   salut   ne  viendrait  pas du  ciel,  et  il posa  les yeux  sur  la  terre." When  Floralie and  Anthyme finally  find each  other, they  fall asleep on the ground, to be discovered next  morning by the de­ lighted  villagers,  who  pour  beer on them,  a  libation  to  the  earth  and   a  baptism  into  a new life. In  La Guerre, yes sir! the earth is  represented  by  old  Corriveau's cider,   which  fills  the  villagers  with   joy, and  which  contains  the "forces merveil­ leuses  de  la  terre." Dorval too  loves  the earth, cries  out:  "Moi, j'aime  la  terre," and  symbolically revolts  against death by urinating  in   the   pit   dug   by   the   de­ molishers.
Characters such  as  these  are  individ­
uals  finding their  own  destiny,  but  they are  also  representatives of a  community. Just  as  the  individual must  cling  to  life, must  throw  off  the  forces  of  death and affirm himself, so, Carrier implies,  must Quebec. He  says  that, when  he  became a  writer, he  had   to  reject   the  influence of  the   culture  of  France,  although  he greatly  admired it,  and  cling  to  his own culture. He  had  to affirm  himself  as a representative of that  culture, and  affirm his  culture as  a  living  thing. Writing of
 La  Guerre,  yes sir!, he  says:   "Ecrivant mon roman, je ne me situe pas dans  un univers de culture romanesque, je prends place  parmi  un  Quebec qui  a ete depos­
sede  de  sa  culture et  qui,   petit  a petit, avec achamement s'applique a se donner
une  ame."18
By his  own  example, and   by  the  ex­ ample  of his characters, Carrier urges the need  for  Quebec to accept  itself, to free itself from  its fears,  and  to  live.  His  is a literature  of  liberation.   Yet,  while   his novels  have  a  message  for Quebec, and  an  unmistakably Quebec setting, his mes­ sage  applies   to  all  men.  It is  Carrier's genius  to  have  combined  successfully   a meditation  on   the   destiny   of   a   com­  munity,  on  the  role  of  the  individual in modem  society,  and  on  the  fate  of man  in  general.


NOTES

1 See, for  example, Ronald Sutherland, "Uses of the  Grotesque," Canadian  Literature, No.
50  (Autumn 1971), pp. 87-88, where  the author  refers   to  Carrier's  use  of  the   gro­ tesque    and    to   his   "fantastical   realism"; Andre Major,  "Le  parti-pris  du   realisme caricatural,"  Le  Devoir  (23  mars  1968), p.
15,   where   Carrier's  work   is  described  as "une oeuvre  de  caricature"; and  Rene Dionne, "Jolis deuils," Relations, 25 ( 1965),
323-24,  where   Dionne  writes  of   Carrier's use  of  "une  poesie   de  !'intelligence et   de
!'imagination."
a  See  Rene   Dionne, "II   est  par ltl, le  solei!, de  Roch   Carrier," Livres  et  Auteurs  Que­ bchois  1970   (Montreal:   Editions   Jumon­ ville,  1971), pp.  54-55; P.C.,  "Roch Car­ rier,  Floralie, ou es-tu? et  Contes  pour mille oreilles," Etudes  Frant;aises, 5  ( 1969), 492-
94;  Cecile  Cloutier-Wojciechowska, "Flora­
lie,  ou  es-tu?  de  Roch   Carrier," Livres  et
Auteurs   Quebecois   1969   (Montreal:   Edi­
tionsJumonville, 1970), p. 22.
a Roch  Carrier, "Comment suis-je devenu romancier?" in Le Roman  contemporain d'expression  frant;aise, ed.  Antoine Naaman et  Louis   Painchaud  (Sherbrooke:   Univer­ site de Sherbrooke, 1971), p. 268.
• Ibid., p. 266.

OPINIONS AND NOTES



s Quoted by Andre  Major, "Roch Carrier nouvelle  maniere: La  Guerre, yes sir!"  Le Devoir  ( 2 marsI 968), p. I 2.
a  Although Carrier has written  plays based on La  Guerre, yes sir! and  Floralie, ou es-tu?, they differ little from the novels, so I have examined only his fiction  in this article. The following   are   the   works  of  fiction   used:
]olis   deuils   ( 1964),  La   Guerre,  yes  sir! ( 1 968), Floralie,  ou  es-tu?   ( 1 969) , Il  est par ltl, le  solei!  ( 1970), Le  Deux-millieme etage   ( 1973). All  these  are   published   by Editions   du  Jour   (Montreal). I have  also referred   to  Contes   pour  mille   oreilles,  in Ecrits  du  Canada  Fran ais,
pp.  135-60.
1   "Comment suis-je  devenu   romancier?"  p.
269.
s  Ibid.,  pp.  269-70.
9  And  the  goal  of  marriage   is, of  course,  to produce   children,  a  view  cruelly   satirized in   the   scene   in  Il   est  par  ltl,   le  soleil where  Carrier depicts  a religious  procession headed  by twenty-one  wheel-barrows  carry­ ing  twenty-one   grossly  deformed  children. The   mother   and   father   of  these  children walk  behind,   thanking God  for  "blessing"  them  with  so many  little  "angels."
10 On   this   point   see   Renald    Berube,   "La Guerre, yes sir! de  Roch  Carrier:  humour noir  et langage  vert,"  in Voix  et Images  du Pays III   (Quebec: L'Universite du Quebec,
1970)' pp. 145-64.
11  Quoted by  Andre   Major,  "Roch  Carrier nouvelle maniere: La Guerre, yes sir!" Le Devoir  ( 2 mars 1968), p. 12.
12  That they are meant  to be viewed as  prosti­ tutes  is  perhaps  also  indicated by  the  fact that,   despite   their   strength  and   muscular build,  they  are  depicted  as very  effeminate.
1a   See also "La  Chambre nuptiale," Le Devoir
(8  avril  1965), p. 20.
H Quoted by Renald  Berube,  p. 146.
15 On  the  intermingling of life and  death  and on  images  of  life  and   death   in  Carrier's work, see Jean-Cleo Godin,  "Roch Carrier: U ne  terre  entre  deux   ( ou  trois?)  soleils," Livres  et  Auteurs  Quebecois   1971   (Mont­ real: Editions  Jumonville, 1972),  pp. 305-
10.
18   "Comment suis-je  devenu   romancier?"  p.
272.
DAVID J. BOND
 FEMALE ARCHETYPES
IN
Fifth Business

DuNSTAN RAMSAv's  DESIRE to  authenti­ cate   Mrs.   Dempster's three   "miracles" disturbs  Padre Blazon  because  he realizes that  it  says more  about  Ramsay than   it does  about  Mrs.  Dempster. "What good would  it  do  you  if Itold  you  she  is in­ deed  a  saint?"  he  asks  Ramsay. "Turn your  mind   to  the  real  problem: who  is she....  What  figure  is she  in  your  per­  sonal  mythology? ... That is what   you must  discover,   Ramezay, and   you  must find  your  answer  in  psychological truth, not  in  objective   truth." At  this  point  in the novel any reader who is familiar with the  implicit  Jungian principles on  which Fifth Business is based,  realizes  (even though Ramsay  does not)  that  Mary Dempster is an important figure  in  Ram­ say's personal  mythology because she  is a projection  of  some   aspect   of   Ramsay's unconscious  world-but  what aspect?
Jung suggests  that  the  process  of  indi­ viduation (the movement towards psychic wholeness)    is  complicated   by   the   fact that  modern man  tends  to deny  the  exis­ tence of the  unconscious: that vast realm  that  keeps the Ego  (the conscious  part of the  psyche)   separate  from   the  Self  (the  psyche's  true  and  inmost  centre). Before the  Ego  can  become  aware of  the  exis­ tence  of the Self, it must  begin  to assimi­ late  the  personal and   archetypal figures that  inhabit the  unconscious. As long  as the  Ego  denies  or  represses  these  figures its freedom  is in jeopardy. Jung repeatedly reminds  his readers not "to  underestimate [the   Ego's]   dependence on  the  uncon­ scious"  because  at any  moment  the  un­  conscious  may  erupt and  assert  its  au­  thority. When  David  unexpectedly bursts out  with  the  question: "Who killed  Boy Staunton?" during a  magic  show  at the

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



Royal  Alexandra Theatre, he realizes that there   are   forces  inside  him   over  which he  has  little   or  no  control. "I  was  no longer  in command of my actions. Some­ thing  had  to be done."
Those   figures  in  the  unconscious that
have  the  most  frequent influence  on  the Ego  are  what   Jung calls  the  "shadow" (the   negative  side   of   the   personality) and  the "anima" (the  female  or "feeling" principle in a man's  psyche). To  become conscious   of  the   shadow  is  to   become aware  of  the  unpleasant side  of the  per­ sonality   and   to  acknowledge  that  thing  of darkness  as one's  own.  But recognizing the  shadow, the  personal side  of the  un­ conscious,   is  only   part of   what   Blazon calls  the  "Great Battle." The most  influ­ ential  figure  in  the  unconscious, and  the one  most  difficult  to apprehend, is  the anima. The anima  is not  simply  a  com­ posite  symbolic  figure  that   emerges  in  a man's  unconscious  as  a  result   of  early relationships  with   women    (although  it may,  of  course,   be  influenced  by  these women), but  an  innate  archetypal  figure "which is incarnated anew  in every  male child."2 The anima has many  forms rang­ ing from  the divine  to the demonic: when properly assimilated it acts as a mediator between  the  Ego and  the  inner reality  of the Self;  but  if its existence  is repressed  it becomes  a vengeful power  feeding  on the very  psyche  which   houses  it.  When   the Brazen   Head   answers   David's  question with   the   words:    "[Boy  Staunton]  was killed  by the  usual cabal: by himself,  first of  all;   by  the  woman   he  knew; by  the woman   he  did   not   know; by  the  man who granted his inmost  wish;  and  by the inevitable  fifth,  who  was  keeper   of  his conscience  and    keeper    of   the   stone," there   is considerable speculation  among the  characters concerning the  identity of the  "woman  he  did   not   know."  David thinks   she   is  his   stepmother,   Ramsay thinks  she  is Leola,  and   Paul  thinks  she is  his   mother,  Mary  Dempster;  Lies!,
 who  speaks  for  the  Brazen  Head, admits later   that  she  did  not  have  any  specific person  in mind  at  the  time. But the exact identity of "the  woman  he did not know" is  not   important  because,   whoever   she may  be,  she  could   not  have   influenced Boy as profoundly as she did  without the assistance  of  the  other woman   Boy did not  know -his  own  anima. When  Paul hypnotizes   Boy,  he   simply   gives   Boy's anima    (grown   demonic  after   so  many years  of  repression)  the  opportunity to express   its   deepest    wishes:    and    what Boy's  anima wants   is  Boy's  destruction. Boy  comes  very  close  to  bringing  these wishes to a conscious  level when  he  con­ fides to Ramsay  that  he sometimes wishes he  could   just  "get   into  a  car  and  drive away   from   the   whole   damned   thing." The  stone  that  is found   in  Boy's  mouth after  his death  is the  stone  that was hid­  den  in  the  snowball   that   Boy  threw   at Ramsay  when  he  was  ten  years  old:   the stone   that    missed   Ramsay   and   struck  Mrs. Dempster. Working with  an  ancient tradition, Jung  identifies   the  stone  as  a symbol of the Self3 and  it is this idea  that  Davies  seems  to have  in  mind  when  Boy dies  with   the  stone   in  his  mouth. The fact  that   Boy  has  repreised  his  memory  of throwing  the stone  in  the  snowball  is symbolic   of   the   fact   that   Boy  has  re­ pressed an important part  of his Self-a Self which  he is unable  to swallow  even in  extremis.
When   the  anima is denied, it  is often unconsciously   projected onto  females  in the  man's environment:  mothers, sisters, friends,  and  wives are  forced  to "become
the carrier and  embodiment of this omni­
present  and  ageless  image,  which  corres­
ponds  to  the deepest reality  in  a  man."4
We  know  a lot  about the  state  of  Ram­ say's  anima  by  the   ways  in   which   he interacts with  various   women  in  his en­  vironment.  His   relationship   with   Mrs. Dempster, for instance, owes much  of its intensity  and longevity  to the fact  that she

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



is  (in  part)  a  projection of  some  aspect of Ramsay's anima which  he is unable  to understand  or  assimilate.   In   his  studies Jung discovered that  many  figures  in the psyche tend  to express themselves  in some sort  of four-fold structure. The anima is no exception. Jung suggests  that  the  first stage  in the anima's normal development emerges  as a result  of man's need  for  in­ stinctual, biological  relations and  is repre­  sented  by Eve;  the  second  stage  emerges from  his need for a romantic, sexual  rela­ tionship and  is represented  by Helen; the third  stage  emerges  from his yearning for spiritual growth and  is represented by the Virgin   Mary;  the  fourth  stage  emerges from   his   thirst   for   wisdom   and    self­ knowledge and  is  represented by Sapien­ tia.5  Because Ramsay's childhood was not exactly   normal   (his   relations  with   his mother were, to say the least, disturbing), the   four   stages   of   his   anima  do   not emerge   in  the  order   that  Jung  suggests, but  they  are,  nevertheless, clearly  mani­ fested  in his relations with  the  four most important  women   in   his  environment: Diana Marfteet  (the   Eve  figure), Faus­ tina   (Helen), Mary  Dempster  (the  Vir­ gin  Mary), and  Liesl  Vitzlipiitzli  (Sapi­  entia).
When  Ramsay's mother dies, his only feeling  is one  of relief: "I knew  she had eaten  my father, and  I was glad  I did not have to fight any longer to keep her from eating  me."  At the  very moment that Ramsay   is  having   these  thoughts,  how­ ever,  his life  is being  shaped   by  another devouring female: Diana  Marfteet. But Diana is all  the  things  his  own  mother should   have   been   and   was   not-and Ramsay  finds  her  very appealing. Just  as his   own   mother    (whose    charity  was usually  directed outside  the  home)   spent six  months  nursing   the  premature Paul Dempster  towards  a stable  physical  exis­ tence,  so  Diana nurses  Ramsay   through the  six-month  period   of  convalescence (during which   he  is  unconscious) that
 follows  his horrendous experience on  the fields of  Passchendaele. Throughout  this interval  Diana    attends  to   his   physical needs  as  a  mother might   attend to  the needs of her infant: she bathes  him, feeds him   liquids,   and   keeps  him   warm   and dry. In  a sense Ramsay  is reborn and  this time   the   nourishing,  life-sustaining   fe­ male  is Diana  Marfteet (Diana's  name is derived   from  the  maternal  deity,  Diana of Ephesus,6  not from  the chaste, Roman, goddess of the hunt). Diana's function is to  attend  to  all  of   Ramsay's  biological  needs -not   just   the  ones   he  holds   in common with infants-and it is not long after  he leaves  the  hospital that  Ramsay and  Diana  become  lovers.  As one  might  expect, Diana is the more  experienced of the two: "Diana was not a novice ... and  she initiated me most  tenderly, for  which I shall  always be grateful." Recalling this sexual   awakening  years   later    Ramsay speaks of it as "an  important step  toward the  completion  of   [his]   manhood." In one  short   year  Diana  guides   Ramsay's biological  development from  "womb" to maturity. But maturity brings  with  it cer­ tain  unexpected insights: "I could  not be blind  to the fact  that  she regarded  me as her own creation ... what  was wrong  be­ tween Diana and  me was that she was too much  a  mother to  me." Although Ram­ say  has  projected the  Eve  figure   in  his anima  onto  Diana, no  harm is done  be­ cause  he soon becomes aware  of his error  and   realizes  that   he  can   never   achieve  psychic    wholeness    if    he    marries   his "mother."  Before   Ramsay  and    Diana part,   however,   she   decides   to   re-name him.  Symbolically  giving  up  his mother's maiden name  (Dunstable), Ramsay is re­
christened  with   the   name   of  a  saint -
Dunstan.
But  Diana  is  not   the   only  one   who shapes  Ramsay's life during this crucial year. While  he is unconscious for  the six­ month period,  he is visited  by the  "little Madonna" who has become associated in

133

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



his  mind  with  Mary   Dempster. Seconds after  the flare lands  on Ramsay in the battlefield he catches a glimpse of a statue of the Virgin and Child in a niche in the nearby   wall:    "But   what   hit   me  worse than   the  blow  of  the  shrapnel was  that the face was Mrs. Dempster's face." When he finally regains consciousness six months later,  he  realizes  that his  mind  has  been on  a  "paradisal holiday" and  that  spiri­ tually  he  was  "wonderfully at  ease and  healingly   at   peace." Although  all  "was strange nothing was evil,"  and from  time to  time   "the   little   Madonna   appeared and  looked  at  [him]  with  friendly con­ cern." While Diana (Eve)  is attending to his  physical  needs,  Mary  Dempster  (the  Virgin  Mary) is attending to his spiritual needs.  Davies   seems   to   be  basing   this close  association  of  the   two  figures  on the  Jungian suggestion that  the  spiritual motherhood of the  Virgin  Mary  figure  is closely  related   to  the  biological  mother­ hood of the Eve figure.
From   the  beginning of  their  relation­
ship   Ramsay  seems   attracted  to   those qualities  in   Mary   Dempster  which   his mother most  conspicuously lacks:   Mary laughs  a  lot,  his  mother has  no  sense of humour; Mary   has  soft,  gentle  features, and  waving   tendrils of  hair,   his  mother has  "strong features and   [stands] for  no nonsense  from  her  hair"; Mary  remains totally  uninterested in  housework despite the  fact  that  Mrs.  Ramsay, whose "privy set the sanitary tone  of the  village," tries to "teach her the ropes." But most signifi­ cantly,   Mary   is  the   only  person  whom Ramsay can  trust. Willing  to admit that  some  of  her  actions are  a  little  unusual, Ramsay  nevertheless feels  that  Mary  has a  "breadth of  outlook  and  a  clarity   of vision"  that   are  strange  and  wonderful: "She  knew  she  was  in  disgrace  with  the world,   but   did   not  feel   disgraced; she knew she was jeered at, but felt no humil­ iation. She   lived   by  a  light   that arose from   within.... It was  as   though  she

134
 were   an   exile  from   a   world   that   saw things  her  way."
Looking back on  his early  adolescence, Ramsay  realizes  that  Mrs.  Dempster  was "the   taproot that  fed  [his]   life,"  but  he never seems to understand why he needed someone  to fill that  role. When  he has  a vision  of  her  at   Passchendaele   (signifi­ cantly  in the guise of the little Madonna) he  is convinced   that   she  has  performed a miracle; but  Padre Blazon is skeptical: "If she   appeared  to   save   you   on   the battlefield, as you say, it has  just as much  to do with  you as it has with her-more probably. Lots  of  men   have  visions  of their  mothers  in time of  danger. Why  not you?"  Blazon seems  to  realize  that  Mary  is Ramsay's spiritual mother and  that  she is, to a certain extent, a manifestation of some  part   of  his  own  inner   reality,   but Ramsay   never   accepts   this   fact.   Fully aware  of  the way in which  he encouraged Diana   to   play   the   role   of   biological mother,  he  does  not  realize  that   in  his personal   mythology   he   has   cast   Mary Dempster  in the  role of spiritual mother. Able  to  admit   that   Mary   is  "a  part   of [his]  own soul,"  he is never  able to understand the full implications of this admission. Locating the statue of the little Madonna shortly  after  Mary's death, Ramsay  finally realizes  that  she does not, after   all,  look  like  Mary   Dempster, but the  expression,  he  argues,  was  still  "un­ deniably   hers -an  expression   of  mercy and  love,  tempered with  perception  and  penetration."
Just    as   the   Eve   and   Virgin  Mary figures are closely associated  in Jung's analysis  of  the  anima, so are  the  Helen and  Sapientia figures.  As one  would  ex­ pect,  these  figures are  also closely  associ­ ated  in Fifth  Business:  Faustina  (Helen) and   Liesl   (Sapientia)   both   work   with Eisengrim, they  are  introduced to  Ram­ say  during the  same week,  and  it  is the discovery  of  their  sexual  union   (a  union  of mind  and  body perhaps?)  that  throws

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



Ramsay   into  the  worst  "collapse of  the spirit" he  has  ever  known.   By  drawing secrets  out  of Ramsay   that  he  has  never revealed  to  anyone  else, Lies! makes  the first   chink   in   Ramsay's  carefully   con­ trolled  Ego  ("I was an  historian, a  hagi­ ographer, a bachelor of unstained charac­ ter ... a man  whose course  in life was set and   the  bounds   of  whose  success  were defined"-a chink   that  rapidly  widens into  a large fissure when he finds  himself falling  in love with the beautiful Faustina. Bewitched  not so much by Faustina as by his own long-repressed romantic fantasies,  Ramsay  worships  the  ground  on  which the lady treads: "There were whole nights when  I  lay  awake  from  one  o'clock   till morning, calling  up her  image  before  my imagination.... I   plagued  myself  with fruitless  questions: would  the  promise  of a life's  servitude  be enough  to  make  her stoop   for   me?"   Ramsay  finds   himself attributing  "subtleties  to  Faustina  that were certainly absurd  but that  [he]  could not   fight  down". Having  repressed   his anima for so many  years, Ramsay is now forced   to   suffer   the   consequences.  In Eisengrim's  "Soiree of Illusions," Faustina
bewitches  the audience with her  portrayal of three  of the  characters from  Goethe's Faust:  Gretehen, Helen, and  the  Eternal Feminine; in  Ramsay's personal  mythol­ ogy,  however,  she  is cast  in  the  role  of Helen, the bewitchingly beautiful maiden  whose  radiance  has  the  power   to  turn "men's  hearts   and   heads   so  that   they spare neither themselves  nor anything else worth  sparing."7
Ramsay's passion for Faustina would probably never have risen to a conscious level, however, if his secret life had not already been invaded  by Liesl's skillful questioning. Having always  prided  him­ self  on  his  ability  to  keep  secrets  ( "Al­ most  from  the  earliest  days  of my  child­ hood  I had  been close-mouthed,")  Ram­ say is dismayed  to  find  himself  babbling to Lies!about Deptford, Mary  Dempster,
 Boy Staunton, and  even  the  Little  Ma­ donna. Looking on  all  this  chatter  as  a betrayal  of his inner  worth, he begs Lies! to  protect his  confidences; but  Lies! re­ fuses:  "It has  done  you  good  to tell  all you  know,"   he
more  human already." Liesl's  questions
not only prod  the youthful, secret-sharing side of Ramsay's personality, they also uncover  some  rather  adolescent  passions
-passions he  would   have   preferred to
repress. His involvement with  Faustina would  have  been  quite  acceptable at  fif­ teen,  but  at  fifty  it  is somewhat  discon­  certing. It  is,  as   Lies!   tells   him,   "the  revenge  of  the  unlived   life.  Suddenly it makes a fool of you."  And  as  usual,  Lies! is right.
But who is Lies!? If she is the devil, as many  reviewers  suggest,  she  is  the  kind of  devil  that   Padre Blazon  has  in  mind when  he  describes  the  devil  as  one  who "knows  corners  of  us all of which  Christ Himself    is   ignorant."   Certainly   Lies! seems  to  be  able  to  uncover   corners of Ramsay's psyche  that   have  been  hidden since  childhood. But  Liesl's  function  in the   novel   is  somewhat  more   complex. When  Ramsay   is  recalling certain  lack­ lustre  love  affairs   that   he  had  after his relationship with Diana Marfteet, he con­ cludes  that  they  were  really  rather insig­ nificant   compared   to   one   very   special relationship  that   he   had   several   years later: "It was  many  years  before   I dis­ covered  love,  and   then  . . . I drank the reviving    drop   from    the   Cauldron  of Ceridwen."  This  is Ramsay's first  refer­  ence  to  his  relationship  with   Lies! and should  not be ignored because  it suggests something about Liesl's function in Ram­ say's  personal   mythology.  According  to the legend,  Ceridwen was a Welsh nature goddess who had  an ugly, dull-witted son. Perceiving  that   her  child  was  "the most ill-favoured man in the world,"8 she mixed a number of secret  herbs  together which,  when  boiled  in a large  pot for a year and

OPINIONS AND NOTES



a day, would yield three  drops  that  would make  her son the wisest man  in the coun­ try.  The drops   never   reached  their   in­ tended    destination,  however,  for   they were   accidentally  swallowed   by  Gwion Bach,   the   boy   who   was   guarding  the cauldron. Pursued  by the angry Ceridwen. Gwion  kept  changing his shape  in  order to escape  her  wrath. Ceridwen, however, was  too  fast  for  him: when  he  took  the form  of  a  grain   of  wheat, she  changed herself  into  a hen  and  devoured him. But this  was  not  the  end  of  Gwion   Bach - nine   months  later   he   was   reborn   and eventually became  Taliesin, the  wisest of poets.  Since  that   time   the  Cauldron of Ceridwen  has  been   associated  with   the kind  of intuitive wisdom  that  transcends the  merely  corporeal. And  it  is this  kind of wisdom  that  Liesl possesses-the  kind
of  wisdom  that   makes  her  the  Sapientia figure   in  Ramsay's  personal  mythology. The reviving  drop  that  Ramsay speaks of drinking from  the  Cauldron is the  good counsel  that   he  receives  from  Liesl  dur­ ing  their  three-hour talk,  a talk  that does much  to dissolve the illusions Ramsay has held  about  his own  life.
Fulfilling her  role  as  the  wise  woman in   Ramsay's  psychic   world,    Liesl   has plenty  of  advice  to  give  him.  About  his early  homelife  she says:  "That horrid village   and   your   hateful  Scots   family made  you a moral  monster"; about his religious  background: "I know Calvinism as  well  as  you  do.  It is  a  cruel   way  of life"; about 1vfary Dempster: "You  des­ pise    almost    everybody  except    Paul's  mother. No wonder  she seems like a saint to  you;   you  have   made   her   carry  the affection you should  have  spread among  fifty people"; and  about  Faustina: "She is of the  earth, and  her  body  is her  shop and  her  temple,  and  whatever her  body tells her  is all the law and  the  prophets." She  also  tells Ramsay  about himself  and  her  advice  is very  similar   to  Padre   Bla­ zon's.  In  an attempt to make  him  realize
 that  he  is human she  says:  "Why don't you shake hand5 with your devil, Ramsay, and change  this foolish life of yours? Why don't you, just for once, do something in­ explicable, irrational,  at  the  devil's  bid­ ding,  and   just  for   the  hell  of  it?  You would  be a different man." And of course he does-he  goes  to bed  with  Liesl!
Like many Sapientia figures, Liesl has hermaphroditic characteristics. Not  only is she sexually ambidextrous, but when Ramsay  first sees her he is struck  by her unusual appearance:  "The  person   who was speaking   to  me  . . . was  probably a woman   but  she  wore   man's dress,  had short  hair, and  was certainly the ugliest human creature I had  ever  seen  . . . she was tall,  straight, and  obviously  very strong,  but  she  had   big  hands and  feet, [and] a huge jutting jaw." Later he men­ tions  that   her  voice  was  "impossible  to identify   as  man's or  woman's." One  of Liesl's  most  outstanding  features is  her war-like nature. Huitzilopchtli,9 the Aztec god from whom  Liesl's  surname seems to be  derived,  was  noted  for  his  aggressive, war-like  nature, and  certainly Liesl is one of the most aggressive  females  that Ram­ say has ever encountered. "She was much stronger  than   I would   have  supposed," Ramsay  observes,  "And she  had  no silly notions  about  fighting fair." But  Ramsay certainly seems  to  be equal  to  the  occa­ sion:  "I hopped   towards  Liesl, waggling the  leg with such  angry  menace that  she made  the mistake of  retreating and  I had her  in  a  corner. I  dropped the  leg  and  punched her with  a ferocity  that  I should be  ashamed  to  recall; still,  as  she  was pun  hing
was   a   fair   enough  fight."  After   Liesl leaves,  Ramsay  surveys  the  "battlefield" with  considerable relish,  admitting  later that  he  feels better   than   he  has  felt  "in a  very  long  time." In  a  sense  Ramsay's fight  with   Liesl  is  his  fight  against   the intuitive, feeling  side  of  his  own  psyche (note   that   Liesl  comes   closest   to  win-

OPINIONS AND NOTES



ning   the   battle   when   she  hits   Ramsay with  a part  of his own  body,  his wooden leg)  -a fight  that   he  appears to  have won  when  Lies! leaves  the  room  in  pain and  frustration. When  she returns a short time later,  however,  Ramsay dresses her wounds and it isn't long before he finds himself  making  peace  with  his enemy  on her  own  terms: "With such  a  gargoyle! And  yet  never  have  I known  such  deep delight or such an aftermath of healing tenderness." Ramsay has  finally  accepted not  only  Lies!,  but   also  his  own  inner reality.
I do not  wish to reduce Davies' female
characters to  psychological types,  nor  to suggest that  Fifth  Business is some kind of psychomachia in  which  all  of  the  char­ acters   are   allegorical   representations  of some  part  of  Ramsay's  soul-the  novel is far  too  complex for  that  to  be  true­ but I think  we come closer to understand­ ing  Ramsay's  relationships  with   Diana, Mrs. Dempster, Faustina, and  Lies!if  we realize  that  in  Ramsay's personal  myth­ ology   they   sometimes function   as   the Jungian archetypes.


NOTES

1 C.  G. Jung, The Collected Works (London: Kegan Paul, I959), vol.  IX, ii, pp.  6-7.
2  Ibid. p.  I4.
a  Man and  His  Symbols, pp.  2I7-27. See  also
Jung's Works, vol.  XII, pp.  280-300.
• Jung, Works. Vol.  IX, ii, p.  I2.
5  Ibid. Vol.  XVI, p.   I 74·
a For  a  more  detailed  description see  Erich Neumann's The  Great   Mother  (Princeton: Princeton  University  Press,    I 972), p.   I 26.
7   Goethe, Faust, translated  by  Barker Fairley (Toronto:    University   of    Toronto    Press, I97o), p.  158.
s The  Mabinogion, translated  by   Charlotte
Guest (London:  ]. M.  Dent, I906), p. 263.
9   In World of Wonders Lies!  attempts to  ex­ plain   her   relationship to  Magnus  Eisengrim (Paul  Dempster)  in  their famous  "Soiree of Illusions" magic  show  by saying  that because
 she  was  entirely dependent  on   him  for  the success   of   the   show,   she   chose   the   name "Vitzliputzli" because that was  the  name  of one  of  the  least   of  the   demons  that   served Faust in  the  original, German version  of  the play.  The name,  she  says,  was  intended as  a "delicate compliment to  Magnus." While  this explanation may  account for  her  dependency on  Magnus, it does  not  allow  for  the  some­ what  paradoxical  fact    that   she   was   also "Theatre  Autocrat" or,   to   use   her   words, "the boss"  of the  entire enterprise.  But  since  the  name she  chose  also  associates her  with  the  god, Huitzilopchtli, a very  autocratic and egotistical deity,  the  appelation seems appro­ priate.  Heinrich  Heine  Germanized   Huitzi­ lopchtli  to  Vitzliputzli  in   his   poem   by  the same  name. For  more  information see  Nigel Davies'  The   Aztecs   (Toronto:  Macmillan,
I 973), pp.  14-18.

MARILYN CHAPMAN



OATES'
The Poisoned Kiss


ANYTHING   JOYCE  CAROL OATES  WRITES about  the  meaning and  form  of her  own fiction  merits  attention. Her  collection of short   fiction,   The  Poisoned    Kiss   and Other  Short  Stories   from the  Portuguese (I 975), contains an  especially  intriguing "Afterword," in  which  she  describes  the intrusion of a  foreign  "life,  or  vision,  or personality" upon  her own  aesthetic con­ sciousness.   She   began    to   feel   intense  psychic    pressure    from    Fernandes   de Briao,  an  "imaginary   [Portuguese]  au­  thor,"    while    working    on    her    novel Wonderland. Ultimately, Oates  was "be­  seiged"  to  "translate" Fernandes' visions into   the   twenty-three  "'parables"  con­ tained   in  The  Poisoned   Kiss:    "I was never   able   to   designate  myself  as   the author  of the  stories; they  were  all  pub­  lished  under   the  name  'Fernandes,' and I was  listed  as  having   translated  them
'from  the Portuguese.'" It is not my con­
cern  to speculate upon  this experience of

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



"real or  imagined 'possession' " in  itself. There is no reason  to doubt Oates' state­ ment   that   whatever she  felt  was  intense enough  to  result  in  extensive  investiga­ tion into  "parapsychology, mysticism,  the occult  and  related subjects."
Still, the most valuable aspect  of this "Afterword" is what  it implies  about, not only the "parables" of The  Poisoned Kiss, but  all  of  Oates' fiction.  She  writes  that "the Fernandes stories  come  out  of  no­ where: not  out  of an  interest  in  Portugal (which   I  have   never   visited),"  or  any need   to  penetrate  in  parable  form   the "existential" problems about   which   she ordinarily writes.  In  fact,  the one-dimen­ sional  nature of  the  parable  form  does not  represent the  kind  of fiction  she pre­ fers:   "I  believe  that   writing   should   re­ create  a world, sanctifying the real  world by honoring its  complexities."
Oates' view  of  literature as  a  process of  sanctification is  basic  to  her  complex books of criticism,  The  Edge of  Impossi­ bility   ( 1972)    and    New   Heaven,   New Earth   (1974).  In   an   essay  on   A  Full Moon  in March  in The Edge of Impossi­ bility, she  praises  Yeats'  "obsessive  com­ mitment  to  a   transposing  of  daimonic knowledge   into  human  language." She writes  that  it  is  "Yeats' sacred  duty  as a poet to translate the ineffable into a fable strong  enough  to bear  the  burden of this forbidden   language,"  and   that   such   a duty   can  only  be  met   with   the  aid  of "magic." All great  art  is a form  of magic, in part  because  "the  accidental, temporal form of  a human being  may be a disguise of his true  substance, even  from  himself"  and  this arbitrary "temporality" can only be purified  or purged by the supernatural power of creative  genius. The great  artist, then,  is  the  true   redeemer-he  under­ stands  that  he must  wed his consciousness with  the  raw  materials of  the  world  to produce something that   transcends both. That final product must  incorporate both the  "holy" and   the  "daimonic"  because,
 in man's "self" as in the external universe, the  saint  and  the  criminal, God  and  the Devil, are so inextricably interwoven that any   aesthetic  attempt   to   deny    either would  be incomplete and,  thus, false. The redemptive mission  of  the  artist   has  be­ come  increasingly difficult  as established, coherent world  orders  have given  way  to accelerating  chaos,   resulting   in   human fragmentation and  anonymity  so  severe as   to   border   on   spiritual  annihilation. However, the  creation of  new  "sanctify­ ing"  aesthetic  visions  in  such  a  chaotic universe  is as essential  as it is difficult.
It would  be an  understatement to  say that   Oates   does  not   share   the  view  of many  intellectual skeptics  that  literature cannot  change  anything. In  New Heaven, New  Earth,  she  asserts  that   "poetry, or the  poetic  imagination, has  made  every­ thing   happen." Thus,  she  is  inevitably made  uneasy  by  many  contemporary American writers  whom  she  calls  "mini­ mal" artists   (she  names  Burroughs, Pyn­ chon,   Barthelme,   Purdy,  and   the  John Barth  who  wrote  Lost in the  Funhouse). The  term  needs  clarification. Burroughs, Pynchon,  Barthelme,  et  al.  are,   in  her mind,   the   end   product  of  a   decaying romanticism which, confronting the chaos of  twentieth-century America,  retreats into  an  irrational longing for  "entropy." Their works  are  the  "verbalized screams and  shudders" of confused  egos so  terri­ fied at alienation that  they express a will­ ingness  to suspend  faith  not  only in  their  own personalities and  external reality,  but in language itself as a mode  of  meaning­ ful  communication. The  unifying theme  of Tony  Tanner's study of  contemporary American fiction,  City  of Words,  is  the prevalence  of  a  sense  of   imminent  en­ tropy  among many  contemporary writers  and   their   varying  reactions  to  this   ex­ ternal   disorder   and   alienation. Tanner labels  one  reaction, that  of James Purdy in   Cabot   Wright   Begins,  as   "aesthetic skepticism." The  term  has specific  refer-

139

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



ence to Purdy's questioning of "the ability of  art   to  establish   any  contact with  re­ ality," which,  of  necessity,  leads  to  "the  artists' foredoomed inability   to  produce anything but  veils, silhouettes, outlines, a schematized unreality unable  to  hold  the drowsy  prince  to  the  promise  of life."  It is  not  Tanner's  contention  that   all  the writers   he   treats  express   an   "aesthetic skepticism"  as   deep   as   that    found    in Cabot  Wright  Begins  (he  does  not  even feel  that   Purdy  at  his best  veers  so com­ pletely  into  a  denial   of  any  meaningful reality).  Still,  a  pervasive  awareness of the  dissolution  of  external  and   internal meaning is shared  by the  writers empha­ sized in City of Words, and  a concern for what  Tanner calls "foreground" is a long­ standing   tradition  in   American  letters.  To Tanner, extreme dedication to "fore­ ground" implies  an  obsessive  experimen­ tation with  language  precisely when  dis­ trust  in the viability of language as mean­  ingful  communication  is  most  extreme: "there is detectable an element of radical distrust of language among many Ameri­ can writers, even  while paradoxically they must  perforce  continue  to  work  with  it to  preserve  the  extended range  of  possi­ bilities it makes available." Tanner's anal­ ysis  calls  to  mind  such  ironic  manipula­ tion  of language as found in Barthelme's Snow  White   (the  elaborate invention of words  like "horsewife" and  "vatricide"). In   regard   to  The   Poisoned  Kiss,  three final comments concerning Tanner's work are  relevant: Oates refers  to  it  with  re­ spect  in  New  Heaven, New  Earth;  City of Words  contains an   introductory  dis­ cussion emphasizing Borges and Nabokov  as the  two  major foreign  inspirations for the   intense   dedication   to  "foreground" among contemporary  American writers; and   both  these  points  are  relevant to  a key story  in The  Poisoned Kiss, "Plagia­ rized  Material."
Neither Tanner nor  I  believes  that  the ironic  pushing of language to its extremes
 which  is so pervasive  in  the  Burroughs­ Pynchon-Barthelme-Purdy   school   leads inexorably  to  "aesthetic  skepticism."1
However,  that   is  not   really   the   point here.  Oates   would,   of  course,   feel  that writers who have lost faith in their own "personalities," the validity  of external reality,  and  language itself, cannot fulfill the   "sacred  duty"  of   the    redemptive artist. In  fact,   preoccupation  with   the manipulation of language for "absurdist" effect,  when  the  inherent power  of  lan­ guage  itself  is questioned, must  seem  to her an extreme  form  of cynicism. In  New Heaven, New Earth, she writes:  "since so refined  an  art  willfully  excludes  the emo­ tional   context   of  its  own  creation, per­  sonality  is minimal; art  is all."  "Minimal art"  is  "all,"  but   not   nearly    enough. Oates'  discussion   of    "minimal art"  is finally  a  variation  on  the  old  argument concerning the  validity  of  art   for  art's sake.  She  sees  the  Burroughs-Barthelme kind of writer as both  too serious  and  not serious  enough. Innovation  in  form  and technique is not adequate in itself to compensate for a discarded faith  in liter­ ature  as  the  expression   of   "communal tragedy." Oates  can  respond  to  Norman Mailer and  James   Dickey,  even   though annoyed by the adolescent  preoccupation with   "masculinity" in  Why  Are  We  in Vietnam? and  Deliverance, because  Mai­  ler   and   Dickey   have   a   very   "serious" regard  for  the  role  of  their  own  person­  alities  in   transmitting  "communal"  ex­ perience.
There is a particularly teasing  sentence in the "Afterword" to The  Poisoned Kiss: "the only way I could accept  these stories [Fernandes' "parables"]  was  to  think  of them  as  a  literary  adventure, or  a  cere­ bral/ Gothic   commentary  on   my   own writing, or as the  expression  of  a  part  of my personality that  had  been stifled."  All three  descriptions are  applicable. Begin­ ning with  the story, "Letters to Fernandes from  a Young American Poet," much  of

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



the  last  third  of the  volume  can  be seen as "a  cerebral/Gothic commentary" not only  on  her  own  art,  but  upon  the  con­ trast  between  "minimal art" and  "sancti­ fying  art." Because  of  her  faith  in  total "personality," Oates  has always been con­ cerned  with  all forms  of human passion. A  number of  the  Poisoned  Kiss  "para­ bles" focus upon aspects  of passion  which are   certainly  not   unprecedented  in  her work,  but  which  she  has  not  previously treated in quite  so bold  a manner. There are  a  number of homosexuality stories  in the   volume.  The  statement that  her "'possession'" by Fernandes began  dur­ ing  the  writing of  Wonderland   is  espe­ cially  interesting in  this  regard  since  ho­ mosexuality is an  extremely  understated aspect  of the Jesse Harte Pedersen  Vogel­ Trick  Monk   relationship  in  that   novel. Still  Oates  must  feel  the   heterosexual's restraint  in  dealing  with  this  theme, and approaching it boldly  and  directly as she does in The  Poisoned Kiss is an  "adven­ ture."
Other variations on  the  theme of  pas­
sion  are  central to  the  Fernandes  "par­ ables": the  crippling nature of  religious "adoration" in contrast to secular "love,"  the  fascination  which   the  criminal and  the   "abnormal"  hold   for   the   "average man," and  the  forces  (parental, govern­  mental, and scientific)  which  seek to con­ trol  and   limit  the  total   development of "personality." These  themes  are  inherent in all her fiction. Thematically, then,  The  Poisoned Kiss does not represent a radical departure  for  Oates. Technically, it  does because  the surrealistic settings of her previous   fiction   are   replaced  by   some­ thing  more closely approximating allegory than  Portugal.
In  two stories, Oates  directly contrasts "sanctifying art"  and   "minimal art." "Letters to Fernandes from  a Young American  Poet"   tells  of  a  great   Portu­ guese   writer   named   Antonio   who   has been  taken  captive  by the government of
 "S."  (Salazar) and  abandoned by most of his friends,  including Fernandes. The let­ ters are  the  plea  of an  American  disciple of Antonio  that  Fernandes not irrevocably desert   the   imprisoned   genius.   What  is crucial  in  the  story  is  the  young  Ameri­  can's  description of  the  writing and  life of  his  master.   The  American  had   been carried out  of the  prison  of his "self"  by the   totality    of    the    Portuguese  poet's  "vision:" "love  in  all  its Shapes, serpen­ tine and  ponderous Shapes, the  denial  of nothing, no landscape too  ugly for  him." He  has even  come  to see that  the  "land­ scape"  of  his  home,  Youngstown, Ohio, described  in  detail  as a  frightening,  pol­ luted, anonymous sprawl, must  not simply be   repudiated.  Throughout   her   work, Oates  has sought  to confront  "love in all its Shapes" and  to  deny  nothing, includ­ ing  the  suffocating  landscape  of  urban  America.
Antonio  is correctly perceived by the government as a dangerous figure because he, in fact,  preaches "revolution": "noth­ ing  blown  up  or  thrown into  the air  & raining down  but  a  Spiritual  change so much  more  violent  -how all  the  coun­  tries  of the  world  could  be  transformed, even   the   United  States."   One    hardly  needs to point  to  the concentration upon violence  in  Oates'  work  or  to say  that  a prayer     for    "spiritual"   transformation underlies  all  that  she  has  written. D. H.  Lawrence,  Yeats,   Antonio,  Joyce   Carol  Oates,  all "visionary artists" are  the  ulti­ mate  revolutionaries, advocating not  po­ litical or economic change, but spiritual rebirth. Thus, it  is inevitable that  forces seek  to  destroy  Antonio's work.  His  lan­ guage  itself is the  enemy  and  it  must  be erased:  "when  the   language   is   erased  we  will  all  be  erased."  Language is the means of redemption, not something with which   one   plays  elaborate  games.   The young  American  poet  is "proud" of hav­  ing  resisted  "the  North  American  con­ sciousness-slop,   where    so   many    poets,

OPINIONS AND NOTES



some of them  older  than  myself, are  per­ manently stuck." The  trap   of  "minimal art" has  been  escaped  because  of  the  re­ demptive power  of  Antonio.
The  central  themes    of   "Letters  to
Fernandes"   are    foreshadowed   in   the story,  "The Sacred  Marriage," contained in   Marriages   and   Infidelities.    In   this earlier	story, 	a 	passive, 	emotionless scholar   is  initiated  into   passion   by  his admiration for a dead  poet,  named  Con­ nell  Pearce,   and   his  love  for  the  poet's  widow.  Working with  the  Pearce  papers  in  the  dead  genius'  West  Virginia  home, the   scholar  falls  in   love   with   Pearce's very beautiful widow. Just  as he becomes certain  that   he  will  marry the  woman  (she  has  controlled  the  initial  seduction and  even suggested  that  she become  preg­ nant) ,  she   begins   to   retreat  from   the relationship.  He   then   discovers   among  the  Pearce papers  some  notes  for  "'re­ ligious  parables  and   riddles' ": X,  "the famous   Spanish   novelist,   nobleman.... Many  adventures,  prison," approaching death,   finds   a   young   woman    who   is "worthy" of  him  and  marries her; after his  death she  becomes   the  lover  of  X's disciples,  "a  multitude of lovers  come  to her,  lovers  of  X,  and   she  blesses  them without  exception, in  her  constant  vir­ ginity."  Realizing  that    his   relationship with  Connell  Pearce's  widow  has  paral­ leled  the dead  poet's  outline of  the legacy of X, the scholar is plunged into  momen­ tary   despair.  Ultimately,   however,  he feels  renewed   dedication   to  his  task  of editing the  poet's posthumous work. Like Antonio of  "Letters to Fernandes," Con­  nell  Pearce  is a  "sanctifying" artist; and  he  creates   intense   passion  in  a  disciple. That the story of X is described as one of a  series  of  proposed   " 'religious parables and  riddles'" illustrates how  closely The Poisoned  Kiss  is  tied   to  Oates'  earlier work.
"Plagiarized   Material,"   the    longest story in the volume,  is an  elaborate satire
 of "minimal" artists. Cabral, the  central character, is a  European  nobleman who devotes  himself  to  the  writing of  fiction which   is  based  solely  upon  gamesman­ ship with words and  which attracts young admirers throughout the  world,  particu­ larly  in  France and   the  United  States.  Oates  goes  to  great  lengths   to  establish Cabral's  aristocratic   credentials,  to   the point   of  emphasizing  that   much   of  the family    wealth    is   derived    from    both American  copper   and   tin  mines.  Obvi­ ously,  her  satire  is specifically  aimed   at Borges  and   Nabokov; but  what  is more crucial  is her attack on  the veneration of Cabral's kind  of art.  In  a  book  entitled, In  the  Mind  of the  Brain  of Cabral the master  outlines   his  aesthetics:

"Ail  my writing,  as it is written, cancels out the tradition in which  it is written. It  is not magic,  but  anti-magic. It  has  no  meaning. It   is....  The   words  are   only  themselves; they have no purpose  outside  themselves.... The  world  releases  a  stench; the  world  is not  equal   to  any  subjective, specific,  anti­ magical   assault  upon   it.  That  is  why  my writing   reduces   the   world   to   words  and, ultimately, words  to silence."

Unable to  love anything, even  the  exer­ cises  of  his  own  elaborate  imagination, contemptuous   of    passion,    love,    "the  world,"  and  even language, Cabral finally retreats   into   the   ultimate   "silence"  of suicide.  Whether the satire here  is fair or not,  it pinpoints Oates' objections to  the writers   of   anti-stories   and    anti-novels. "Anti-magic" is  to  her  an  accurate des­ cription of the  results of "aesthetic skep­ ticism,"  and  a  term  of  ultimate literary  blasphemy. The  repudiation of  "magic" implies   a   necessary   abdication  of   the "sacred duty" of the great  artist  to "sanc­  tify" the world. When  emotion, tradition, reality,  and  the  sanctity of  language are erased,  aesthetic suicide  is the  inevitable result.
In  two other  stories,  Oates  seems to be
reflecting   on  her  own  career. The   con­
cluding   "parable,"  "Journey,"  describes

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



a trip  in which  the  narrator starts  out  on a broad, well-travelled highway   (at  this point,  she  is  "a  lover  of  maps") , turns onto  increasingly less travelled roads, and ultimately ends  her  journey  on  foot  in a dense forest.  In an almost  defiant tone of affirmation, the ending asserts that  the traveller is not  lost and  would  make  her trip  in the  same manner had  she to do it again.  There is something curiously  ele­ giac   about  "Journey."  Perhaps   Oates  wrote   it,   as  well   as   "Plagiarized   Ma­  terial,"   partially   in   a    despairing   at­ tempt  to teach  critics  who see only  mor­ bidity  and  doom  in  her  fiction.  It is easy to   outline  the   symbolic   overtones  of "Journey"-the   initial   broad   highway  represents the  existential, realistic   tradi­ tion  on which  her work is based,  and  the movement to  the  final  dense  forest  cor­ responds  to  the  abandonment of  realism in The  Poisoned Kiss.
The volume's  "title story"  recounts the narrator's  efforts   to   cross  an   obstacle­ filled  "pathway to  you." Various "stran­ gers"  attempt to  stop  him  and   must  be subdued.  Finally,   a   soothsayer   detains  him  with  "idle  questions" and  is hurled  into  an  "open  tomb." At least  two  com­ plementary  readings are possible for "The Poisoned  Kiss":   it  is an  allegory  of  the difficulty  of  realizing  passion  in  a  world that  must   rationalize everything;  or  it, like   "Journey,"  is  a   "parable"  of   the struggles  of  Oates' own  career.  Passion, even  to the  point  of violence,  is, after  all, a  critical ingredient in  her  fiction.
"Journey" and   "The  Poisoned   Kiss" are  two  of  the  least  successful  stories  in this   complex   volume   because   they   do read so much like the efforts of Oates to explain and defend herself. In them, the allegorical landscape is too dominant and too contrived. Seen  as advance signals of a coming new stage in her writing, they become   more   meaningful,  but   perhaps even  more  troubling.
 Five   "parables"  focus   directly  upon the  theme  of homosexuality. In  three  of them,  the  pattern is the  same : a promin­ ent  young  man  becomes  entangled in  an alliance   with  a  type  of  "hustler" and  is torn   between   the   conflicting  needs   to save  his  reputation  and   to  preserve   the passion of the relationship. Oates is really attempting  to  cover  difficult   ground  in her  "sacred" obligation to study  "love  in all its Shapes." Since  this group of "para­ bles"  deals  exclusively  with  male  homo­ sexual  love, she  has  embarked  upon  the most  foreign  of  possible  territories. As a heterosexual woman,  Oates has  left  her­  self  open   to  much   potential  attack  in even  approaching  this  theme. Still,  the three   "hustler  stories" do  communicate the  main  characters' love  for  the  "hus­ tlers,"  as  well  as  the  purgatorial hell  of such  socially  forbidden  relationships. A fourth  "parable," "The Secret   Mirror," is perhaps the most daring of all in its description of a  transvestite dressing  be­ fore  a  mirror. Because   of  her  commit­ ment  to the redemptive nature of passion in and  of itself, one does  not want  to say that  Oates  is passing  negative  judgment here; still  she  ordinarily utilizes  mirrors, as contrasted to windows,  as symbols of a crippling  narcissism.  That is perhaps the point:   the   transvestite,  because   of   his terror  of  the  crowd  outside, cannot  pos­ sibly  find  anyone   who   might   share   his passion.
The  homosexuality stories  lead  natur­
ally into a discussion of two related  themes of  The  Poisoned Kiss:  other "dark"  as­ pects of passion, and  the  varying societal restraints upon emotional fulfillment. The bond   between   criminal   and   saint,   the normal   and   the  abnormal, is  central to "Parricide,"   "Distance," "In  a   Public  Place,"  "The Cruel  Master," "The Mur­ derer," and  "Maimed." In   "Parricide" and  "The Murderer," the "normal," "in­ nocent"   narrators  are   irresistibly   com­ pelled  by the  power  of young  killers. "In

I43

OPINIONS AND NOTES



a  Public   Place" describes   the  strangula­ tion  of  an  elderly,  sleeping  man   by  the narrator in  an  ancient  hotel  filled  with half-alive  guests.   After   the   killing,   the narrator sits "contented" aware that  "the  utter  safety  of  such  a  place  is a  kind  of oblivion; in such  reservoirs of civilization you  understand  that   you  are  immortal." This   particular   "parable"   illustrates  a side of Oates' work  that  is puzzling,  even threatening,  to  many   critics.  The  half­  alive, the spiritually crippled trappings of our   civilization  must   be  discarded  vio­ lently  if there  is no other way. Her  work becomes  "disturbing" when  she  uses the metaphor of the killing  of a human being to emphasize her call for a spiritual revolution  necessarily   preceded  by   de­ struction of all that  is obsolete and stifling (e.g.,  Jules   Wendall's   momentary  reju­ venation after  shooting  the  policeman in them).
In  "The Cruel Master," a  doctor  be­
gins to retreat into  a hypnotic vision of a young   boy  being   trampled  by  a  horse: "for  all  his  adult life  he  had   cared   for the  sick  and   the  injured,  wrestling with them,  but  now, with  a beating heart that seemed concentrated on the roof of his parched mouth, he was free to simply contemplate the fact of their  suffering." Oates has, of course,  analyzed such essen­ tial,  but  crippling, scientific  restraint be­ fore-most  memorably in  Wonder/and. In  "Maimed," Oates   turns  almost  com­ pletely  to  allegory  in  her  analysis  of  the wedding of  the  saintly  and the  diabolic  in  human  personality.  Rather than  spir­ itual   demonism,  she   uses   physical   dis­ figurement, and  focuses  upon   the  neces­ sity of the abnormal being  defining  him­  self  by  the  concepts of  the  norm.  How­  ever,  the  landscape  here   is  so  divorced  from  realism  that   one  begins  to  wonder  if the disfigurement may, indeed, be emo­ tional  or  spiritual.
"Distance" is the  best  of this  group  of
"parables."  In   it,   a   respectable   young
 Portuguese diplomat is sent to London where  he  destroys  his  career   because  of his fascination with  a  group  of vagrants who  "live" in  a   public   park   near   his hotel.  Initially repulsed  by them,  he can­ not get the vagrants out  of his mind  until he  is finally  compelled to  transverse the "distance"  between    them   and   himself. The    story   works   well   largely   due   to Oates' use of a shadowy,  half-seen  mem­  ber  of  the  hobo  group  who  symbolically  represents the narrator's unconscious  need to   join  it. The   respectable  American's hatred/fascination response to the young "freaks" of our  counterculture is central not   only   to  Wonderland,  but   to  such short  stories as "Stray Children" from Marriages and Infidelities.
However fascinated, respectable society does   attempt  to   repress   everything it deems   "unnatural."  In    The   Poisoned Kiss, Oates examines four  specific  varia­ tions of such repression: scientific, paren­ tal,   governmental,  and   religious.   "The Brain  of  Dr.  Vicente"  is  a  "parable" of the  dehumanization  which  results  when the  scientific rationalist attempts to deny his  emotions  and   the  needs  of  his  body. In  contrast  to  her  complex characteriza­ tion of Jesse Harte Pedersen  Vogel, Oates exhibits  no  sympathy for  Dr.  Vincente, the  one-dimensional rationalist. Parental pressure   for   "respectable"  achievement and   against   "the  dark   passions"   is  the central focus of "The Enchanted Piano," as   well   as   constituting  a   subordinate theme  in  several  other   "parables" (The Cruel  Master," "Sunlight/Twilight," and "Plagiarized  Materials"). Throughout Oates' fiction,  one  finds children  psycho­ logically  crippled  by  respectable,  "emo­ tionless"   parents   (e.g.,  the   narrator  of Expensive   People,   Shelley   in   Wonder­ land). Since  such  passionless  adults   are especially  dominant among her  middle­ and  upper-class characters, it  is not  sur­ prising  that  she treats  political  systems as emotionally   repressive.    In    democratic

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



states,   governments  are,   after   all,   pri­ marily   instruments  of   the   middle   and upper    classes.   The   Portuguese   setting  allows  Oates   to  use  overt  fascism  as  a metaphor  for   corrupted   American  de­ mocracy.   Since   the   middle  and   upper  classes  most  fear  "spiritual  revolution," it  is inevitable  that the  Salazar   govern­ ment   will  retaliate  against  Antonio, the "sanctifying" artist,  but  not  against  an aristocratic, "minimal" writer  such  as Cabral.
Portugal as setting  also allows Oates  to overtly connect political  and  religious repression.  One   hardly needs  to  be  told that,  in a fascist country, the  church functions as  an  arm   of  the  state.  How­ ever,  the  repressive   nature of  organized  religion is every bit as real, if  more subtle, in a democracy. Inevitably the same one­ dimensional middle-  and  upper-class adults   who  "own"  political   parties   con­ trol    the    churches    through   economic  power. Thus, organized religions in fascist and  democratic states  correctly see  pas­ sion, the essential inspiration for any spiritual revolution, as a dangerous force.
In  "The Son of God  and  His Sorrow,"
Oates   describes  the  central  dilemma of all   Christ   figures  - since   the   human pain  of  this  world  and   the  needs  of the body    are    ultimately   not    "real,"   the Christ  figure  becomes  a traitor to God  in exactly  the  degree  to  which  he  responds to  altruistic  emotion   and   physical   pas­ sion. Writing about   The  Brothers  Kara­ mazov   in   The  Edge    of    Impossibility, Oates  contrasts the  "existential" and  the "Christian"  visions:

The  existentialist accepts  all   responsibility for  his actions and  does  not  beg forgiveness, but   he  accepts  absolutely  no  responsibility for  actions that are  not  his  own.  The  essen­ tialist   (in  this  context, the  ideal  Christian) accepts all  guilt   for  all   actions,  is  morally  ubiquitous, has  no  singular  identity, can  be forgiven for  any  sin,  no matter how  terrible, because   he  ultimately  has   no  freedom and  no responsibility, not simply  for  his own sins
 but  for  the  sins  of  mankind; he  is a  "crea­
ture."

The   Christ   figure  in  "The Son  of  God and  His Sorrow" is finally  unable  to deny the  "singular identity" of his human, ex­ istential  self  and   orders   his   mother   to crucify  him.  "I am  unable  to  purify  my­ self. God shrieks  at  me:  Always  this  hap­ pens!  Always  my  sons  disobey  me!"   To  the degree  that  they are  unescapably hu­  man,  saviours  must  indeed   disobey  this God.  Besides its strictly  religious  context, this  "parable" has  several  possible  impli­ cations: "god" here  is the inhuman savior of Christian theology,  as well as the cumulative societal  pressures  which  war against   man's  "unnatural"  passions.
In  her  "Afterword," Oates  writes  that "Our Lady  of the Easy Death of Alferce" represents   her    initial    "possession"   by Fernandes; and  this  "parable" does  cer­ tainly  tie  together several  major  themes of The   Poisoned  Kiss. The central  figure is a statue  of the  madonna. Carrying the Christ   child   in  her  arms,  she  is  impri­ soned,  turned "to  stone,"  by  the  adora­ tion  of  her  worshippers.  However, when a  young  man  in  the  congregation gazes at  her  with  human,  passionate love,  she is  terrified; and  later  the  man's   mother attacks   her   and   pulls   the   Christ   child from  her  arms, screaming: "You  are not Mary!  You are  a thief, a murderer! ... My  son was  poisoned by you-they have taken   him  away-." Although  the  wo­ man  is subdued, she "steals" Christ  from the  madonna,  who   is  replaced  on   her pedestal   with   a   "wooden  doll   in   His place."  The    story   graphically  outlines Oates' formula for meaningful "spiritual" change  -"Christ" must  be made  human through the  birth  of a new veneration of man's    passionate existential "totality." Only  recognition and  acceptance of man as  "thief" and   "murderer," as  well   as "innocent"  child,   can   bring    salvation. Not    simply    institutions   such    as    the church,  but   the   modern  psyche   itself,

145

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



must cease to fear  the "demonic," the "unnatural." Such  a fundamental change in  human  morality will  not  come  easily
-"they" will attempt to repress  it. Even
the human mother in this "parable" does not really understand her son's passion. Modern man  will be tempted always to prefer  the  "easy death" of inhuman adoration  to  the  spiritual  challenge  in­ herent in  human passion.
Joyce    Carol    Oates    is   essentially    a writer  of contemporary  spiritual  history. In   her   "Preface"  to   the   collection   of stories  about  "Young  America," Where Are You  Going, Where  Have You  Been?, Oates  directly confronts what  she feels is a  basic  misunderstanding of her  writing. While  older  critics  find  only "morbidity" and  "absurdity" in her  work,  younger readers "intuitively" understand that  her central  theme    is  a   redemptive   one­ "human beings  struggling  heroically  to define  personal  identity in  the  face  of in­ credible   opposition, even  in  the  face  of death itself."  Man   has  always  had  great difficulty  in accepting  his own  mortality; moreover,  we   twentieth-century  Ameri­  cans live in an age and  a culture of deep­  seated  pessimism.  Our  culture is one  "in which    the    concept   of    'divinity'    was snatched  up  by  a  political/economic order, and  the  democratic essence  of  di­ vinity  denied."
Still, she feels that  a rebirth of faith  in man's  inherent divinity is inevitable: "though it  has  been  denied, this  essence of  divinity   has  not  been  destroyed, and we  are   witnessing   in   our   time   its   re­ emergence, its  evolution  back  into  con­ sciousness."   Even   the   despair   resulting from    mortality   is   being   transcended: "And   I  believe  a  new,  healthier, saner  concept of the experience of death is also evolving  in our  time." We are,  in fact,  in the   midst   of  a  critically  important  re­ demptive hour  in  the  long struggle   that  is  man's  spiritual  history:  "a   new  mor­ ality  is emerging  in  America, in  fact  on
 the  North  American continent  generally, which  may  appear to  be  opposed  to  the old but  which  is in fact  a higher form  of the   old -the   democratization   of   the spirit,   the  experiencing of  life  as  mean­ ingful   in   itself,   without   divisions into
'good'    or    'bad,'   'beautiful'   or   'ugly,'
'moral' or 'immoral.'" Oates has often seemed an essentially pessimistic writer because   her   novels   focus   so   intensely upon  diagnosing the symptoms of our diseased culture. Even  the characters who struggle for a transcendent vision in her novels seem ultimately to fall short of attaining a  truly  permanent spiritual  re­ birth.   However,  the   sheer   difficulty  of their   struggle   conveys   a   degree   of  re­ demption.
The  "parables" in  The   Poisoned Kiss
are  not  a  thematic departure  for  Oates. They document the essential causes of contemporary spiritual  alienation  (fear of  man's   "totality,"  of   the   "demonic" side   of   his  personality,  and   a   funda­ mental  distrust  of the  self and  the  world which  has  resulted  in  the  phenomena of "minimal" artists  skeptical  of  the  power of language and devoted  to "anti-magic") and   they  outline   the   formula  requisite  for  salvation   ("sanctifying" artists   des­ cribing   all   possible  "Shapes  of  love"). What  is  different, and  disturbing, about  these   "parables"  is  their   form.   In   the "Preface"  to   Where   Are   You   Going, Where  Have You  Been?, Oates says that the  "mode" in which she ordinarily writes is that  of "psychological realism." One accepts   this  term  as  descriptive of  most of her work. Indeed, the "psychological realism,'' or surrealism, of her  novels is crucial   to  their  importance. No  contem­ porary  writer  has  managed to  document so thoroughly as Oates  the surface  reality and  underlying moral  and  spiritual "un­ reality"  of American life.
It is possible that  the  total  "unreality" of landscape in The  Poisoned Kiss repre-


BOREALIS  PRESS  LIMITED
9  ASHBURN   DRIVE, OTTAWA, ONTARIO  K2E 6N4
TELEPHONE  224-6837  or  829-0150

LITERARY CRITICISM

ON  E. J. PRATT, Glenn  Clever
80 pp.    1977
ISBN  0-919594-72-7    paper 	$4.95

ARCHIBALD LAMPMAN: Canadian Poet  of
Nature, Carl  Y. Connor
A reprint  of this biographical  study.
180 pp.    1977
ISBN  0-919594-75-1    paper 	$7.95
 STANDARD AUTHORS

LAMPMAN'S KATE: Late  Love Poems  of Archibald Lampman, ed. Margaret Whitridge Previously unpublished   lyrics.
52  pp.    Illustr.  cover    1975
ISBN  919594-33-6    paper 	$3.95
LAMPMAN'S SONNETS: The  Complete Sonnets of  Archibald Lampman,
ed. Margaret Whitridge
200 pp.    lllustr. cover 	1976

SUSANNA MOODIE: Voice  and  Vision, by  Carol  Shields
 ISBN  919594-50-6    paper
919594-60-3    cloth
 $9.95
$14.95

The  first  in-depth  study  of  the  fiction  of this remarkable pioneer writer.
81 pp.    1977
ISBN  0-919594-46-8    paper 	$8.95

EXILES AND PIONEERS: A Study  in  Identities, T. E. Farley
A critical  study of Canada's two founding nationalities.
250  pp.    lllustr.  cover    1976
 HUGH AND  ION: An  Unfinished Narrative
Poem  by  Isabella Valancy Crawford, ad. Glenn  Clever
52 pp.    1977
ISBN  0-919594-77-8    paper 	$3.95

NOVELS

PRAIRIE SYMPHONY, Wilfrid   Eggleston

ISBN  0-919594-45-X     paper
0-919594-73-5    cloth
 $14.95
$19.95
 A novel about  a  boy's maturation during the Depression.
297 pp.    Illustr.  cover 	1978

SEATED  WITH THE MIGHTY: A Biography  of
Sir Gilbert Parker, John C. Adams
400 pp. includes  photographs
 ISBN  0-919594-99-9     cloth
0-88887-000-0   paper
 $15.95
$10.95

paper cloth

POETRY
 $14.95
$19.95
 HIGH PLAINS, Wilfrid Eggleston
A novel about  pioneer days in the Palliser
Triangle of Alberta.
150  pp.    Illustr.  cover    1975


A VISITING  DISTANCE, Patrick  Anderson
100 pp.    Illustr.  cover 	(2nd  ed.) 	1976
ISBN  0-919594-48-4    paper 	$5.95

MILK STONE, Pat  Lowther
The  voice of mother,  lover, earth  goddess;
prophetic  and  tactually  female.
99 pp.    Illustr.  cover    1974
 ISBN  919594-41-7     paper
919549-49-2    cloth

PROSE

WOMEN  IN CANADIAN  LITERATURE, ad.  M. G. Hesse
An anthology  of selections.
287  pp.    Illustr.  cover    1977
 $9.95
$14.95

ISBN  0-919594-28-X     paper 	$4.95
 ISBN  0-919594-58-1    paper 	$9.95


JOURNAL OF CANADIAN POETRY,Vol. 1,No. 1
By arrangement  with  the  editors,  Borealis offers  this  first  volume  of  a  new  journal devoted  to scholarly  research  and  criticism  of the poetry of Canada-from its origins to the present. Subscriptions  $7.50 one year (2 issues), $14.00 two years (4 issues).
Submissions  welcome
JOURNAL OF CANADIAN POETRY
P.O. Box 5147, Stn. F, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K2C 3H4

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



sents  the   beginning of  a  new,  but   not entirely   unanticipated,  phase   of  Oates' career.   In  such  stories  as  "Stalking"  (in Marriages  and  Infidelities),  Oates  has utilized  the allegorical mode  before; and allegory  can  never  be  totally  foreign   to the   "mystic"  or   "visionary"   conscious­ ness. Indeed, such  a  mode  must  have  its obvious   attractions  for   a   "sanctifying" artist  who  foresees  the  birth  of  "a   new morality"   in   the   American   "wonder­ land." Still, a  writer of historical  fiction,
even   contemporary  spiritual  history,   is
 ON THE VERGE

***   JEREMY    ADAMSON,   Lawren  S.   Harris.
Art   Gallery of  Ontario.  Exhibition catalogues
-conscious   of   their  role   as   guides  to   the
actual  paintings,  seldom  reproduce  paintings in  colour; they  are  more  valuable as  texts  (and sometimes  just  as  memorabilia)  than as  coffee table  ornaments. Adamson's catalogue contains several  colour  prints, and  a fine  text,  which explores theosophy and  poetry as well as travel and  composition. It will  particularly aid  those who   seek   connections between literature  and painting and  glimpses of painting's role in Canadian intellectual history.

best   served   by   a   realistic    prose   fore­ ground. The  struggles  of Clara  Walpole,  Jules  Wendall, and  Jesse Harte  Pedersen Vogel  to  attain  transcendent  visions  be­ come    truly    meaningful    only    through Oates'   depiction   of  the  spiritual waste­ lands  in which  they live  (migrant worker camps,  the  urban   decay  of  Detroit, the "inhuman landscapes" of  New  York  and Michigan and  the  medical  profession  it­ self) . In  contrast,  the  allegorical  mode inevitably   leads   to   a   completely "un­ real" setting  which  cannot be  reconciled  with   a precise documentation of our contemporary spiritual  decay.  Through­ out   her   career    up   to   "the   Fernandes parables," Oates has  consistently at­ tempted "to  re-create" and  "to  sanctify" "a   world"   by  "honoring  the  complexi­  ties" of "the real  world"; and  the  result­ ing  wedding  of  "mysticism" and   "real­ ism"  has  been  a  vital  ingredient in  her artistic  power.


NOTE

1 Tanner  is  quite  correct  in   observing,  for instance, that  for  all  his surface playfulness, Donald Barthelme is "distinctly not  at  home in  the  trash  age." One  could  argue that  the desperate tone  of a Burroughs comes  from  a last-ditch protest against  the  dissolution of all  values,   rather than from   the  surrender of a locked-in ego  to entropy.

JAMES R.  GILES
 W.N.
**  CAROLE  HARMON,   ed.  Great   Days  in  the Rockies:  The  Photographs of  Byron   Harmon I 906-1934. Oxford,  $14.95· Canada  and   the
art  of  photography  came  of  age  at   about the
same  time, though perhaps not  the same  rate. Harmon's skill   both   with   the   mountains and the   camera  is  lovingly    recorded  here.   What also  emerges  from  the  pictures is a sense  of the cameraderie and  the  warm  humour of  the mountain  expeditions. There  is   a   degree  to which     loneliness    is   a    later    fabrication   of authors and  critics.
W.N.
**   KENNETH   MACKINNON,  ed.   The  Marco Polo   Papers   I:  Atlantic  Provinces Literature Colloquium Papers.  Atlantic Canada Institute,
$4-75·  Readers  who   found  Canadian   Litera­ ture's  Maritime  issue   (No. 68-69)   appealing will  find  further commentary in  this collection. In   part   it  is  a  call   to  literary  arms   (Douglas Lochhead's  outline   of   projects in   need    of executors),  and   in   part  a  critical   anthology. Particularly   striking  are   Gwendolyn   Davies' article on  women  in  early  periodical literature and     four     exploratory    papers   on    Acadian writing.
W.N.
**  ROBERT  H.    HANDY,  A   History   of   the Churches  in   the   United  States  and   Canada. Oxford, $22.95. There is  much   straight  infor­ mation in  this  book:  names, dates,  boundary lines,  and   disputes, more   on  the  U.S.A. than  on   Canada.  What  Handy  tells   is  a   political story   of  Christian institutional  expansion  and  multiplication; but   it  is  political  without  the cultural politics.  If  anything it  underestimates the  importance of  Catholicism in  early  Quebec and   it  neglects to  make  clear   the  subtleties of distinctions among  the  various orders; the  cul­  tural   weight   of  the  Ryerson-Strachan disputes

147

ON THE  VERGE



is comparably reduced  to an  acknowledgement of  dispute; and   the  book  stops  with  Christian­ ity: scarce   mention of  Judaism,  and   no  men­ tion   at all  of  the   Sikh  temples  and   Muslim mosques that   more  recently have  become part  of  the  landscape.  But within its  limits, it is an  authoritative document of one strand of empire.

W.N.

***   CLAUDE LEVI-STRAUss,  Myth and  Mean­
ing.  Univ.  of   Toronto  Press,   $7.50;  paper
$2.95. These five  radio talks-the  1977  Mas­ sey lectures-derive from  questions about our perceptions of mythology: rejecting the  simple dichotomy that distinguishes it from  "science," rejecting  the   habit of   dismissing  the   "primi­ tive," and   positing connections  between myth  and   music   as   habits of  sound,  and  between closed  mythological and  open  historical systems of sense.  Readers of Frye's Spiritus Mundi and  of  West   Coast Trickster   fables   wi11 alike   be illuminated by this articulate thinker.
W.N.

***   PIF.RRE   SAVARD,  Melanges  d'histoire  du Canada  franrais  offerts  au   professeur   Marcel Trudel. L'Universite d'Ottawa,  n.p. The festschrift is an  opportunity both  for  honouring a   distinguished  person    and   for   contributing further  to   that  person's field   of  inquiry.  Sa­ vard,  himself    a   distinguished  historian,   has brought   together  a   fine   set   of   glimpses   of colonial French Canada:  glimpses of economic structure,    the     military     establishment,   the Church's  role   in  finance,   the   history  of  the word    "north," and   other   special  subjects.  A bibliography  of  Trudel's  work   and   essays   on historiography are  further  meritorious features.
 ***   s.   w.    JACKli:IAN,   ed.   and   intro.,    The Journal   of     William  Sturgis.  Sono  Nis,   n.p. Sturgis was one of the  Boston  captains whose fortunes lay  in  the  coats  of  the  sea  otter herds off   British   Columbia. This  logbook   narrative of  the   early  nineteenth  century  valuably  re­ cords   the  graphic -and unusually  particular
-observations of  one   voyage.   Relations  with the  Indians were  by  no  means consistent. Jackman's commentary supplies a context for interpreting them,  and  Sturgis' own  glossary  of Indian  vocabulary shows  a  more   than  casual contact with  a civilization not  his own.

W.N.





**   JANICE L.  MURRAY,  ed. Canadian Cultural Nationalism. Proceedings of  the  4th   Lester  B. Pearson   Conference   on   the    Canada-United States Relationship. New York  University  Press and   Macmillan of  Canada, $4.95. Conference proceedings  sometimes  communicate   on   the page  all  that was  important about a gathering of  minds;  sometimes they   miss  it   altogether, for  they  do  not  come   to  terms  with   the  kinds of exchanges and  reflections that  matter most. This  compilation attempts  to   perform  both tasks,  printing some  informational  background papers  (Cook, Rolland,  and   Swanson)  aimed at  an  American audience, and some  later  im­ pressions  of  participants. No  cultural  national­ ist  should  be  unaware  of  the  historical  data  Cook  provides,  or  of his  cautionary  comments. Nor  should   he  be  unaware of  the  implications of  Denis  Smith's  magnificent title:   "Choosing Our Distance."

W.N. 	w.N.
