$1.25  per copy


CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·38


Autumn, 1968



EXPLORERS JIND POETS



Articles
BY V. G.  HOPWOOD, ROY  DANffiLLS, MAURICE HODGSON, A.   J. M.  SMITH, LAWRENCE M.  JONES,  NORMAN NEWTON


Reviews

BY DESMOND PACEY, LOUIS DUDEK,  HALLVARD DAHLm,
MEREDITH THOMPSON, PHYLLIS GROSSKURTH, RONALD  SUTHERLAND, GEORGE  WOODCOCK, HELEN SONTHOFF, DONALD  STEPHENS,
JANE FREDEMAN, EDWARD  MCCOURT, S. E. READ

Opinion

BY LLOYD  W. BROWN




A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW








THE  WORLD IN MICROCOSM





IT  wouLD BE   HARD  to  think  of a  Royal  Commission  more conscious of the  historic nature  of its task than  that  on  Bilingualism  and  Bicul­
turalism,  which  began  its work in  1963 and  only four  years afterwards,  at  the end of rg67, started  to publish, volume by volume, its massive report.  So aware were the Commissioners of the serious division of attitudes  between  English and French  Canadians that  in  rg65, before they were half way through  their massive task of investigation and research, they published a preliminary  report which undoubtedly   played  a  great  part  in  initiating  the  profound  changes  that  have taken  place in the  English Canadian viewpoint during  the  past two years.
Book One-now  issued -of   the  definitive  Report  is concerned   with  the
"official languages",  and  with the need for the French-speaking  Canadian, even where he is in a small minority, to be able to carry on official business and  gain education  and   justice-as  the  English  Canadian can  do  in  Quebec -in his own language.  This,  the Commissioners believe, will necessitate the extension  of official bilingualism  to Ontario and  New Brunswick as bilingual  provinces,  and to the creation of bilingual districts in other provinces, wherever a tenth of the population  in any appreciable  area is French-speaking.  Undoubtedly these meas­ ures, which may  well be law by the time these words appear,  will not  only play their  part  in  easing  tensions  between  the  two  principal  "nations" in  Canada; they will also help, by encouraging  local nuclei of French  culture,  to  enrich  the lives we all live.
It seems an inconsistency that  only one out of ten Commissioners should  have suggested that  similar  facilities be extended  to other  minorities  in  Canada. The
demand  of this Commissioner,  J. B. Rudnyckyj,  is not  that  any  other  language
should  be nationally  equal  to  French  and  English,  but  that  where  a  minority


3

EDITORIAL



reaches  ro%-as  Ukrainian,  German  and  Italian  minorities do in some regions of Canada-their language should be regionally  official. No reason is given why the other  Commissioners did not accept this demand, which on the surface seems in the spirit of their general approach.  The  Commission, after  all, rather  proudly claims  that  Canada,  unlike America,  has never  accepted  the  philosophy of the "melting  pot".  "With  its wealth of human,  linguistic, and  cultural  resources," it asserts, "Canada reflects the  world in  microcosm."  Wonderful,  but,  if so, why not give these microcosmic fragments  of the world formed  by our lesser cultures a reasonable  degree of support,  at least equal  to that  proposed  for  English and French  Canadians   where they are  minorities? It  might  bring  considerable  divi­ dends.  It  is true  that  the less widely spoken languages  have  produced-if  one can  judge from such translations  as exist -no literatures  in Canada  comparable  to those of the French  and  English, but  the recognition  that  such  languages  are not  mere baggage to be shed in the rush for  assimilation  might  have  an  unpre­ dictably stimulating  effect.
However, the consideration of arts and letters, and  of the mass media, belongs
to later volumes of the Commission's Report,  which apparently  will not be avail­ able for some  months  ahead,  and  which  we shall  anticipate   with  the  greatest interest, among other reasons because the Commissioners include  men well aware of the life of the arts and  the intellect, not only in both  the  Canadas, but  in all of them.
























4



DAVID  THOMPSON

Mapmaker and Mythmaker


V. G. Hopwood




DAVID THOMPSON as a  w.-iter has  not  yet 'eceived  the attention  he deserves. However,  since narrative  style cannot  be separated  from
the story told, it is appropriate to begin with a summary  of his life and  achieve­
ments. He  was born  in London  of Welsh parents in I no and  came  to what  is
now Canada in  I 784, where he lived until his death in I 857. Between the ages of fourteen  and  eighty, he worked as trader, surveyor, explorer, mapmaker, natural­  ist, and  writer,  first for  the  Hudson's  Bay Company,  then  for  the  North  West Company,  and  later  for  various British and  Canadian  governmental  bodies. In more  than  six decades  he travelled over 8o,ooo  miles  by foot, canoe, and  horse, taking observations and  recording events and natural and social phenomena  in his journals  or  day  books. More  than  5o,ooo  of these  miles were  covered in  his twenty-eight  years in western  and  northern  North America. The  remainder  were in  eastern  Canada and  the  United  States during  the second  half of his life.
Thompson's surveys take in a wide area on both sides of the present Canadian­
American  boundary  from  Montreal  to the Pacific. His main  discoveries include the  Reindeer  Lake  and  Black River route to Lake Athabasca,  the upper  regions of the  Missouri, the source  of the  Mississippi, the Howse and  Athabasca  Passes through  the Rockies, the upper Columbia River and its sources and branches, Kootenay  River and Lake, and much of the interior of southern  British Columbia and  the  American   Northwest.  In  addition  he surveyed  and  drew  most of the maps  establishing  the  boundary   between  Canada   and  the  United  States  from Montreal  to the Lake of the  Woods. He mapped  the Muskoka  country  between the  Ottawa River  and  Lake  Huron,  and  laid  out  the  Eastern  Townships  in southeastern  Quebec.  In his last years as a surveyor he made hydrographic charts of the St. Lawrence  River  from Cornwall  to Three  Rivers.
The  late J. B. Tyrrell,  himself an outstanding  geographer,  explorer,  and  his-


5

DAVID THOMPSON



torian,  intimately   familiar  with  Thompson's  work  and  the  area  he  surveyed, called him "the  greatest practical land geographer  who ever lived." As a layman, I  can  only  remark  that  I  do not  know of any  other  land  explorer  whose work surpasses  Thompson's in  years of  experience,  extent  of  territory  explored  and mapped,   consistent  accuracy  up  to  the  limits  of  the  instruments  and  methods available,  perception  and  recording of significant natural  and  human  detail, and ability to generalize. Canada  and the world have many great land  explorers, but the man I think of as Thompson's  peer is Captain James Cook, the sea geographer.
Without   claiming  expertise, I  can  supplement   Tyrrell's  estimate  from  maps and  documents  not available to him. A series of maps drawn  by Thompson, but not credited  to him, were the source for seventy-five years of much  new informa­ tion about  western  North  America. These include  those published by  Alexander Mackenzie in  I8oi, two maps drawn  for the North  West Company  in  I8I3-I4, a map  published  by the same in  I 816, a set of two maps of the West in general and  the Oregon  country in particular  drawn  in  I 826,  and  another  similar more perfect set drawn in 1843.
The  value of Thompson's  journals for science and  history has been gradually
dawning  on modern  scholars. John  Warkentin  has found  in Thompson's papers what  he believes to be the first general description  of the geological structure of the Canadian West. Allan H. Smith, in the Northwestern  United  States, has used Thompson's maps  and  journals to help find old  Indian  camp  sites. The Smith­ sonian  Institution   has made  use of a small  part  of Thompson's  daily  weather notes. But  these instances  are  only placer  pockets on  the  edges of  a  great  un­ worked lode.
Late  in life, about  1845, Thompson  finally settled  down  to write the book he had long intended,  the story of his travels in the West. When ill health  and  near blindness made  further  writing impossible at the age of eighty, it was unfinished. Tyrrell  was responsible for the editing and  publishing  of the manuscript  by the Champlain Society in 19I5,  under  the title, David Thompson's Narrative  of his Explorations  in  Western  America,  I784-1812. Since Thompson  always referred to his book as his Travels, I have chosen to follow his own usage. Incomplete, and in places still almost in note form, Thompson's Travels  belongs among the world classics of  travel  writing, and  is one of the  finest works in  Canadian literature. Undoubtedly much of its interest springs from its content  of adventure  and scien­ tific achievement.  However, and this is the main  point of this paper, Thompson's Travels  has unique  qualities of style and  imagination, ranging  from  precision of word  choice  to sensitivity to myth, which  lift  it  to literary  greatness.

6

DAVID THOMPSON



The  primary feature of Thompson's prose is directness; it is a  practical style, concerned   in  the  first  place  with  the  business  of  explaining the  ways  of  life, natural and  human, in the Canadian wilderness, for example the country around Hudson Bay:  "Of  all furrs  the furr  of the hare  is the warmest, we place pieces of it in  our  mittens, the skin  is too thin  for any  other  purpose." Behind  this intense practicality lies  a  tremendous power  for  exact  scientific  observation, which  for all its bareness  still conveys a sense of variety  and  warmth, as in his description of the species of ptarmigan or white  grouse:
The  willow Grouse  has a  red stripe  round  the  upper  eyelid, is a finer  bird  than the rock grouse, and one fifth larger:  they are  both well feathered  to the very toe nails; all  their  feathers  are  double,  lie close on  each  other,  two in  one quill, or socket, and  appear  as one feather; the  under  side of the  foot, have  hard,  rough, elastic feathers  like bristles.

From   the  description of  the  animal, Thompson moves,  characteristically, to  its habits  and  then  to its relations to men. In the passage which follows, note the concreteness, the sense of human activity,  and  Thompson's keen awareness of environment, particularly of  weather:

After  the  bitter  cold  of December  and  January  is passed, they  congregate  in large flocks. Each  man  now bags from thirty to forty grouse per day, but as this is a  Load  too  heavy  to  hunt  with,  part  is buried  in  the  Snow  and  only  taken  up when going to the  Tent.... we walk and  pick up the  bird,  then  get  the  powder in, and  walk again, at  length  [get in]  the shot, and  the gun is loaded;  it is need­ less to say, exposed to such bitter cold, with no shelter, we cannot  fire many shots in a short day, gloves are found  to be worse than  useless.

Thompson then  explains  how, later  in the winter, mainly  in March, the ptarmi­ gan  are  netted. He  outlines  the  process so clearly  that  a reader  should  be able  to build  and  work  a net  himself,  ending  with  a stark  description of how  the  birds are taken  and  killed and  a sharply  practical explanation:
... the  net  falls, we directly  run  and  throw  ourselves on  the  net,  as  the  strong efforts of forty or fifty of these active birds might make an opening in the net. We have now to take the  neck of each grouse between our  teeth, and  crack  the  neck bone, without   breaking  the  skin, and  drawing  blood,  which  if  done,  the  foxes destroy  the  parts  of the  net on  which  is blood and  around  it,  which  sometimes happens  to our  vexation, and  we have to mend the net.

Perhaps  the   most  obvious   feature of  Thompson's  diction   is  its  numerical, measured   exactness.   Indeed, the  large  proportion of  mathematical material in Thompson's writing may  have  prevented many  readers  from  seeing  the  intense

7

DAVID THOMPSON



imagination  at work within his almost infinite factuality. Thompson's mind  must have been one of the most complex organic computers that ever existed. I am convinced  that  between the ages of twenty  and  eighty it counted  and  registered almost  every step he took and  its direction,  but  without  ever missing the quali­ tative  detail  of what  was around  him. Other  sources of Thompson's vocabulary are  the Bible, seventeenth  and  eighteenth  century  prose, the literature of science and  natural  history, the language  of the fur  trade,  and  the translated  concepts of the Indians.
In  the passages quoted there is an almost complete lack of metaphor.  But as Thompson  moved  towards the conclusion of the description  of the white grouse, he expresses what  is always just below the surface,  his thoughtfulness  about  the beauty of the earth:
... no dove is more meek than  the white grouse. I have often taken them from under the net, and provoked them all I could without injuring  them, but all was submissive meekness, rough beings as we were, sometimes of an evening we could not help enquiring why such an angelic bird should be doomed to be the suffering prey of every carnivorous animal, the ways of Providence are unknown to us.

Meek  as a dove,  angelic-ordinary words and  comparisons,  in most writers trite-transformed  in  the  context  of  Thompson's concreteness  into  new  life. And expressive, moreover, of Thompson's  character, the scientist wondering  and finding  out  if ptarmigan  could be provoked,  yet marvelling  and  sympathetic  at the  same  time. Thompson,  a man  whom  nothing  could  make  idle, whose  curi­ osity was insatiable,  who wintering  on  Reindeer  Lake  pounded  frozen  mercury to discover its physical properties, and, in the summer, observed, through a pocket microscope, the anatomy of the mosquitoes which were biting  him.



tOMPSON's PROSE exemplifies something  of the ideals of Wordsworth's   Preface:  the  compatibility  of science  and  poetry,  the  expressive power of common  speech, and  the power of nature  as a teacher.  Like the naive Wordsworth,  the semi-literate David Thompson  is a misconception,  although Thompson  had  little formal  education.  There  is evidence in  his notebooks and Travels of extensive reading  in science, philosophy, travel,  and  literature,  and of awareness  of  the scientific concepts of his time. The  deep  religious feeling  that lies behind  his description of the dove, combined  with much  immediate observa­ tion  and  his knowledge of Indian  thought,  allowed him to stand  outside and  be critical  of  contemporary  concepts and  jargon.  Describing  the  migration  of  the

8

DAVID THOMPSON



reindeer, Thompson records  the scornful  words of the  Indians about  the  idea  of instinct; then  he himself  goes on  to say:  "I have sometimes  thought Instinct, to be a word  invented by the learned  to cover their ignorance of the ways and  doings of  animals for  their  self  preservation, it is a learned  word  and  shuts  up  all  the reasoning powers."
Sometimes, deep  Christian though  he is, Thompson's empathy with  the Indian
mind  makes  him  write  almost  as though  he  were  thinking in  Indian terms,  al­
though  notes  of the  European scientific and  religious observer  slip in:

The  Manito  of the geese, ducks, &c. has given his orders,  they collect, and  form flocks of, from  40 to 6o, or more;  and  seem to have leaders. The  Manito  of the equatic  fowl has now given his orders for  their  departure to milder  climates, his prescience sees the setting in of winter, and the freezing of the  ponds. The  leaders of flock have now a deep  note. The  order is given, and flock after  flock, in  inum­ erable numbers, rise.I

The  above passage brings us close to one more source of stylistic strength in Thompson, his  ability   to  catch   the  characteristic speech   and   turn of  mind  of others.  And  often  the figures of speech  he takes from  others  are  anything but  the commonplaces which  Thompson tended  to use himself.
... at length the rain ceased, I was standing  at the door watching  the  breaking up of the  clouds, when  of a sudden  the  Indians  gave a  loud  shout,  and  called  out "Oh, there is the mark of life, we shall yet live," on looking to the eastward  there was one of  the  widest and  most splendid  Rainbows  I  ever  beheld;  and  joy was now in every face.

Thompson speaks of the difficulties of learning  the real thoughts of the Indians, a  problem   fully  recognized   by  modern  anthropologists, since  as Thompson  says the Indians answer  direct  questions  in the manner "best  adapted to avoid other questions,   and   please  the  enquirer." What   Thompson has  to  tell  about   Indian beliefs  and  customs  is  almost  uniquely  valuable,  in  part  because  of  his decades of experience with  them,  again  because  he knew them  in many  cases before they had  had  any significant contact with  white  men, and  also because  he developed  a comparative  method  of  studying  their  customs,  based  on  experience  with  the many  tribes which  he knew  and  never lumped  together  as Indians, distinguishing

I The  quotations   are  transcribed   directly  from  Thompson's   manuscript.  Tyrrell's editing is usually quite  accurate. In  this passage, however, his reading  was confused by the attempts  of Charles  Lindsey to improve  the mechanics  of Thompson's style. The  mechanical  irregularities  of Thompson's  writing, obvious enough  in  the  quota­ tions, have probably contributed to the slowness of his recognition  as a writer.


9

DAVID THOMPSON



them  as carefully  as he did  the species of the  natural world.  In  addition he had the  testimony  of his half-Indian wife, whom  he taught to read  and  write  English. But  above  all  because  he shared  their  lives and  spoke  their  languages.  Possibly some of the  mechanical problems  of Thompson's style are  the  price  that  we have to  pay  for  the  fact  that  he  began  to learn  Indian  languages at  the  age of  four­ teen,  and   could   learn   them,  because  his  mind   was  not  encumbered  with   the linguistic  fallacies  of classical grammar twisted  to fit English.
My knowledge has been gained when living and  travelling  with  them in  times of distress and  danger  in  their  prayers  to invisible  powers.... Mter  a  weary  day's march  we sat  by a log fire, the  bright  Moon,  with  thousands  of sparkling  stars, passing before us, we could not help enquiring  who lived in those bright mansions; for  I frequently  conversed with them as one of themselves.

Thompson then   goes on,  in  a  way  which   touches  a  problematic side  of  his character, one  which  has raised  questions  among hostile  historians such  as A. S. Morton and  Richard Glover.  "A  Missionary  has  never  been  among them,  and my  knowledge of their  language has  not  enabled me  to do  more  than  teach  the unity   of  God,   and a  future state of  rewards and   punishments." The ego  of Thompson's puritanism, combined  with  the  conceit  that  he could  believe he had achieved  so much,  is here  apparent. Judged as a man  of lesser achievements, it is easy  to  see  that   Thompson can  be  regarded as  a  monster   of self-righteousness. Almost  the  same   judgment can  easily  and  has  been  given  against   Milton. But how  is it  possible  to measure  such  ego  against Thompson's determination, from the  time  he  was  twenty,  to bring  the  whole  of  unknown Northwestern America within  the  range  of human  knowledge,  and  in fact  to succeed?
The cells of Thompson's writing  are  short  pithy  pages  of description or  anec­
dote.  This characteristic makes  it  hard  to illustrate his writing  in  sentences  and explains my  use  of  rather  long  quotations. To  confirm   this  point  of  anecdotal units,  to remind  you that  Thompson is important as a surveyor  in eastern  as well as western  Canada, and  to indicate that  Thompson's gift of characterization  in­ cluded  whites  as well as Indians, I give  a  condensed version  of an  unpublished account of how fever struck  down the Canadian-American boundary survey party  in  the  swamps of  Lake  Erie  in  181g. Thompson had  proposed  that  he  and  the chief  American surveyor  each  make  a quick  survey  of  the  marshes  of  his own side of the  lake:

I  had  scarcely  uttered  the  words when  General  Porter  sprang  up, saying, "The man  that  will dare  to do it is dead,  dead."  Captain Douglass very gallantly  said, "It  is the cause of science; I will undertake  to row round  the marshes on the south


10

DAVID THOMPSON



side if you will do the same on the north  side." General  Porter  said "Gentlemen you may do as you please, but I would not give a cent for your lives."

Thompson proceeds  to  tell how  both  parties  caught  the fever.

With a boat's crew of six hearty men I was often reduced  to two rowers. The  men would fall to the  bottom  of the boat as if thrown down.

Then Thompson's men,  after  taking  refuge  from  the  swamps  on  an  island  off­
shore,  were  rescued  and  taken  on board  an American steamer.

I requested  some acid  liquor,  but  the sickness had  been so great  that  they  had expended  everything.  They  offered me water,  I refused it, and  my feverish mind looked with  contempt  on Lake  Erie as not sufficient to allay  my burning  thirst. The  surgeons came and  enquired  [of my attendant] if I were not dead. He said, "No."  "Well,"  they replied, "He  must die today" This  was close to my bed. The next morning  they came and  enquired, "Is  he not dead  yet?" The  answer was no. They  said, "Let  us go and  see him."  They  found  me without  any  fever  but  re­ duced  to a mere skeleton.

This  is  an  example of  Thompson the  recorder   of  history  at  the  moment of happening: exact, detailed and  immediate, filled with  real people, important as a source,  but  perhaps even  more  important for  the  near  fable  form  in  which  he catches  the  events,  a  form  which  lifts  them  to  legend.  Let  me  give  another  in­ stance  from  unpublished Thompsoniana, this  time  the  story  of  the  migration of French-Canadians from   the  Illinois  River  to  settle  west  of  the  Rockies  in  the North-western United States  before either  Lewis and  Clark  or Thompson entered the  area,  a story  which  I believe no other  writer  has ever set  down,  an  unknown chapter  in  the  history  of  Canadians, which  will  eventually  be  fitted  into  the foundation literature of both  the Canadian and  American West:

At first they were about  350 men, but their precarious way of life, sometimes with Indians  in  their  wars, soon  reduced  them,  and  at  the  cession of the  country  by Spain  they were only full 150 men. The  United  States insisted on their  becoming settlers  on  the  lands  or  retiring  elsewhere. They  chose  the  latter,  took  up  their rifles; and  with  their  few women  crossed the  Missouri  River  and  hunted  on  its west bank, continually  advancing  towards the mountains,  where  I first met  them.
The  same fate still attended  them, as all the natives of these fine countries  are too often in a state of petty warfare.  Some of these men were camping  with them, and  as the Indians  acknowledged  no neutrals, they had  to fight for the party  with whom  they  were  found; as  the  Indians  dreaded  them  as good  marksmen,  they were aimed  at in battle.  When  I first became acquainted  with  them in I Bog, they were then  reduced  to twenty-five men.


II

DAVID THOMPSON



Everywhere  the  Indians,  both  friends  and  enemies,  spoke of  them  as a  brave race of men, whose conduct  was always prudent  and  manly. Even  these few men were reduced to only two, Michel Bordeaux and Augustin Kinville, two of my companions,  brave and faithful,  on whose word for life or death  I could depend. In  the  summer  of  1812 they  were with  the  Salish  Indians,   when  a  battle  was fought  with the  Piegans, who were defeated.  Yet these two brave men were killed, and  thus ended  the last of these men, few of whom died  a natural  death.

This  passage  provides  a natural transition to one of the  main  statements of this article,  that  David  Thompson's Travels   express  and  are  unified  by  a statement of the  quality  of human life in societies where  there  is no vested  authority. There are  other   unifying   threads  in  the  Travels:  the  journeys  of  exploration, the  re­ curring characters, and  above  all  the  character of  the  narrator himself.  I  have however  dealt  briefly  with  these  matters  elsewhere,  and  I think  they  should be immediately apparent to the  thoughtful reader. To  sharpen our  perception of the depth   of  Thompson's understanding of  precivilized  man, I  turn now  to  R.  M. Ballantyne's Hudson's Bay:  a book which  Thompson read  while  writing  his own and  on which  he commented with acerbity.  Here  is an anecdote which  Ballantyne says was told him by another  trader:

Wisagun,  peeping in between the chinks of the  tent  to see what  the women were doing, saw his wife engaged in cutting  up one of her own children,  preparatory  to cooking it. In  a transport  of passion, the Indian  rushed  forward  and  stabbed  her, and  also the  other  woman;  and  then  fearing  the  wrath  of the other  Indians,  he fled to the woods.... During  the  night  Wisagun  and  Natappe  returned  stealthily to the  tent,  and,  under  cover of the darkness, murdered  the  whole party  as they lay  asleep.... the  horrible  deed  [Wisagun]   excused  by saying  that  most  of  his relations  had  died  before he ate them.

The  Victorian view of the savage  as utterly  depraved is clearly  behind  this fur trader's horror  story. The  attitude involved is as misleading as that  behind  the eighteenth-century idea  of  the  noble  savage.  Let  us take  a  comparable account from  Thompson, noting  how he avoids both  these  European  misconceptions, and tells his story  without glossing over  anything, yet with  sympathy and  inside  per­ ception  of the exact  relevant  social relationships. His anecdote from  the beginning involves  real individuals in  a particular group:

One morning  a young man of about twenty two years of age on getting  up, said he felt a strong  inclination  to eat his Sister; as he was a steady young man and  a promising  hunter,   no notice  was taken  of  this  expression;  the  next  morning  he said the  same and  repeated  the same several  times in  a day for  a few days. His


12

DAVID THOMPSON



Parents   attempted to  reason  him  out  of this  horrid  inclination; he  was silent  and gave  them  no answer; his Sister  and  her  Husband became  alarmed, left  the  place, and  went  to  another Camp, he  became  aware  of it; and  then  said  he  must  have human flesh to eat,  and  would  have  it; in other  respects,  his behaviour was  cool, calm  and  quiet.   His  father and  relations  were  much  grieved; argument had   no effect  on him,  and  he made  them  no answer  to their  questions. The Camp became alarmed for  it was doubtful who  would  be his victim.

Then Thompson precisely  describes the  manner in  which this  group dealt with an individual threatening their  community.

His  Father called  the  Men  to a Council, where  the  state  of the  young  man  was discussed,  and  tl1eir decision  was,  that  an  evil  Spirit  had  entered into  him,  and was in full  possession of him  to make  him  become a Man  Eater (a  Weetego) The father was  found   fault   with  for  not  having   called  to  his  assistance   a  Medicine Man, who  by sweating  and  his Songs to the tambour and  rattle might  have  driven away  the  evil spirit,  before  it  was too late.  Sentence  of death was  passed  on  him, which  was  to  be done  by his  Father. The  young  man  was  called,  and  told  to  sit down  in  the  middle, there  was no fire, which  he did,  he was then  informed of the resolution taken, to  which  he  said  "I am  willing  to  die"; The  unhappy Father arose,  and   placing a  cord  about   his  neck  strangled   him,  to  which   he  was  quite passive ...

Finally there is the  explanation of why  the  execution was  carried out  in  the  way decided, indicating on  Thompson's part, a deep  understanding of primitive social relations.

It may  be thought the  Council acted  a cruel  part  in ordering the  father to  put his Son  to death, when  they  could  have  ordered it by the  hands  of another person. This  was done,  to prevent the  law  of retaliation; which  had  it  been  done  by  the hands  of  any  other  person,  might  have  been  made  a  pretext of  revenge  by those who  were  not  the  friends  of the  person  who  put  him  to death.




T.IOMPSON'S PROFOUND UNDERSTANDING of such an incident reveals the  essentially melodramatic  and  shallow view  of  Ballantyne, reflecting a racist corruption  element in  the  Victorian outlook. Ballantyne believed that the British  were  really  doing non-Europeans a favour by  bringing them missionaries, policemen, trade, and  European concepts of property and  propriety, even  though the  process  involved killing  a  substantial proportion of  the  beneficiaries and   des-

DAVID THOMPSON



troying  their  society. His views would  now matter little,  had  his books not  played a  part   in  producing a  recent  fictional  variant of  his  outlook.   The relation   of Ballantyne's Coral  Island  to William  Golding's Lord  of the  Flies, is well known, although most  commentators emphasize   the  differences.  Actually  it  is far  more important to  realize  that  both  authors assume  the  same  pseudomyth: that  the heart of  man   is  desperately   wicked  unless  saved  by  grace   and   upheld   by  the institutions of  civilization-civilization obviously  meaning the  church, the  law, the  police,  and  military  discipline.  The difference between  Ballantyne and Golding is  Ballantyne blaming  the  violence  of  his  heroes'  actions  on  the  ingratitude of their  victims,  and  Golding  blaming  the breakdown of modern civilization  on that non-existent abstraction, natural man,  found  in the heart of every schoolboy  and adult. These  are  two sides of  the  same  coin.  Heads, Queen Victoria; tails,  Bri­ tannia's trident, now beht.
Thompson, who  worked  with  Indians for  over  twenty-eight years, was  almost always  able  to achieve  his ends  by diplomacy, largely  because  he understood the operation of  the  law  of  tribe  and  family  blood  vengeance and  the  very  limited power  of the Indian chiefs. He  tells an amusing story illustrating the above  point.

The  Chiefs  that  are  acknowledged  as  such,  have  no  power  beyond  their  in­ fluence, which  would immediately  cease by any act  of authority  and  they  are  all careful  not to arrogate  any superiority over others.
When  out  on the  Plains one of these Chiefs had  rendered  me several services, for which  I  had  then  nothing  to pay him.  On  my return  to the  house, by  inter­ preter,  I sent him a fine scarlet coat trimmed  with orris lace, and  a  message that as I understood  he was going to war, I had sent him this coat as a  recompense for his services with some tobacco, but the interpreter, not thinking  this homely mes­ sage sufficiently pompous, on delivery of the  coat,  told  him  I  had  sent it to him as being a great  Chief and  to be his dress on  going to War  as  a Chief.  He was surprised  at  such a message; and  the  next day, by a young  man, sent it with  the message to the  Chief at  the next camp, who  not liking the  tenor  of the message, sent both to another  camp, and  thus it passed to the sixth  hand,  who being some­ thing of a humourist, sent it to a very old chief, who was  not expected  to live, he kept it, telling the messenger to thank the Trader for sending him such a fine coat to be buried in

Golding  and  Ballantyne are  chiefly aware of primitive dance as expressing  and arousing frenzy  and  leading  to war  and  murder. Thompson sees the  wide  range of  quality and  meaning in  Indian dances.  He  describes,  for  instance, a dance  of Nahathaway or Cree  women  to the  Manito of the marten for success in trapping. Their husbands and  brothers

DAVID THOMPSON



proposed they should dance to the Manito of the Martens, to this they willingly consented,  it  was  a  fine, calm,  moonlight  night,  the  young  men  came  with  the Rattle  and  Tambour, about  nine women formed  the  dance,  to which  they sung with  their  fine voices, and  lively they danced  hand  in hand  in a half circle for a long hour;  it is now many years ago, yet I remember  this gay hour.

The  summer ritual  of  the  Mandan Indians on  the  upper Missouri,  who  prac­ ticed  very rudimentary agriculture, is probably  an example of agricultural fertility rites in their  most  primitive form.  While  the  puritanical Thompson was shocked by  the  rites,  he  records  them  exactly  and  sees not only  the  ceremonies,  but  how individuals adjust their  own  ways to communal practice.

The  first day both sexes go about  within  and  without  the  Village,  but  mostly on the outside, as if in great  distress, seeking for persons they cannot  find, for a few hours, then sit down and  cry as if for sorrow, then retire  to their houses. The  next day  the  same  is repeated,  with  apparent   greater  distress  accompanied  with  low singing. The  third  day begins with both sexes crying (no tears)  and eagerly search­ ing for those they wish to find, but cannot;  at length tired with this folly; the sexes separate,  and  the  Men  sit  down  on  the  ground  in  one  line,  with  their  elbows resting on  their  knees, and  their  heads  resting on  their  hands  as in  sorrow;  the Women,  standing,  and  crying  heartily,  with  dry  eyes, form  a  line  opposite  the Men;  in a few minutes,  several Women advance  to the  Men, each of  them  takes the Man  she chooses by the hand, he rises and goes with her to where she pleases, and  they lie down together  and  thus until none remain, which finishes this abomi­ nable  ceremony.  No  woman  can  choose her  own husband;  but  the  women  who love their husbands lead away aged Men.

In  all  the  passages  I have  quoted, I think  the  value  for  natural and  human history  is  apparent. Yet  the  process  of  history  turning into  legend  is of  equal interest,  and  for literature, of prime importance. It can  be seen in some historians, for   instance,  Herodotus,  or  some  of  the  individual  contributors  to  Hakluyt's Voyages  and  the  ]esuit  Relations. Thompson's own  powers  in  this direction are intensified  by his prolonged inside understanding of the natives of North America, people   who  lacking   written  literature  and   codified  laws,  necessarily  relied  on verbal   tradition. Under such   conditions   the  telling  and   retelling  of  stories  em­ phasizes   the   mythic-poetic  powers  of  the   transmitted  story.  Thompson  retells Indian myths  with  an  immediate intuitive grasp  of  the  myth,  but  also  with  a conscious  sense  that   the  myths  themselves  are  in  the  process  of  formation. The  various  traditions that  Thompson repeats  about  the  coming  of  smallpox  among the  Natives  all  seem  to   catch   the  tremendous impact   of  the  disease  on  Indian ways. An old  Indian recalls  the  coming  of the disease:

DAVID THOMPSON



This  dreadful disease broke out  in our camp,  and  spread  from  one tent  to another as if the  Bad  Spirit  carried   it.  We  had  no  belief  that  one  Man  could  give  it  to another, any  more  than  a wounded  Man  could  give his wound  to another. We did not suffer  so much  as those  that  were  near  the  river,  into  which  they  rushed  and died.  We  had  only a little  brook,  about  one  third of  us died,  but  in  some  of  the other  camps,  there  were  tents  in  which  everyone  died.  When  at  length  it  left  us, and  we moved  about  to find  our  people,  it  was  no longer  with  the  song  and  the dance; but  with  tears, shrieks, and  howlings  of despair  for  those  who would  never return to us.
Commenting on   the   memory  of  the   Indians about  life before the  smallpox, Thompson says:
A strange Idea prevails  among  these  Natives,  and  also  of  all  the  Indians to  the Rocky  Mountains, though  unknown to each  other: that  when  they  were  numer­ ous, before  they  were  destroyed  by the Small  Pox  all  the  animals of  every  species were  also  very  numerous and  more  so in  comparison  of  the  number  of  natives than  at  present.

Here we  can  see how  the  coming of the  white man stimulated an  Indian myth of a golden age.
Thompson  includes a  number of  Cree   myths, including one  of  the  flooding and recreation of  the  world, involving the  demon Weesarkajauk, and  the  Otter, the  Beaver, and the  Muskrat, in which  the  Muskrat emerges as a totemic ancestor.

He  now  praised   the  Musk  Rat  and  promised   him  plenty  of  roots  to  eat,  with rushes  and  earth to make  himself a house;  the  Otter and  the  Beaver  he said were fools, and  lost themselves, and  he would find  the ground, if he went  straight down. Thus encouraged he dived,  and  came  up,  but  brought nothing; after  reposing,  he went  down  a  second  time,  and  staid  a  long  time,  on  coming   up  Weesarkejauk examined his fore  paws and  found  they  had  the  smell  of earth, and  showing  this to  the  Musk  Rat, promised  to  make  him  a  Wife,  who  should   give  him  a  great many   children, and   become  more  numerous than   any  other animal, and  telling him  to  have  a  strong  heart; and  go direct  down,  the  Musk  Rat  went  down  the third  time  and  staid  so long, that  Weesarkejauk feared  he was drowned. At length seeing some bubbles  come up, he put  down  his long arm  and  brought up the  Musk Rat, almost  dead,  but to his great  joy with  a piece  of earth between  his fore  paws and   breast,   this  he  seized,  and  in  a  short   time  extended it  to  a  little  island,  on which  they all reposed.

Thompson's telling of this and  other myths is admirable, and  comparison to other written versions  of  the  same  story,  indicate that it  is authentic. But  Thompson's insight into  such  traditions is deeper than recording and translating. This is shown in  his treatment of the  tradition that once  the  Beaver and Man divided the  world

DAVID THOMPSON



between  them,  the  Beaver  ruling  the water  and  Man  the land. The  story  reflects the  coming  of  the  white  man   and  the  pursuit   of  the  beaver  in  the  fur  trade. When  Thompson tells the story  as told to him  by an  old  Indian, we are  both  in the  presence  of history  and  of a myth  in the  hours  of its making.

About  two winters  ago, Weesaukejauk  showed  to our  brethren,  the  Nepissings and  Algonquins  the  secret  of  their  [the  beavers']  destruction; that  all  of them were  infatuated with  the  love of  the  Castorum  of their  own  species; and  more fond of it than  we are of fire water. We are  now killing the  Beaver without  any labor, we are  now rich, but shall soon be poor, for when  the Beaver are destroyed we have nothing  to depend  on to purchase what  we want  for our families, stran­ gers now overrun  our  country  with their  iron  traps, and  we, and  they  will soon be poor.
A. J. M.  Smith   properly says of this section  that  'it  has  a  patriarchal  simplicity and  dignity,  an  almost  Homeric freshness of vision, that  is unique  in  our  litera­ ture.'  One  of the reasons for this special quality  is the firmness with which Thomp­ son sees the  inner  dynamic of the  exploration of Canada by the fur  traders: the rapid  extermination of  the  beaver  and  the  thrust  onward   to  exploit  new  beaver
territories which  drove   the  fur  trade  ever  westward.  The  result  in  about   half  a century  was that  the  continent was explored  from sea to sea, and  the  beaver  was reduced  to an almost  lost species.
By  now,  largely   because   of  the  passages  from  Thompson  which   have  been exhibited, it should  be possible to place Thompson among  his peers. Thompson's Travels  belongs  among such  master  works  as Cook's  Voyages,  Darwin's Voyage of the  Beagle, Doughty's Travels  in  Arabia  Deserta, Bates's  Naturalist  on  the River  Amazons, and  Stefansson's The  Friendly  Arctic. This  is the  company of greatness  where  it  is ridiculous to  ask who  is greater or  less. Thompson  belongs among  them  as a geographer, a scientist,  an  observer  of nature and  people,  and a writer.  In  such  a group the only purpose  of comparison is to clarify  the distinc­ tive quality of  each  author. I  find  Thompson's Travels  closest in  special  quality to Darwin's Beagle. Part of the excitement of Darwin's book is to feel him  almost reaching the great  generalizations of the Origin of Species. The special excitement of Thompson is to be with  him  as mapmaker and  historian, feeling history  almost transformed  into   myth.   Thompson  is  the   mapmaker   of   the   Canadian  half­  continent. But  he  is  more  than   that; he  is the  foundation  mythmaker  of  the Canadian West.  He  is one of the  mapmakers of  the Canadian mind.












CANADIAN LITERATURE PUBLICATIONS


A CHOICE  OF CRITICS

Selections  from  Canadian Literature, edited  with  a criti­ cal   introduction  by  George   Woodcock.  Essays  on  the Canadian  literary   landscape and   on  individual  writers,  including  Margaret  Avison,  Earle   Birney,  Morley  Cal­  laghan,  Robertson  Davies,   A.   M.   Klein,  Hugh   Mac­
Lennan, Jay   Macpherson, E.   J. Pratt,  Gabrielle Roy,
A.  J.  M.   Smith,   Raymond  Souster,  Anne   Wilkinson.
Published   by  Oxford  University  Press  in  co-operation with  Canadian Literature. Cloth $5.00,  paper  $2.50.

CANADIAN LITERATURE I LITTERATURE CANADIENNE
Edited  by Inglis F. Bell and Susan  W. Port. A listing of Canadian creative   and   critical  writings in  English  and French  for   the   period    1959-1963.   Cloth  $5.50,   paper
$2.50.

Obtainable  from
PUBLICATIONS CENTRE, UNIVERSITY OF  BRITISH COLUMBIA
VANCOUVER 8, BRITISH COLUMBIA












18



THE LITERARY RELEVANCE OF ALEXANDER MACKENZIE

Roy Daniells


s,.ALEXANDER  MACKENZIE has been given a fo•mal  wel­
come into the confines of Canadian Literature  by Victor  Hopwood,  whose clear
and  summary  chapter  on  western explorers, in  the  Literary  History  of Canada
(I 965)  cannot  fail to stimulate  readers to further  thought and further  enquiry. Mackenzies'  two  great   journeys-from Lake  Athabasca   to  the  Arctic  and
from Fort  Forks to Bella Coola-were brought  to the attention  of the public by the  appearance in  180 I, in  London,  of a quarto  volume, with  dramatic  maps, entitled Voyages from Montreal on the  River  St. Laurence  through  the Continent of North  America to the  Frozen  and  Pacific Oceans  in the Years  1789  and  1793 with  a Preliminary Account  of the  Rise,  Progress, and  Present  State  of the  Fur Trade of that  Country. Mackenzie's name is on the title page but the preliminary account  of the fur  trade  was written, it is believed, by his cousin Roderick,  who loyally served under  him in the Athabasca  region.
The  invisible editor  of  the  Voyages, who  rewrote  Alexander's   journals  (and
may  have  rewritten   Roderick's  account)   was  William  Combe.  Combe   was  a highly skilled and  reputable   writer,  author  of the immensely  popular  stories of "Dr.  Syntax", and  he had  already  written  up the Voyages of John  Meares,  for publication  in I 790. The  easy assumption is that,  as we peruse the I 8o I quarto, we are really reading Combe,  working from rough journals kept by a semi-literate explorer. The  style of the book is lucid, cadenced  and  at times soberly eloquent. By great  good luck, however, a copy bearing  all the marks of a faithful  rescript has survived of the journal  Mackenzie kept during theI 789 trip. Even the slight incoherence of the last two days, when his joy at being almost home runs the two entries together,  is faithfully  preserved  by the  copyist. Microfilm  copies and  an edited edition  by T.  H.  McDonald  (University  of Oklahoma  Press)  enable  us to check the  original  entries against  Combe's  version and -mirabile  dictu! -the

I9

ALEXANDER MACKENZIE



comparison is not odious; both men rise in our esteem, Combe for his faithfulness to the original, Mackenzie for the clarity and  toughness of his journal style.
Combe's distortions of Mackenzie's meaning are so few and so slight they have to be searched  for. As the expedition  to the Arctic starts,  Mackenzie says, "Mr. Leroux  got his men  and  Indians  to salute  us with  several  Vollies to which  we returned  a few Shot."  This  nicely differentiates  the  party  close to base, able  to fire volleys, from the party already intent  on the  journey and  unwilling to waste powder on more than a few token discharges. Combe's version loses this urgency: "We  were saluted  on our  departure with some vollies of small  arms,  which  we returned." It is not a very important loss. A fairer sample  of Combe's  editing is seen in the sentence, "The  Indians  complained  of the  perseverance  with  which we pushed forward,  and that  they were not accustomed  to such severe fatigue  as it occasioned." Mackenzie had written, "The  Indians  complain  much of our hard Marching,  that  they are not accustomed to such hard  fatigue."  Frequently  when Combe's  phrasing sounds literary, it is Mackenzie  himself who is responsible. In the Journal, when some Indians  are encountered, "we made  them smoak, tho' it was evident  they did not know the use of Tobacco,  we likewise gave them some Grog to drink,  but  I believe they accepted  of those Civilities more through  Fear than  Inclination." The  literary  cadence  and  balanced  structure are  there in  the original.  How can  we account  for this? It is surely the  product  of what  Arnold called "our  excellent and indispensable eighteenth  century", when even a suicide note could be rationally structured.
We may fairly claim for Mackenzie a place among Canadian writers, or rather among writers who left a literary record of their engagement  with Canada.


So FAR,  so GOOD.  We must  now admit  that  this volume of
Voyages is not in the front rank of narratives  of exploration.  It concerned  a  ter­
rain  and a type of enterprise so remote from the English reader's  experience that a great chunk of preliminary explanation  was needed. Furthermore, its events did not  provide  a  dramatic  structure.  In  I 793,  Mackenzie  and  his  men  paddled, poled, portaged,  ploughed  through  the  bush,  then  plodded  three  hundred  miles overland,  turned  about  and  came back;  just as, in  I78g, they  had  paddled  and portaged  and  pushed  aside the  ice and  plunged  into  the  current  of  the  Mac­ kenzie, then, reaching the Arctic sea on Bastille Day, had  turned  about  and come back. As for the scene, the terrain  itself, this marvellous Canada of ours, let Mac-

20

ALEXANDER MACKENZIE



kenzie himself speak;  he is explaining  why his references to flora  and  fauna,  to Indian customs and  habits,  and  to natural  scenery must  appear  so scanty  and inadequate. He  had  been obliged  to pass on "with  rapid  steps": "I had  to  en­ counter  perils by land  and  perils by water;  to watch  the savage  who  was  our guide, or to guard  against those of his tribe who might meditate  our destruction. I had  also the passions and  fears of others to control and subdue.... The  toil of our  navigation  was incessant, and oftentimes extreme."
As for the characters  in the story, there is only one, Alexander  Mackenzie. The voyageurs are barely named,  the Indians barely numbered. At the end of its  jour­ neys the party do not encounter  the princes of India or the court of Kublai Khan,  only the nets and  pots of some Eskimo who never show up in person, or a friendly fellow in a village who feeds them roast salmon.
The  Voyages, however,  possess very high literary  values of a secondary  kind, that  is, values which  can  be elicited by a  process of  editing  which  reveals the superb,  taut  thread  of narrative; or else by a  process of extending  the story to show its dramatic and  epic features.  We will examine  these  possibilities briefly, in the order mentioned.
If we follow each  expedition  from  its point  of departure, the  onward  linear movement is continuous; the canoe pierces all obstructions;  the single will of Mackenzie  drives forward. There  are, in fact,  no digressions, only obstacles;  no delays, only pauses for brief recuperation  and repairs; no hesitations of more than a few hours even when Mackenzie is most perplexed as to his best direction; and, with one small exception,  there is no back-tracking.  It  is this simple, continuous, linear  drive that  gives impetus  to the narrative.  To  take one example:   on June
I 3th, I 793, they  had  just crossed the continental  divide  and  were feeling their way toward  a rumoured  great  river (now known as the Fraser).
They  pushed off into  a rapid  current  and  at once the canoe struck  and  broke itself sideways on  a sandbar. As they  jumped  out,  the  torrent  swept  them  into deeper water, leaving one of the crew behind, then drove them downward  into a rock which shattered  the stern below the gunwales, making steering impossible. Thrown   to  the  edge of  the  channel,  the  canoe smashed  its bow. The  foreman was swept  out  by branches  of a  tree he laid  hold of to  check their  course. On went the canoe into  the fury of a cascade which pounded  it on rocks, ripping the bark  into great  holes and  wrenching  the thwarts  so that  now  the  wreck floated flat  on  the  water.  After  several  hundred  yards of surging  forward, in  extreme peril, a small eddy enabled  the exhausted  crew to let the canoe's  weight  rest on some stones. The  Indians  climbed to the bank, sat down, and  wept. In great pain

2I

ALEXANDER MACKENZIE



from  the icy waters and badly bruised,  Mackenzie  held  the smashed framework on the outside  until the crew got everything  ashore. Among  their losses was the total spare supply of bullets.
Now, miraculously, the two lost men reappeared. A fire was built and, after  a
hearty  meal  and  an  allowance of rum,  Mackenzie  began,  like Odysseus, to  re­ build morale. So effective were his arguments  and so persuasive was his eloquence that  by  nine  the  next morning  a  party  went  off  to  look for  birchbark  and  to locate, if possible, their point of junction with  the great  river. In  the meantime,  Mackenzie, though  he had come ashore from the wreck so benumbed  and bruised he could  scarcely  stand,  had  found  the  strength   to  make  his usual  attempt   at astronomical  observations  and  had  established  their  latitude  as 54°23', though not their longitude, for he could not get a sufficient horizon among the mountains  to try for the satellites of Jupiter.
One could, of course, write Mackenzie's life in the manner  of Lytton Strachey.
Beginning with the predatory nature of the fur trade and its slaughter of animals, continuing  into  the violent competition of the trading  companies,  and concluding with Mackenzie's  adumbration of the "fatal  impact" of the white man, one could interpret his non-violence as no more than  prudential, classify his mercantile de­ signs as imperialistic, look sideways into the mystery of his son Andrew's unknown Indian mother,  and end by making Alexander  Mackenzie almost as contemptible  as Lytton  Strachey.
It  would be a fruitless exercise. Mackenzie,  at least up to the time of his con­ flict with  Selkirk, fulfils too magnificently the  requirements  of the  Jason  figure, the  adventurous  far-seeker, as the  Western  world  has conceived  his  image.  His family  is poor  but  they are  Scottish  clansmen; his father  and  uncle  are  both loyalists;  he is early thrown  upon  the world  and  in  his twenties  has established a reputation for honesty, courage, diplomacy  and  enterprise. Appointed  to a post in the remote wilderness, he receives maps and  plans from  an older, more experi­ enced  man,  whom  he succeeds. His first voyage, in  search  of a western  passage, is unsuccessful, in spite of the loyalty of his Argonauts.  He retires to England,  to learn more of navigation and acquire better instruments.  Returning to his original starting  point, he sets off again, a veritable Odysseus in the skill and  craft  of his voyaging  and  his ability to endure  and  survive;  doing  better  than  Odysseus, in that  he never lost a man, or forfeited a loyalty or harmed  an Indian. Every sordid aspect of the trade  withers away out of  the picture; the commercial  and  imperial motives retire into the wings; Mackenzie's return  to Athabasca  is like the clasping of a necklace strung  with the real and shining  jewels of courage,  hope, resource-

22

ALEXANDER MACKENZIE



fulness and fair dealing. The  Voyages, below their level of surface detail,  possess immense narrative  strength,  derived  directly from  the energy of heroic  achieve­ ment.
But let us press on,  as Mackenzie  did, toward  our  ultimate  objectives. These are the dramatic and  epic elements of his story.




hE DRAMA ASSERTS  ITSELF after  the  voyages ended.  It is neither comedy nor tragedy  but a true history play in which interest centres upon conflict  between  two  great  figures;  each  backed  by  diplomatic,   financial  and armed  forces;  each   representing   a  territorial  interest;   each  desiring  absolute power,  under  the  aegis of  a  more  remote  superior  sovereignty,  to  which  both appeal.  Dramatic   elements  abound; situations  develop  climactically;  tragic  dis­ appointments and ironies of fate are present. The historical implications  are enor­ mous  and  fitly symbolized  by  the identification  of each  contender  with  a  vast natural feature  of our  country -Sir  Alexander  Mackenzie  with  the great  river and  Lord  Selkirk with  a  range  of mountains  paralleling  the  Pacific  coast. The  best account  of Mackenzie  is still that  published in  I927,  by M. S. Wade;  John  Gray's  Lord  Selkirk  of Red   River   ( I963)   has the  triple  advantage  of  being  a definitive historical account,  a labour of love, and  a  complete  apologia.
The  action of the drama  commences about  I 8o8. Selkirk and  Mackenzie were
buying shares in the Hudson's  Bay Company on joint account.  Selkirk was thirty­ seven years of age. He  had  been Thomas  Douglas, the  seventh  son of  a  noble family, and  by certain  untimely  deaths  had  inherited  an  earldom  at  the  age of twenty-eight.  He  was a  natural philanthropist  and  deeply  concerned  about  the cotters and crofters who were being pushed out of the Highlands. Having  already, in  r8o3, led a group  of them  to Prince Edward  Island,  to  establish new homes, he was now turning  his attention  to the fertile prairie land  of the Red River and buying up Hudson's  Bay Company shares, which had fallen to three-fifths of their par  value because of competition  from  the  North-Westers  and  a renewal  of the Napoleonic  conflict. Selkirk was advancing  money to  Mackenzie,  who was short of liquid  capital.   Mackenzie,  at  the  age of  forty-four, was  an  experienced  fur trader  and  renowned  explorer  who had  retired to England  but was still pursuing the interests of his company.
By 18 I o the irony of the situation  became apparent. The  two men  were hop­
ing to get a controlling,  or at least a decisive, interest in the Hudson's  Bay Com-

23

ALEXANDER MACKENZIE



pany for totally opposite and utterly incompatible  reasons. Mackenzie  wanted  to secure an outlet for the fur trade  through  Hudson's  Bay, which the old company controlled. Selkirk desired a huge grant  of prairie  upon  which to found  an  agri­ cultural  settlement.  The  incompatibility  was as old as Cain  and  Abel:  the  tiller of the soil, who encloses and guards his land, is at  perpetual  war with  the herder or hunter  on the open range.
The  two  men  stand  in  dramatic  contrast.  Although   their  dates  of  birth  are separated  by only seven years, one is young,  the  other  over  the  hill. Selkirk is eager and impulsive. Early in I8I I  he has made his proposal to the Hudson's  Bay Company. His optimism absorbs all difficulties, even the six hundred  miles of wilderness between  the proposed point of disembarkation for his settlers, on  the shores of the Bay, and  the most suitable land  in  the Red  River valley; even the climate, with its frequent sub-zero winter temperatures.
Mackenzie,  on  the other  hand,  is a man  defeated  after  a  protracted  struggle to induce  the  British government  to form  the fur  trade  into  a single enterprise with  bases  (at  once  military,  naval  and  commercial)  on  the  Pacific coast. He now does all he can to defeat Selkirk's plans for settlement.  There  is good  mate­ rial here for a dramatist  who could bring to life a series of related scenes:  Mac­ kenzie insisting that  Selkirk's proposal be brought  to a general  meeting of Hud­  son's Bay Company  stockholders; Simon  McGillivray  writing  to his brother  that "His  Lordship  is a designing and  dangerous  character-and  Sir Alexander  has not been sufficiently aware of him";  Mackenzie  telling Miles  Macdonnell, leader of the settlers, before the expedition  left Britain,  that  the  North-Westers  would not tolerate the colony and could incite the Indians  against it;  the deplorable  set of incidents  at  the  dockside where  an  official related  to  Mackenzie  used every means to dissuade and intimidate  the prospective settlers, so that  the captain  put to sea in haste, leaving part of his stores behind.
The  rest of the  drama  is well known:   the  massacre  in I 8I 6 at  Seven  Oaks
(not  connected  with  Mackenzie),   where  Robert  Semple,  governor  of  the  Red River  colony, and  about  twenty of his men  were killed by the metis, who gave no quarter  to the wounded;  Selkirk's arrival  with  a troop  of disbanded  soldiers, many of them  Swiss, with which he restored order; arrests, action  and  counter­ action in the Canadian courts, Selkirk being ordered  to pay damages of  £2,ooo; his return  to England  at  the end  of  I8I8; his death  eighteen  months  later,  at Pau,  within sight of the Pyrenees, dictating  during  his last days  his plans for  an experimental  farm  at Red River.
During  these years, Mackenzie's  own  health  had  been  declining  and  his in-

ALEXANDER MACKENZffi



volvement in  affairs  lessening. He  writes to his cousin, in I 8 zg, that  events in Canada  have  not been as disastrous to the North  West Company  as was feared. "The  losses sustained  in  the country,  though  severe and  serious have  been in  a considerable degree recompensed by the high prices obtained for the furs, the sale of which was certainly  managed  with great  judgment  in  London."  He  is to the last what  he always claimed  to be-a  trader.  "Sono  mercanti", said  Napoleon of the British, borrowing  a phrase from  Paoli. A good line to bring  down a  cur­ tain. Mackenzie's death  occurred in March  1820, among the mountains  of  Killie­ crankie, scarcely a month  before Selkirk's death  by the Pyrenees.
At the time of their  death,  what  each had fought  to establish, through  defeat after  defeat,  was precariously sustaining  itself:  the North  West Company,  rely­ ing on a dwindling  animal  population  and  desperately over-extended  in its com­ munications,  was to be absorbed  by its old rival the Hudson's  Bay  Company  in
182 I; Selkirk's settlers, clinging to the land,  had  many  dangers  ahead  of them,
including  Riel's rebellion.


IN A  CONTEXT  LARGER than its dramatic possibilities, the story of Alexander  Mackenzie  may be seen as possessing the scope and  grandeur that belong to epic tradition. Absolute powers are involved;  wars hang on the horizon
like thunder  clouds; long, hazardous  journeys are undertaken  by a leader and  his faithful   band  of  followers;  recuperation   after  disaster  is  a  recurring   pattern. Granted  the gods do not intervene;  or do they? Mackenzie almost nightly directs his telescope toward  the moons of Jupiter  or watches for the appearance of Diana, that  he may  receive direction  and  achieve orientation.  When  the long  journeys, undertaken to extend  His  Majesty's territories,  are accomplished,  he receives in knighthood  a royal reward.  After the second voyage, he falls into  an underworld of helplessness and  disturbing  visions. He writes to Roderick,  "I never  passed so much of my time so insignificantly-nor so uneasy-Although I am not super­ stitious-dreams amongst  other  things-caused me much  annoyance  I could not close my eyes without  finding myself in company  with the Dead."
The  principal  epic  element  in  the  Mackenzie story  is, however,  much  more definite, extensive and significant. It is the old motif of the fate of nations. Harold Innis  has  said,  "It is  no  more  accident  that  the  present  Dominion  coincides roughly with the fur-trading areas of northern  North  America."
If we follow  the  delineation  of  Canada's western  boundaries,  beginning  in
1783 with  the Treaty  of Paris, we are surprised  at  the immense stretch  of terri-

ALEXANDER MACKENZIE



tory involved, more than  two million square  miles, and  our  astonishment  grows as we come to realize the crucial role played by Mackenzie's two voyages in secur­ ing title to this vast empire, as large as Europe  minus Russia.
It is true  that  the  boundaries were not as extensive as Mackenzie  had  at first
hoped.  In  theory, Britain was entitled by the Treaty  of Paris to territory extend­ ing as far south as navigable water on the  Mississippi, and  from  that  point west to the Pacific. In  practice,  an ambiguity in the wording,  arising out of  an ignor­ ance of the terrain,  made it possible for the Americans  to claim the entire  Missis­ sippi  basin. In  I 8 I 8, the 49th  parallel  was agreed  on  as a  boundary  up  to the Rockies.
At the time of Mackenzie's death,  in  I82o,  Britain still had  a strong claim  to the Columbia  valley, but after  I838  American  settlement  steadily increased  and in  I843  the settlers demanded  union with  the U.S.  The  Democratic  party  even pushed  the American  claim  northward  in  the famous  slogan,  "Fifty-four  forty, or fight." Earl Cathcart, governor of Canada  and commander of the forces, made extensive preparations  for defence. Finally, by a compromise settlement,  the terri­ tory west of the Rockies was divided along the continuation of the 49th  parallel and  the Strait of Juan  de Fuca.
For the Alaskan boundary  there is a similar story of compromise  unfavourable
to Canada, but not disastrously so. In  I903 Roosevelt threatened to use force and used the old Russian claim (bought  by the American  government) to cut off the northern  half of what is now British Columbia  from  the sea. Farther  north,  the boundary  between Alaska and the Yukon was more equitably  drawn,  running  for seven hundred  miles through  wild, almost uninhabited, potentially  rich  country. The  fur  traders  who  followed Mackenzie  up  the  valley of the  river  named  for him, reinforced by goldminers in the  I 8go's, established a firm claim.



trs HISTORICAL SERIES of events, played against a geographic background,  has great  possibilities as literary  material.  A double  irony emerges,
on a scale to provoke the laughter  of the gods. The  impasse  between  the  North West Company  and  the Red River settlement,  with  all its stupid  and  brutal ele­ ments, its harassments and murder,  proved in its outcome  to have held in balance the  two forces necessary to  the  formation  of  Canada as  a  viable  body  politic. Without  the  West and  access to  the  Pacific, Canada would  have  remained  in

ALEXANDER MACKENZIE



continuous  danger  of absorption  by the United  States. And without  both  the fur trade  and  the  agricultural settlement,  the  West could never  have  been claimed. Had  Lord Selkirk's farmers  abandoned  their lands, the Red  River  basin  (if that great fertile plain can be so named)  would have been filled, inevitably, by Ameri­ can settlers and  would have gone the way of the Oregon territory. If, on the other hand,  the  North  West  Company  had  lost its supply  routes,  as seemed  possible when  at  one  time supplies  were  not  allowed  to  be taken  out  of  Red  River,  it would have failed to achieve the few years of frenetic expansion  which gave "the lords of the lakes and  forests" their  place in history. A network of  canoe  routes, extending  beyond the Rockies, and pinned down by hastily established posts, suf­ ficed to establish a British presence right to the waters of  the Pacific. But for this trading  right,  bought out by the Hudson's  Bay Company soon after  Mackenzie's death,  and  translated  into a political claim by first the British and then the Cana­  dian government,  Canada would have established almost no mainland  claims west of what  is now  Winnipeg.  The  epic quality  of  the story resides in  the immense and decisive national issues hanging on the deeds of half a dozen paladins, among whom Mackenzie  was foremost.
The  second  enormous  irony arises from  the failure of the  British government to follow Mackenzie's many times urged advice, by founding bases that could dominate  the Oregon  territory and part of the present Alaskan coast. It is tempt­ ing, especially to the present  writer,  who has worked as a farm  labourer  among the bright  orchards  of Oregon,  to think in terms of a lost empire,  a surrendered inheritance. Such  romantic  regret,  however, will not stand  the  cold  scrutiny  of the historian.  It  is ten to one, given the pace and  temper  of  American  westward expansion,  that  had  such  claims  been  stoutly  maintained,  war  would  in  due course have broken out.  In  that  event, Britain  (and  therefore  Canada) stood to lose the whole Pacific slope - if anything  so  magnificently mountainous  can  be so named. The  very failures and inhibitions, because of the Napoleonic  threat,  on the part of the British government  may be  reckoned providential  for Canada. In the end,  Mackenzie's  voyages achieved  their  full political  potential; they estab­ lished our initial claim to God's plenty as we now, in the fact of Western Canada, possess it.
William  Cowper,  a contemporary  of Mackenzie, summed  up  the issue in  the prophecy of the Bard to Boadicea,


Regions  Caesar  never  knew
Thy  posterity  shall  sway;

ALEXANDER MACKENZIE



Where his eagles never flew
None invincible as they.


Some day this theme will find heroic and  definitive expression, as the Canadian writer, "long choosing and beginning late", comes at last to a sense of its epic dimension.  In  the  meantime,  as Milton  put  it,  we have  "some  naked  thoughts that  roam  about/ And loudly knock to have  their  passage out."



INITIATION AND  QUEST

Early Canadian Journals


Maurice Hodgson






TE EAkUEST of the Canadion captives  to write  a mmative in
English  was Pierre-Esprit Radisson  who was captured by the  Iroquois near Trois
Rivieres  about  1653. Idiosyncratic in  style  and  probably   imaginative in  detail, Radisson's narrative  set  the  pace  for  many  later  Captivity  journals   written   to epater   les  bourgeois  and   designed   to  appeal   to  the  popular  notion   of  Indian brutality. Other  Captivity  journals   written   in  the  seventeenth  and   eighteenth centuries employed  the same  narrative traits  that  Radisson  had  found  amused  the ingenuous reader: John Gyles, captive  of the Maliseet Indians in New Brunswick; Alexander Henry, captive for  a  year  near  Michilimackinac; and  John Tanner, thirty  years  a  captive in  the  vicinity  of Lake  Winnipeg. But,  ultimately, it is not the   recording  of  privation  and   suffering   which  impresses  the  reader, but  the author's attempt to integrate into  a savage  society, which  may  succeed  in lifting the struggle  into  the  realm  of the heroic and  the tragic. Such  is the nature of John Jewitt's narrative of his captivity  with  the  Nootka  Indians from  1803  to 18o6.


kE CoAST INDIANS who in the summer of 18og massacred  the crew of the merchant ship  Boston  had  little siinilarity  in custom  to the Ojibbeway
warriors   who   had   captured John  Tanner fourteen   years  before.   The   Nootka Indians, unlike  the  nomadic tribes  described  in the  journals of Alexander Henry and  John Tanner, were  a settled  population on the west coast of North  America in  a territory that  had  long  had  commerce  with  Spanish, English  and  American trading ships.  The incident which  precipitated the destruction of the  Boston  was an  insult  directed at  a single  chief,  Maquina, whose power  extended over  fifteen hundred  subjects. Few   tribes  in  North   America's interior,  except   perhaps the

29

INITIATION AND QUEST



Sioux on  the plains,  could muster such  a population, and  few leaders  commanded such  authority except  under  coalition.  The   journal of Jewitt, captive  survivor  of the  massacre, thus  provides  a  unique  picture of  a semi-civilized  nation  living  in relative  peace  and  a  certain  security,  and  the  text  itself  escapes  the  destructive disunity  of  a  journal  such  as Tanner's which  records  the  day-to-day wanderings of a hunting tribe.
Only  Hearne's account  of his Indian mentor, Matonabbee, surpasses  the  por­ trait  which  Jewitt creates  of Maquina in his journal of three  years' captivity with the  Nootka  Indians; and,  like Matonabbee, Maquina demonstrates  monarchical foibles only  too familiar  to European journal  writers.  Jewitt had  little intercourse with  the  common  Indians, except  for unpleasant experiences  of  their  teasing  him about  his menial  position in the chief's household. But there is an interdependence between  the  young  English  blacksmith  who  produces for  his  captor  weapons  be­ yond  the  capability of  Indian  craftsmen, and   the  chief  who  has  constantly to guard his captive  against  the  murderous jealousy  of lesser  chiefs. It was Jewitt's trade   as  armourer  aboard   the  Boston  which   first  caught  Maquina's eye,  days before  he  initiated  the  massacre,  and  it  was  his skill  as  blacksmith which  sug­ gested  to  Maquina that  Jewitt would   be  worth  preserving. The   extent   of  his dependence  upon   Jewitt   is  manifested   a  short  time   after   the  massacre   when Thompson, Jewitt's future  fellow-captive, is  discovered   alive;  by professing  that  Thompson is his father, Jewitt manages  to save him. Jewitt's power over Maquina is  again   tested  when  Thompson refuses  to  bow  to  his  captors and  twice  strikes Maquina's sons in  rage,  an  offence  normally punishable by death; only  Jewitt's intervention  saves  his  stubborn  pseudo-father.  As  Jewitt settles  down   to  what  appears to  be a lifetime  of  captivity,  his  journal  gradually effaces  its author, but reveals  the  Indian chief as  an  almost  tragic  figure,  beset  alternately by the  desire to emulate and  impress  the  European and  by the  need  to maintain an  image  of integrity and  strength for  his tribe.
Throughout his  journal,  Jewitt professes  a distaste  for  the  savage  society  and a  need  to  preserve  the  vestiges of Christianity amongst the  heathen. His  goal  as captive,  of  course,  is not  to become  like the  savage,  but  to win  his freedom and return to a Christian land.  This  he declares  repeatedly in his  journal, yet during his three  years of captivity  he achieves a fair degree  of integration with  the Indian world.  Stubborn Thompson simply doubles  his efforts  to remain  aloof,  preferring death to servility; while Jewitt  takes his first step  towards integration in deciding to "adopt a conciliating conduct towards  them  ... I sought  to gain  their  goodwill by always  endeavouring to assume  a cheerful countenance ... I  resolved  to learn

INITIATION AND  QUEST



their  language". From that  point  he vacillates :  he is unable  to  prevent  his own absorption into  the  tribe,  and  the moves he does make  to maintain his identity  as a civilized individual are  nominal and  ineffectual. First,  he and  Thompson try to eat  as they  are  accustomed, but  they  are  often  unable  to  procure  anything but Indian food  and  when  they  try  to cook with  salt  Maquina arbitrarily forbids  it. Secondly,  they manage during the first part  of their captivity to maintain their European dress at least  until  Jewitt  marries  and  Maquina insists that  they  adopt the native  life completely.

Our  principal  consolation  in  this gloomy state, was to go on Sundays,  whenever the weather would permit,  to the borders of a fresh water pond, about a mile from the village, where after  bathing, and  putting  on clean clothes, we would seat our­ selves under  the shade of a beautiful  pine, while I read some chapters in the Bib!t, and  the prayers appointed  by our church  for the day.

It is  not  until  after  Jewitt's  marriage that  he  and  Thompson are  invited  to  a native  religious  celebration, and  Jewitt seems  to accept  without fear  of  jeopard­ izing  his own  religious  principles.
By the end  of the second  year, Jewitt at last identifies  himself with  the Indians, and   though  he  recognizes   their  faults,  he  is prepared  to  forgive  them  for  the massacre  of his shipmates:

For though  they are a thievish race, yet I have no doubt  that  many of the melan­ choly disasters have principally  arisen from the imprudent conduct  of  some of the captains  and  crews  employed  in  this  trade,  in  exasperating   them  by  insulting, plundering,  and  even killing them on slight grounds.

The  importance of Jewitt's sympathy becomes very apparent in the closing pages of  the  journal, when  he  pleads  with  the  captain who  rescues  him  to spare  the natives'  lives.
Jewitt's integration depended upon  his good  relations  with  Maquina's family, and  it  was  facilitated  by  recognizing  in  Maquina  characteristics above  those  of the  common savage,  and  confusing   his natural traits  with  European  sophistica­ tion.  This  rationalization is apparent in  his assessment  of  Maquina's  favourable points:

He  was much  neater  both  in person and  eating  than  were the others, as was like­ wise the queen, owing no doubt  to his intercourse with foreigners, which had given him ideas of cleanliness.

His  fondness  for  Maquina and  his family  he shows  particularly through his at-

INITIATION AND  QUEST



tention   to  the  young  prince,  Sat-sas-sak-sis,  whom  he  adopts into  his household following  his marriage:

I was also very careful to keep him free of vermin  of every kind, washing him and combing his hair. These marks of attention  were not only pleasing to the child ... but  was highly gratifying  both  to Maquina  and  his queen,  who  used  to express much satisfaction  at my care of him.

Considering the  almost  sacred  position  of  the  royal  family,  it  is  not  likely  that Maquina  would   allow  Jewitt  to  have  complete   control   over  the  prince  unless the  king  realized  the  extent  to which  Jewitt  accepted Indian life and  thus  was not liable to corrupt the child.
Two  years of captivity  weakened  Jewitt's resolve to keep aloof from  the native life, and  his acceptance of Maquina's suggestion  that  he marry  is an acknowledg­ ment  of  defeat.  It does  not  represent  a sudden change in  his  attitude but  sym­ bolically  marks  a  turning point  in  his life as a  captive. The  girl  he  chooses is a princess, by his own  admission  very beautiful, and  light in complexion. The  latter quality  must  have  been  the deciding  point,  as he had  to  justify his actions  if ever he  were  to  return to  civilization.  The  marriage is as satisfactory as could  be ex­ pected  under the  circumstances, and  for  his final  winter  in  captivity  he manages to  achieve  a  degree  of  domesticity  which  could  only  be  accomplished after  the realization  that   he  himself  was  virtually   an  Indian.  However, a  severe  illness that  spring  gives him  an excuse to send his wife back  to her  people, and  in allow­
ing  this, Maquina starts  to lose his hold,  and  Jewitt starts  to release himself from
the savage  bonds  as though  his capitulation had only been a momentary weakness. His  recollection  of  his parting with  his wife,  by the  time  he wrote  his narrative, had  become  divorced from  emotion  and  she  had  resumed the guise of a pathetic savage:

Though  I rejoiced at her departure, I was greatly  affected  with  the simple expres­
sions of regard  for me, and could not but feel strongly interested  in this poor girl
... after  her departure, I requested  Maquina, that  as I had  parted  with my wife, he would permit  me to resume my European  dress.

Maquina does, and  it is from  this point that  he seems to give up hope of retaining
Jewitt; only  a few  months  later  the  brig  Lydia  appears and  Jewitt is released.
As in  other  Captivity journals,  there  is no  attempt on  Jewitt's part  to system­ atize  scientific  and  sociological  observation; however,  of  all  Canadian  Captivity journals  his is the  one  with  the greatest  literary potentialities. It  presents a large

INITIATION AND  QUEST



degree  of dramatic unity,  since he had  the advantage of involvement in a settled society;  it is the  episodic  adventures which  the other  captives  undergo while  tied to  a  nomadic people  that  from  the  start  destroy  any  natural unity  there  might be  in  their   journals. However, Jewitt   himself  seems  aware of  the  necessity  of direction, plot  and  suspense; and  one of the few adventures prior  to his capture that   he  recalls,  the  destruction of  the  sailor's  archetypal symbol  of  luck,  points forebodingly to  the  future:

After passing the Cape  when the sea had become calm saw great numbers of  Alba­ trosses, a  large  brown  and  white  bird  of  the  goose kind,  one  of  which  Captain  Salter  shot, whose wings measured  from their extremities  fifteen feet.

It is Captain Salter  himself  who is the direct  cause of the massacre  when  he later insults  Maquina at  Nootka. Jewitt  is a conscious and  capable artist  working  with material which  provides  him  with  the  necessary dramatic unity.



IN  SPIRIT  Jewitt   is  in  touch  with  the  prevailing Romantic movement, and  his descriptions of the New World are not unlike those of Chateau­
briand who was writing at the same time. It is the early romanticism of Rousseau, Chateaubriand  and   Goldsmith:  a  charming eighteenth-century Nature  created by  God  for  a  simple,   appreciative human  race.  There is  nothing in  the  other Captivity journals to compare with Jewitt's description of his religious  retreat  by the inland  pond,  or of the  Indians' winter  bivouac on  the coast north  of Nootka:
Tashees is pleasantly situated  and in a most secure position from the winter storms; in a small vale or hollow on the south shore, at the foot of a mountain. The  spot on  which  it  stands  is level, and  the  soil very fine, the  country  and  its  vicinity abounding  with  the most romantic  views, charmingly  diversified, and  fine streams of water falling in beautiful  cascades from the mountains.

The  concept  of a provident and  benevolent  Nature, essential  to the  Romantic, was  very  much   a  part  of Jewitt's literary  philosophy,  no  matter how  embryonic that  might  be.  His  desire  to epater  les bourgeois  is obviously  not  meant to do so through horrific  description, but rather  as Chateaubriand did, with concepts  novel to the reader, but  pacific in nature. It is the tradition of Defoe as well. Like Defoe, Jewitt chooses  to pose  as  the    practical man,  aware  of providential Nature and the hand  behind  that  nature; but  the puritan Defoe speaks also for self-sufficiency, and   as  Crusoe  survives  through  ingenuity so Jewitt   emulates him.  One  of  the

33

INITIATION AND  QUEST



first tasks that  Crusoe  sets himself is to strip  the wrecked  ship  of all usable itCIIIlS, and  Jewitt follows suit.  When  Crusoe's  ship  is finally  destroyed  by  the sea  he is left  to survive  by  his  practical sense;  and  after  a  native   Nootkan inadvertently burns  the Boston,  Jewitt, too, is dependent on his own  devices. Thus, weeks after their  capture, the  illiterate  Thompson insists  that  Jewitt  keep  a  journal and  that he, Thompson, will supply his blood for ink if necessary; Crusoe-like, Jewitt experiments and  finds a solution:

On  the first of June  I accordingly commenced  a regular  diary ... and  after mak­ ing a number  of trials I at length succeeded in obtaining  a very tolerable ink by boiling the  juice of the  blackberry with  the  mixture  of finally powdered  charcoal
... as for  quills  I found  no  difficulty in  procuring  them ... while  a  large  clam
furnished  me with an ink stand.

Each  writer  of a  Captivity   journal  certainly  has  the  material to create  a work of  some  drama, though  most  of  them  do  not  have  the  native  ability  to develop the material satisfyingly. Jewitt  exhibits, with  his education and  his apparent sym­ pathy  with  the  contemporary spirit,  the  highest  literary potentialities. Dramatic­ ally  the  capture and  release of the  captive  would  seem  to supply  the  most  likely material; Tanner has not the literary  ability  to exploit  them,  while Jewitt, though  he  creates  a  mediocre capture sequence,  concludes with  a  masterful description of his final deception of the natives. The deception involves Maquina, and through
Jewitt's handling of the narrative to that  point,  Maquina evolves as a sympathetic
character. The  deception, therefore,   appears gross,  as  Maquina must   run   the risk of forfeiting his life in order  to preserve  Jewitt. The reaction  of the  tribe, despondent and  powerless to aid its leader  in the  hands of the  white  men,  is not
unlike  a Sophoclean chorus  watching inert  as the  inevitable tragedy  draws  to a close. As Maquina is held  on  board  the  brig  as a  hostage,  Jewitt  returns to the shore  to collect the  Boston's gear,  and  though greeted  by spears, he is certain  that
with  their  chief in  the captain's hand  the  Indians will not  harm him.
In  his three  years of captivity,  he has become  accustomed to the Indian customs and  the Indian psyche, and  fortunately for him,  unlike  captives  with more  volatile captors, he is not harmed. As he boards  the canoe  to return to the ship he is inter­ cepted  by  the  prince,  and  later  he  records  the  expression  of  the  child's  divided  loyalty:

As I was going into  the  canoe, little  Sat-sas-sak-sis, who  could  not  bear  to  part with me, asked me, with an affectionate simplicity, since I was going away to leave him, if the white  men would not let his father  come on shore, and  not kill him. I told him  not to be concerned, for that  no one should  injure  his father.

34

INITIATION AND  QUEST



The tragedy  averted, Maquina greets Jewitt  as he boards  the ship. Then, after the  chief is given  presents  by the  captain and  prepares  to return to his people, he acknowledges Jewitt's  deception, but  also his own  cunning when  he declares

that  he should  never take a letter  of recommendation  from  anyone, or even trust himself on  board  a  vessel unless I  [Jewitt]  was there.  Then  grasping  both  my hands, with much emotion, while the tears trickled down his cheeks, he bade me farewell, and  stepped  into  the canoe, which immediately paddled  him on shore.

To  the  last,  Maquina acts  in the style of the eighteenth-century concept  of the "noble savage" and  he  remains to the  end  more  European than   Indian, just as the young princess is pictured with his archly civilized "affectionate simplicity". Doubtless  the feeling  that  lingered  with Jewitt  as he sailed from  Nootka  was that of a touching parting with  his foster family,  but  the sense of identification did  not pass  beyond  this  admirable "European" family  to the  natives  in toto or  to  the savage  way of life.



l:E CAPTIVITY JOURNAL obviously comes near  the genre of the novel  and  consequently this  type  of narrative-at  least  the  better  examples  of
it -can  be examined in  terms  of prose fiction. However,  the  narratives of quest
-the Exploration  journals such  as  those   of  Alexander   Mackenzie,  David Thompson and  Samuel  Hearne-have a purpose in which  the literary  value can only  be considered as secondary to the  description of the  quest.  But,  as each  is a unique attempt to  reach  a goal,  the  universality  of theme  which  this suggests­ adventure,  quest,   initiation,  suffering, privation  -attests  to  the  immediacy of these  journals  as much  to the  author's contemporaries as to the twentieth-century reader. Few  Exploration journals  have  enjoyed  so continuous  and  so deserved  a popularity as Samuel  Hearne's journal  which  was first  published  in  1795·
After  the French were defeated in the Seven Years War  the English once again
showed  some interest  in expanding trade,  and  this took the novel form  of scientific and  commercial speculation over  copper  ore brought  to the  Prince  of Wales Fort by  some   Chipewyan  Indians.  After   two   abortive attempts, Samuel   Hearne reached  the  mouth of the  Coppermine River  in I 77 I, and  Hearne's journals  and maps   proved   him  not  only  able  to  expand   the  trade,  but  also  competent as  a surveyor,  cartographer, anthropologist and  an  exceptional narrative writer.
Mr.  Norton  was an  Indian; he was born  at  Prince of Wales' fort,  but  had  been in  England   nine  years, and  considering  the  small sum  that  had  been  expended


35

INITIATION AND QUEST



on  his  education,   he  had   made   some  progress in  literature.  At  his  return   to Hudson's   llay  he  entered  into  all  the  abominable  vices of  his countrymen.   He kept for his own use five or six of the finest Indian girls ... took every means in his power  to prevent  any European  from  having  intercourse  with  the  women of the country ... and showed more respect to one of their  dogs, than  he ever did  to his first officer.

Hearne's years  as a sailor  aboard  the  frigate  Bideford during the  Seven  Years War  had  inured him  to privation, which  stood  him  in good stead  during his trip to  the  Coppennine river;  but  it  could  not  prepare him  to endure the  profligate half-breed  Moses  Norton,   governor   of  Prince   of  Wales  fort.  Son  of  a  former governor and  a  Southern Indian  woman, of  a  tribe  that  Hearne rated  as  "the most   debauched  wretches   under   the  sun",  Norton was  a  certain   antidote  to Hearne's remaining at  the  fort.  Although Hearne was posted  at  the  fort specific­ ally  to  undertake an  expedition   to  the   area   that   had  yielded  some  interesting samples  of copper,  he was probably  not  expected  to show  much  initiative. How­ ever,  faced  with  a  lieutenancy under  Norton, Hearne  chose  the  uncertainty of the  wilderness  in  preference  to the  certain hell  of working  under so notorious a superior. Without this explanation, it would  be difficult to account for the alacrity  of Hearne's repeated attempts to reach  the  Coppermine  river.
Hearne's first voyage  carried  him  only  a few  hundred miles west of Hudson's
Bay;  with  the  desertion  of  his guide  he  had  to  return to  the  fort  with  his  two unhappy  European  comrades   barely   a  month  after   his  departure. Then,  un­ daunted, or  not  wishing  to remain  with  Norton, he struck  out  again  within  two months of his previous failure.  The  second expedition was hardly  more auspicious,  though he  had  learnt  from  the  first and  took  no  encumbering  Europeans. Thus he had  taken  his first step toward  integration and  towards psychological  captivity  to  the  Indians. Though free of Europeans, he  was  not  yet  free  of European in­  experience and  inappropriate equipment:

... what  considerably increased  the  handicap   was ... the  coarseness of our  lodg­ ing ... the tent we had with us was not only too large and unfit for barren ground service, where  no poles were to be got, but  we were obliged to cut it up for shoes.

On  his  final  successful  trip  with  the  guide  Matonabbee, he  would  learn  to  pre­ pare  his  tent  poles  before  entering the  Barren  Ground, and  also  to concur  with Matonabbee's dictum   that  they  be  attended by  many  women  who  "were  made  for  labour; one  of  them  can  carry,  or  haul  as much   as two  men  can  do. They  also  pitch  our  tents,  make  and  mend  our  clothing, keep  us warm  at  night...."

INITIATION AND  QUEST



For  the time  being  he was still at  the mercy of Norton's ineffectual guides,  for he did  not  meet  the  fabled  Matonabbee until  September of I no, as he was return­
ing  to  the  fort  after  breaking his quadrant. Then, mysteriously  appearing from the  uninhabited west  at  a  point  when  once  again  Hearne was being  deserted  by his guides,  the  "stranger" Matonabbee proceeded  to enliven  Hearne's travels  by his company and  his encouragement. So much  so that  Hearne's initial  impression, "the courteous behaviour of  the  stranger struck  me  very  sensibly",  contains   an epithet   that  Europeans would  hardly  associate  with  a savage.  Subtly  the  Indian life, and  specifically  this  Indian chief, was  absorbing Hearne.
Matonabbee, always  free  with  his  advice,  diagnosed   the  reason  for  Hearne's repeated failure  in  terms  that  Hearne could  appreciate and  second,  the  desertion of  his  guides  and,  principally, the  lack  of  women.  The latter   was  antithetical to  the  views of governor Norton, but  by this time  Hearne was  prepared for  his third   venture, and   Matonabbee and  his ideas  had  gained   ascendancy. Scarcely two  weeks  after   returning  to  the  fort  from   an  arduous  seven-month  journey, Hearne commenced his third  and  final expedition. The  trip  took eighteen  months, and  during that   time  Hearne had  no intercourse with  a  European.
From  the  time  of  departure, Hearne anticipates the  dictates of a later  Arctic
explorer, Steffanson, by allowing  himself to be directed  by the natives and their experience with  the  country. Soon  he  appears to have  no  authority; at  least  he does  not  assert  himself.

On  the nineteenth, we pursued  our coarse in the North  West quarter; and,  after leaving the  above-mentioned creek, with empty  bellies, till the  twenty-seventh ... it was the  twenty-seventh  before the meat  was brought  to the tents. Here  the  In­ dians proposed  to continue  one day, under  the pretence of repairing  their sledges and  snow shoes; but from  the little attention  they paid  to those repairs, I  was led to think  that  the  want  of food  was the  chief thing  that  detained  them,  as they never ceased eating  the whole day.

Thus with  some  humour Hearne describes  his  capitulation; soon  afterwards he shows  his  complete dependence  upon   Matonabbee's  judgment  when   the  party spends  a  week  impounding deer  before  attempting the  traverse over  the  barren ground.
The  release  from  his responsibilities  as leader  allows Hearne's sensitive  powers of observation to roam  not  only over the natural life that  he encounters, but  also over  the  Indians themselves.  The   Northern Indians strike  him  as  the  finest  he knows, and  his sympathies lie with  the neglected  women; he sees them  in general with humour:

37

INITIATION AND QUEST



Ask a Northern  Indian,  what  is beauty?  he will answer,  a  broad  flat face, small eyes, high cheek-bones, three  or four  broad  black lines a-cross each cheek, a low forehead,  a large broad chin, a clumsy hook-nose, a tawny hide, and  breasts hang­ ing down to the belt.

But individually he portrays them with much  feeling:

The  instant,  nowever,  the  poor  woman  was delivered,  which  was  not  until  she had suffered all the pains usually felt on those occasions for nearly fifty-two hours, the  signal was made for moving  when the  poor  creature   took  her  infant  on her back and set out  with the rest of the company;  and  although  another  person had
.the humanity  to haul the sledge for her, (for one day only) she was obliged to carry a considerable  load  beside her little charge,  and  was frequently  obliged  to  wade knee-deep in water and wet snow.

His deepest  sympathy remains  with  Matonabbee, whose nobility  and  sensitivity make  him  an  easy mark,  despite  his exalted  tribal  position,  for  warriors  stronger or  less responsible  than  himself.  Throughout the  trip  Matonabbee is dogged  by problems  involving   his eight  wives:  the  youngest  and   most  comely  elopes,  and another is forcibly  taken from  him. The  Indian chief is disconsolate  and, strangely foretelling his final  fatal  action  years later,  Hearne notes  that  "he  [Matonabbee] took  this  affront   so  much  to  heart,  especially  as it  was  offered  in  my  presence, that   he  almost  determined not  to  proceed  further." Matonabbee's concern  over Hearne's reactions  is only outweighed by the  latter's dependence upon  his guide, and   in  a  curiously   European  manner  he  appeals to  Matonabbee's honour to continue the  voyage.  Hearne's integration into  Indian life  has  a  parallel  in  the Indian's adoption of European custom;  he agrees  to continue.
Hearne, the  consummate story-teller,  not  only  builds  his narrative towards the
goal of his explorations, but  also parallels his quest  with  the aim of the Indians­ the   destruction  of  the  Eskimo  encampment  at  the  mouth of  the  Coppermine river.  As  the  party   approaches the  river  its  numbers increase,   as  does  the  cer­ tainty  of executing its design. Hearne's reaction initially is to condemn the Indians' design,  but  by that  point  the success of his venture is so  tied to the  Indians that  when   his  hesitancy  to  attack   the  Eskimos  is interpreted  as  cowardice, his own design  is jeopardized. Dramatically he acquiesces,  again  realizing  the unique and dangerous position  he holds:

I never afterwards  ventured  to interfere with any of their warplans.  Indeed,  when I came  to consider seriously, I saw evidently  it was the  highest folly for an  indi­ vidual  like me, and in my situation,  to attempt  to turn  the  current  of a  national prejudice ...

INITIATION AND  QUEST



Virtually a  captive of  the  Indians by  this  time,  Hearne is forced  not  only  to condone the  inevitable massacre  of the  Eskimos, but, like other  captives,  he takes an  active  part,  if largely  a defensive  one, in the  attack.
. . . I determined  to accompany  them, telling them at the same time, that  I would not  have  any  hand  in the  murder  they were about  to commit,  unless I found  it necessary for my own safety. The  Indians  were not displeased at this proposal; one of them immediately  fixed me a spear, and another  lent me a broad  bayonet ...
Hearne minutely describes  the  preparations for the attack, both  the  physical  and superstitious, as well  as his own  trepidation. The  actual  battle,  as expected, is a tragic  farce.  The sleeping  Eskimos  are  quickly  massacred  as they  flee their  tents, and, though other  captives and explorers recount more numerically impressive massacres,  Hearne's involvement is so personal  and  the  effect  of  his description so  real  that   his  writing   transcends the  involvement he  so  assiduously   rejected earlier. The   climax  of  the  battle,   the   murder of  the  young Eskimo  girl  who seeks his protection, is a  powerful  symbol of Hearne's guilt  over  his approbation of the massacre:
... when  the  first spear  was struck  into  her  side she  fell down  at  my feet,  and twisted around  my legs, so that  it was with  difficulty that  I could  disengage my­ self from her dying grasps ... even at this hour I cannot  reflect on the transactions of that  horrid  day without  shedding tears.
Hearne's epilogue to this  tale  of the  Indians' cruelty is perhaps less severe,  but so pathetic and  final  as to maintain the level of the narrative of the earlier  butchery. An  old  and  blind  Eskimo  woman, oblivious  to what  had  passed  a few  hundred yards  away,  was  fishing  by  a  waterfall; turning to  greet  her  supposed   relative, she  was instead   "transfixed to  the  ground  in  a few seconds,  and  butchered in  a most savage  manner."
It is doubtful if Hearne could  have  achieved  the degree  of integration that  he
did  without the  catalytic effect  of Matonabbee's presence. So great  was the com­ munion between  these  two  men  that  when  La  P.erouse captured Prince  of  Wales fort  in I 782  and  Hearne, then  governor, surrendered to the  French  commander and  was carried  off a prisoner,  Matonabbee quietly hanged  himself. Whether this final  act  of an  Indian still in the  prime  of his life was through  sorrow  or shame;  Hearne notes  that  "he  is the  only Northern Indian who,  that  I  have  ever  heard, put  an  end  to  his  own  existence". Probably no  Canadian  explorer  depended so much  upon  one Indian for the success of his venture,  and  probably also no Indian exists in  early  Canadian  journals with  so dichotomic a  nature: so split  between  the  ideals  of  the  Indian and  the  white  man,  and  yet so  dedicated to the  execu-

39

INITIATION AND  QUEST



tion  of  the  wishes of both  races. It is impossible to  understand   the success of Hearne's last expedition without appreciating  the degree to which Hearne  allowed himself to be physically and  psychologically captured  by the  Indians,  and  more specifically by his attachment  to, and  affection for, Matonabbee. Hearne's  jour­ nal, as a consequence, is the product  of a strong sense of purpose and  an inquisi­ tive spirit;  of a  unique  degree of integration  into  a  voyage and  with  the only people who were a real part of the territory he covered.

As EXCEPTIONAL JOURNAL  WRITERS,   Jewitt  and  Hearne exemplify  the  best characteristics  in  the genre  of travel  literature; equally  they
demonstrate  how all travel journals, whether of Initiation  or Exploration, are dichotomic  in their intrinsic nature-at  once purposeful,  direct  and  immediate, yet moving into  realms of the archetype:   the quest, self-preservation,  alienation, and search for identification. Each Explorer's journal, then, starts with either a scientific, geographic, or commercial purpose, just as each Captivity  journal commences with  the single theme of preservation;  but  both, depending  upon the nature   of  the  individual,  develop  to   some  degree  toward   universality,  toward themes essential to the human  situation.  Thus,  every journal  reflects the spirit of altercation,  between  immediacy  and  universality,  between  its scientific or  com­ mercial  form  and  its  artistic  form.  The   more  readable   journals,  those  which transcend  their immediate and  contemporary  purpose, like Jewitt's  and Hearne's,  unconsciously approach  the genre  of the novel, and  thus can  be  judged  both in their  actual  and  their archetypal  categories.
Overt  heroism  may  be accepted,  even  applauded, in  the  literature  of heroic ages, but  in more sober and  rationalistic  periods the reader  distrusts such an  ap­ proach   and  his  criticism is liable  to  be  cynical  and  damning.   Few  Canadian journal  writers  could  be accused  of  this type  of self-sufficient  heroism;  if any­ thing, they are only too aware of their own physical and psychological weaknesses. Their  heroism, then is of the kind with which identification  is possible; the essen­ tially weak or very ordinary man forced by circumstances to endure and to exceed his own  expectations.  Heroism, in such  conditions,  becomes admirable,  personal and,  ultimately,  real.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
HEARNE, SAMUEL, A  Journey  to  the  Northern Ocean, ed. Richard  Glover, Toronto,
1958.
JEWITT, JOHN R.,   Narration of the  Adventures, New York, 1815.



THE CANADIAN POET



Part II. After Confederation



A. J. M. Smith








W.EN WE  TURN from the poetry of the gene•ations just before  and  just  after  Confederation to that  of the  present  or  the  near  present, we find that there is the same distinction to be drawn between the explicit and somewhat  journalistic  verse that  states or discusses in explicit terms the problems which  face  the  people  living  north  of the  U.S.  border,  and  the  poetry,  which expresses, (indirectly  and  implicitly), the spiritual  reality  which  makes a nation.
To  speak first of what  I  call the explicit verse, a very sharp  difference will be observed  at once. The  poets of the earlier  time wrote, as Lighthall  had  pointed out, cheerfully, hopefully, eagerly. They were expressing a faith-not necessarily a very informed  one,  but  natural  and  very tenaciously held, something  akin  to
what  passes for conviction  and  opinion in the mind of the mythical  man-in-the­ street and  is the basis upon  which democratic  elections are lost or won-a faith in the common interests and  common heritage of all Canadians or, at least  (and  this cannot  be left unremarked  today)  of all English-speaking  Canadians. Sang­  ster,  Mair,  Roberts  all testified to this in  their patriotic  and  political  verse. The  verse of the  modern  poet, on  the other  hand,  tends to be  critical  and  satiric.  It is  the  flaws, shortcomings,  and  failures  that  the  poet  now  sees looming  large, while the ideal and  the hope somehow fails to move him deeply enough for him to make poetry out of it.
One  of the most explicit of the attempts  made by a modern  poet to come to
terms with  the  problem  of what  it  means to be "Canadian" was made-iron­ ically  enough,  perhaps -by   a  young  English  writer,  Patrick  Anderson,  who lived in  Montreal  in  the  late  thirties  and  the early forties,  became  a Canadian

THE CANADIAN POET



c1tJ.zen, and   edited   an  influential litde   poetry   magazine called  Preview, along with  F.  R.  Scott,  P. K.  Page,  and  others,  among whom  for  a time  were  Irving Layton and  John  Sutherland. Anderson was  a  fellow-traveller, if  not  actually a  communist, and  his view of  Canadian history  and  the  future of  Canada  was an  orthodox Marxist  one:   "And  the  land  was. And  the  people  did  not  take  it." But in a section of the poem  called "Cold  Colloquy", Anderson presented us with one  of  the  first  and  one of the  wittiest  expressions  in  contemporary verse of our self-conscious  and  confused  hesitation  to enter  into  what  the poet  (in  this case, at least)   seems to believe is a great  and  manifest  destiny.
In  the  poem  the  spirit of Canada speaks.  It is in  reply  to  "their" question  -
not  "my" question or "our" question  I must  not fail to notice-

What are you . . . ? ... they ask, their mouths full of gum,
their eyes full of the worst silence of the
worst winter in a hundred  years.
And she replies:  I am the wind that  wants a flag. (That want  at least has been supplied.)
I am the mirror  of your picture
until you make me the marvel  of your life. Yes, I am one and  none, pin and  pine
snow and slow,
America's attic, an empty room,
a something possible, a chance, a dance that  is not danced.   A cold kingdom.

Are you a dominion of them?  they ask, scurrying

Most loyal and empirical, she says, in ice ironic ...

And  so the  poem  goes on, purring in puns  and  definitions. After "What are you?" the  question is, "What is the matter then?  And  the  answer  is, "The matter is the promise  that  was never  taken." Inevitably there  comes another question:

What shall we do then . . . ? they ask, English and French, Ukrainians,  Poles, Finns ...

and  the  poet  answers-and now  at  the  end  the  writer  ceases to  be  a satirist,  a writer  of  clever  verse, and  becomes  a  patriot and  an  idealist -like  Sangster  or Roberts. Though with  this difference. They  thought the Fathers of Confederation

42

THE CANADIAN POET



were  God.  They  uttered their  Fiat, and  lo! Canada was;  the modem poet-if  a poet  writing   in  I 945  is  modern-places the  creation  of  a  true  Dominion  still in  the future. But  he answers  the question  in spiritual and  idealistic  tenns, not in terms  of economics  or  sociology  or the  dose-reasoned reports  of Royal  Commis­ sions, but in poetic terms:

Suffer no more the vowels of Canada
to speak of miraculous things with a cleft palate ...

How  apt,  how  true,  and  how  contemporary this is, after  more than  twenty  years! What a perfect  illustration of Ezra  Pound's definition  of literature as "news  that stays news!"
Two   other   distinguished contemporary Canadian  poets  have  dealt   with  this theme,  Earle  Birney  and  ll\!ing   Layton,  but  in  their  treatment of it  neither  de­ viates  very  deeply  into  poetry.  They  have  kept  carefully  on  the surface  of  things, hewed  to  the  line  of  satire,   and  steered  religiously  away  from  faith,  hope,  and patriotic enthusiasm. Birney  is the wittier  of the two and  his destructive but  very impressive  analysis  of our  national weaknesses is salutary. It is found  at its clearest in  the  poem  is called  "Canada: Case  History", written  in  1948.  The  definitions  are  witty  and   deadly,   and   their  truth   will  be  recognized  immediately by  men of all parties.

This is the case of a high-school land, deadset in adolescence,
loud treble laughs and sudden fists, bright cheeks, the gangling presence. This  boy is wonderful  at sports
and  physically quite healthy;
he's taken  to church  on Sunday still and  keeps his prurience stealthy.

(This  one line is no longer  true.  We publish  our  prurience now, and  occasionally put it on TV.)

He doesn't  like books except about  bears, collects new coins and  model planes
and  never refuses a dare.
His Uncle spoils him with candy, of course, yet shouts him down when he talks at table.
You will note that  he has got some of his French  mother's  looks, though  he's not so witty and  no more stable.

43

THE CANADIAN POET



He's really much more like his father and yet
if you say so he'll pull a great face. Parents unmarried and living abroad,
relatives keen to bag the estate, schizophrenia not excluded,
will he learn to grow up before it's too late?

It's  a good question, and we should thank the poet for asking it. I don't  think we should expect him to answer it. It's for us to answer.
Let us consider now the Confederation ode in Irving Layton's new collection, Periods  of the  Moon. This  ode is not of  course a  patriotic  encomium  like the cheerful  exhortations  of  Mair  or  Roberts.  It  is an  angry  and  effectively coarse satire.  And it is not  really about  Confederation; it is about  something  more im­ portant  than  Confederation; it is about  the way Canadians today think  and  feel (or don't  think and feel) about Canada  and Confederation and the Centennial­ about  what,  in fact,  is going to make the Confederation a  reality or a sham.  It is a  satire  on  the  artificially inseminated  enthusiasm  that  government  agencies, civic agencies, business organizations,  and  ad-men  are  feverishly drumming-up and  which  the  poet  feels -not  without  a  certain  grim satisfaction -will  be mvam.
It  is easier, no doubt,  to  point  out  weaknesses and  errors,  and  cry "Stinking fish!"  than  to suggest  remedies, corrections,  and  reformations.  That  is the  job for the historian, the political scientist, the economist, the statistician, the member of a  Royal  Commission. Perhaps  the  poet  may  cheer  when  the good work  has been accomplished, but if in the meantime  he makes use of "satire, invective and disrespectful verse" -to steal a phrase from the title page of The Blasted Pine - to prick the bubble of our complacency and  jolt us awake to a proper realization of our true position in relation to one another,  to the United  States, Great  Britain, and  the world at large, he will have performed  an essential service.




AT   POET  as satmst  and  critic  has been saying in verse, which  when  well written  has the advantage of being concise and  memor­ able, has been stated over and over again by our academic  historians and political philosophers. Compare,  for  example,  with  the  passage from  Patrick  Anderson's "Poem  on Canada" I was quoting  just now, these sentences  by  Professor John  Conway, writing in the Atlantic Monthly for November  1g64:

44

THE CANADIAN POET



We Canadians have  so far  failed  to enter  fully into our  legacy, and  this is our  one great, overreaching problem   as our  centennial approaches. On  its  solution  every­ thing  else depends. We  have  failed  to vest sovereignty  where  it properly  belongs­ in  the  Canadian people.   Instead, we  have  allowed  it  to  remain  in  the  British monarchy, and  in  doing  so we have  divided  our  country and  inhibited  our  emo­ tional  and  creative development as a people.

It is significant perhaps that here  too, in the  essay of a professor of history writing exactly a hundred years  later we have the  same  conviction as that which the  Rev. Hartley Dewart expressed in  his  Introduction to our  first  anthology-that crea­ tive   maturity in  poetry and   the  arts  is  the  result  of  true  nationhood.  Professor Conway continues:

When  we take  the  long  overdue step  and  transfer sovereignty  to where  it properly belongs,  it  will  become  clear   that   Canadians-British,  French, and   European alike-have been   and  are  engaged in  a  common   enterprise  which   is  of  far greater concern than  the  separate concerns  of each  group; and  just  as the  United States  has  given  classic expression  in literature, philosophy, and  political theory  to its  interpretation of  the  New  World,  so will  we  begin  to  give  classic  expression to ours.

One might pursue this  subject farther and  give  illustrations of  the  instructive and  often  amusing parallels between the  writings of historians or social  critics  and those  of  the  poets,  or  at  least  of  the  satirists  among them, and place beside  the verses  by  Frank Scott   entitled "W. L.  M.  K."-

-He  never  let  his on  the one  hand
Know  what  his on the other  hand  was doing. and
Do  nothing by halves
Which can  be done  by quarters - some  sentences by Professor Underhill:
His  statesmanship has  been  a  more  subtly  accurate, a  more   flexibly  adjustable Gallup poll  of Canadian public  opinion than  statisticians will ever  be able  to de­ vise. He  has  been  the  representative Canadian, the  essential  Canadian,  the  ideal Canadian, the  Canadian as he exists in the  mind  of God.

Here you  will  see  the   arts  of  verse  and   prose  coming close  together -prose as  concise   and   pointed as  verse,  and  verse  as sensible  as prose. But  I must  leave

45

THE CANADIAN POET



this tempting  field to the graduate  student  of Canadian literature  who wishes to find a subject for a dissertation that may prove both  useful and e ntertaining.




INSTEAD,  I  will  offer  some  general  observations  about   the state of poetry and  the status of poets here and now.
The  situation  today is immensely different, not only from a hundred  years ago but  from  the time in the middle twenties when  I, along with  F. R. Scott, Earle Birney, A. M. Klein, Eustace Ross, and  Raymond  Knister,  began to write. I say "along  with",  but  that's  not quite  accurate.  I  knew Scott  and  Klein, of course, but  Ross  and  Knister  and  Birney were  unknown  to  us. I  followed  avidly  the European   and   American  literary   journals  and   little  magazines-particularly The   Dial in  New York and  transition and  This  Quarter  in  Paris.  (In  Canada there  was only the Canadian  Forum-and it had one fine feather  in its cap:  it
had  printed  E. J. Pratt's  "The  Cachalot".) We were astonished and delighted  to
find in  the pages of the avant  garde  magazines  writing  by Canadians-Morley Callaghan's first stories and  poems by Raymond   Knister-and when some of my poems appeared  in The  Dial I found also those of another Canadian, W. W. E. Ross -hailed recently by Raymond Souster as "the first modern Canadian poet." These  were  the  first stirrings  of  the  new  poetry  movement  in  Canada.  But for the most part  as the twenties came to a close the picture  was still pretty  dis­ mal.  The   maple  leaf school of  patriotic  nature   poetry  under  the  aegis  of  the Canadian Authors  Association and  a group  of genteel  traditionalists among  edi­
tors and  publishers forced most of the new young poets to look outside Canada, knowing that  acceptance by The  Dial or Poetry (Chicago) or one of the Parisian experimental  magazines meant  that  we had  attained  a higher standard of  excel­ lence  than   was  demanded   by  any  Canadian  journal-always  excepting  the Forum.
The  atmosphere,  indeed, when I began  to write, is very well summed  up and
expressed in Frank  Scott's now famous poem "The Canadian Authors  Meet." It was not  until  1936  that  we were able to persuade  a Toronto  publisher  to bring out  a little group  anthology called New  Provinces containing  work by the  Mon­ treal  poets Scott,  Klein, Kennedy,  and  myself and  the Toronto  poets Finch  and Pratt-the  latter  only being well known. The  book made  no  impact  at  all­ except perhaps on other still younger poets -only eight-six copies were sold, and the  new  poetry  movement,  which in Canada seemed  to be limited  to the  books

THE CANADIAN POET



of E. J. Pratt,  had to wait until the early forties to get under  way. Then,  with the criticism of W. E. Collin  and  E. K. Brown and the first books of Birney, Klein, Scott, myself, and  a little later  P. K. Page, Patrick Anderson,  Raymond  Souster, Dorothy  Livesay, Louis Dudek, and ... but the list grows too long, and has never ceased to grow.
Today,  after  the  amazing  acceleration,  starting  in  the  forties and  continuing through  the fifties and  sixties with an ever-increasing ferment,  Canadian  poetry presents  at  first sight  a  bewildering  spectacle of schools and  individuals  busily writing,  gesticulating,  reading,  declaiming, quarrelling,  praising, lecturing, teach­ ing,  applying  for  grants,   appearing  on  television, grinding   out  little  mags  on mimeograph  machines,  and  frequently  producing  new and genuine  poetry.




AT ONE  TIME it seemed to me that Canadian poets could be roughly divided into  two schools, the native and  the cosmopolitan, and  I think it was  Northrop   Frye  who  added  the  necessary corrective-that this dichotomy is not a matter  of division between poets or groups of poets but a division within the  mind  of every  poet.  The  division that  exists today, however, between  poets and  groups of poets is between  the traditional  or academic,  the cultivated  poets, you might say, and  the new primitives, whose tradition goes back no farther  than to William  Carlos  Williams, Charles  Olson, or his disciple Robert  Creeley, and, in  some cases, to  Allen  Ginsberg.  This  is an  American  school of  (if  I  may  be allowed  a paradox)  sophisticated  primitives. They  hail from  San  Francisco and Black Mountain College -Cid  Corman's  little magazine  Origins  was published at  Black Mountain and  rather  surprisingly, among the Canadian writers it  pub­ lished were  Morley  Callaghan, Irving  Layton,  and  Margaret Avison. The  chief influence of these western American experimentalists has been felt in Vancouver, in the little poetry magazine Tish, and in the verse of such poets as John  Newlove, George Bowering, Lionel Keams,  and even younger writers featured  in Raymond Souster's recent  anthology  New  Wave:  Canada.
In  Canada, however, it is not groups or broad general divisions that stand out most clearly, but  individuals-men of vigorous personality, who go striding  up and  down  the land  (aided  and  abetted  by the Canada Council,  the CBC, and the universities)  speaking  their  poetry and standing up for the poetic way of life, as opposed  to  the  life of unimaginative  acceptance in  the  mechanized  world of ad-men,  mass-communication, and  pollster politics. It is their  immersion  in this

47

THE CANADIAN POET



world  they never made  and  don't  like that  makes so many  of our  best poets - Earle  Birney, Frank  Scott, Irving  Layton,  Leonard  Cohen-satirists and  ironic comedians  in  a  surprisingly large  proportion  of  their  work  and  forces some of the younger poets into abstract  expressionism, black humour,  and  the cultivation of pop art  as a revolt against the conformist art  of the establishment.
Of  recent  years also some of our best poets have realized that  to be Canadian is not enough,  just as to be British or American  is not enough. In the thirty years that include  what  happened  at Guernica, Belsen, Dresden,  and Hiroshima,  events of such stupefying horror occurred-and are still occurring  in VietNam-that the  poet  is forced  to realize that  his responsibility  rests with  all  mankind  and that  he shares the guilt of all mankind.  Something  of this is felt in the poems of India  and  the  Far  East of Scott  and  Birney, of South  America  and  Mexico by Birney  and  Louis  Dudek,  and  in  the  poems  of Germany  and  Spain  in  Irving Layton's  newest collection.
In  the  prefaces  to his last four  or five volumes -he  has published five since I 96 I-Layton  has  presented  the  conception  of  the  universal  moral  responsi­ bility of  the  poet  with  vigour  and  clarity;  and  while  the  presentation  is some­ times marred  by an accretion of personal "soundings-off", these do not invalidate  the  truth   and  pa&'>ion  of  the  poet's  main  message.  "Today,  poets  must  teach themselves to imagine  the worst.... If the poet is to win back the praise he once enjoyed as the supreme 'interpreter of the age' he must learn again to address him­ self to the moral  and  psychological dilemmas of his time. Though satisfying ver­ bally and  technically mere blabbermouthing is out...."
If this should  mean discarding of about sixty per cent of Layton's own poetry, the  rest would  be the stronger  for it. And  I  take it as a sign of continuous  de­ velopment   that   this  element  of  responsibility,  strength   and  sincerity  has  been increasing in  proportion  with every volume he has written  in this decade.
As I close, I  would like to set beside the  prefaces  of Irving  Layton  the  pre­ face  written  in I 94I by  a  young  Canadian named   Bertram  Warr  to  a  small pamphlet  of his poems published by Robert  Graves. Warr was a pacifist, who had tried  to enlist in  the Red  Cross but  was drafted  into  the  Royal  Air  Force  and was killed in  action overGermany on April g, I943·

Ours [he wrote] is an age of renunciation. It is an age of probing and reflection, of scrutiny of tradition and dogma in the hard light of reason. And with each abandonment of the outworn things that for so long had meant security to us, we grow just a little more tight-lipped. We feel the new hardness of scepticism, and as tie after tie is cut, in manners, religion, science, the whole field of contact be-

THE  CANADIAN POET



tween man  and  man,  there  comes over us the lassitude of disillusionment.... We are not yet ready for  this  new world that  has grown  up from  the second decade of the century.  Successive shocks have proved  too much for  us and  we have been driven into retreat,  still clinging to the shreds of old things, and too untried  to step forward  and  gaze upon  the  new in  their  true  light.  We have gone  backward  to lick our  wounds  and  debate,  somewhat  morbidly, whether  to carry  on  the  fight, or to renounce  with  all the  rest, those other  bases of our  being, Beauty and  Love and the Search for Truth.


Many  of  the  most serious  of our  younger  poets have,  perhaps, gone  backward to lick their  wounds, but  one  thing  is clear,  even in the  most far-out of the  Beat poets,  that   the  search   is still,  if  sometimes  in  the  most  unexpected  places,  for Beauty,  Love,  and  Truth.  The contemporaries and  compatriots of the  Canadian poet  today  may  not  be  any  longer  Yeats  or  Eliot  but  rather Lorca  and  Brecht, Pablo  Neruda, Rene  Char, William  Carlos  Williams,  and  Mayakovsky, and  the art  that  he must  aim  at is neither  native  nor cosmopolitan but  universal.
































49



A CORE OF BRILLIANCE

Margaret Avison's Achievement



Lawrence M. Jones




MARGARET AVISON's  exp.,imental poetry  has  oome of age;  we may now place her in the front rank  of Canadian poets. This is obvious to those who have  read  her latest volume, The  Dumbfounding, and  more espe­
cially to those who  had  seen the  merits of her  early  work,  both  in  anthologies (such  as A. J. M. Smith's of 1943)  and magazines, and in her first book, Winter Sun. It seems clear that the elements of pattern, style and  content  used superbly,
but often sporadically in the early poetry, have finally been fused and formed into pearls of great  lyrical vitality and  depth.
The  key to the  change  in  Avison's poetry  may  not  be obvious  to the casual reader. A poem such as "The  Butterfly" in the 1943 anthology  reveals her acute sense of vision and  the verbal facility with  which  it is expressed;  describing  the insect, she says:

I remember it, glued to the grit of that rain-strewn beach that glowered around it, swallowed its startled design
in the larger iridescence of unstrung dark.

Poems such as "To  Professor X, YearY" and "Thaw" in Winter Sun are framed in  that  historical  perspective Avison often  adds  to the  visual one;  and  the well­ constructed  "Apocalyptic?" is an exercise in  metaphysical  speculation  about  the purpose  of  life,  re-echoed  in  other  poems such  as  "The  Mirrored  Man"  and "From   a  Provincial".   Avison's  use  of  all  these  perspectives-the  visual,  the historical,  the  metaphysical-:- may  easily  be  recognized,  but  they  still  do  not
provide the clue to what A. J. M. Smith calls in his review of The  Dumbfounding
"an  immense step forward". What  is that  clue?
In  an  article she was kind enough  to send me before its publication,  entitled
"I wish I  had known ...", Miss Avison makes some statements  which shed light


50

A CORE OF  BRILLIANCE



on  this  question. The  article  concerns  the  progress  of  her  personal  beliefs from the  "will  to  be  good" of  her  early  days  as  a minister's  daughter to  the  present "getting to  be  where  Christ's suffering  goes, terribly  on"  of the  mature religious poet. She  tells how  the  period  between  these points-that of church-joining and Christian service -had  given  her  a "blurry but  adequate" portrait of God  and a concept  of Jesus  as "about the  best person  who ever lived",  and  how  the  Bible became increasingly "opaque"  to her  as she  substituted her  invented Christ  for the  scriptural  Person.
She  then  describes  the  single  most  important event  in  this  progress  of  belief, the  occasion  of  January fourth, 1963,  when  the  "Jesus  of  resurrection power" revealed  Himself  to  her  when  she  was supposedly  alone; says the  poet:

I would  not want  to have missed what he gave then:  the astounding delight of his making  himself known at  last, sovereign, forgiving, forceful of life.

Under the  influence of  the  refocusing  caused  by this experience, she  looks back upon  her  previous  life and  work  and  notes  "how  grievously  I cut  off his way by honouring the  artist" and  sees her  past  as a "long  wilful  detour  into  darkness".
In  the  light  of these  revealing  statements, much  of The  Dumbfounding is im­
mediately illuminated.  Take,  for   example,   the   poem   entitled   "Person". This seems  to  me  to  be  the  poetic  record  of  the  liberation experience of  1963; the experience is given  as a kind  of "flashback", for the initial position  is one of  free­ dom:

Sheepfold and hill lie under the open sky.

from   which  we  are  taken   back  in  time  to  discover  what  the  original captivity, perhaps to her  misconception of God,  was really like:

This door that is "I AM" seemed to seal my tomb my ceilinged cell
(not enclosed earth, or hill)

there was no knob or hinge.

. . . Beneath steel tiers, all walled, I lay barred, every way.

This  realization that  "I lay  barred, every  way"  is in  reality  the  first stage  of the

A CORE  OF  BRILLIANCE



experience;  the concept of the "I AM",  with its overtones of sovereignty and un­
approachability, had kept her from a personal relationship  with God.
The  second stanza outlines the second stage in the liberation -the moment of realization  that  the door  to freedom is actually  a Person:

"I am."   The door was flesh; was there.

No hinges swing, no latch
lifts.   Nothing moves.   But such
is love, the captive may
in blindness find the way:

In all his heaviness, he passes through.

Obviously, this is no forceful, door-swinging operation,  but rather  the acceptance of, the  love-response to the one who says "I am  the door  of the sheep"  (John IO: 7).
The  final stage in the experience is that  of the new freedom  of the sheepfold :

So drenched with Being and created new the flock is folded close, and free
to feed-His cropping clay, His earth-

from which the glories of the Morning Star  (Revelation  22: I 6:  "I am the bright and morning star") may be seen:

and to the wooly, willing bunt-head, forth shining, unseen, draws near
the Morning Star.

"Person" is unquestionably  central  to The  Dumbfounding in that  without  the experience it contains, the rest of what Smith  calls in his review the "act  of  wor­ ship  and  submission"  could  not  have  been  written.
The  title poem falls into the category of an "act  of worship" of the Christ who deigned  to become human  on man's account. The  first stanzas speak of the rejec­ tion of such a Christ by men:

When you walked here, took skin, muscle, hair, eyes, larynx, we
withheld all honour: "His house is clay,
how can he tell us of his far country?"


52

A CORE  OF  BRILLIANCE



Your not familiar  pace
in flesh, across the waves, woke only our distrust.
Twice-torn we cried "A ghost"
and only on our planks counted you fast.

Dust wet with your spittle cleared mortal  trouble.
We called you a blasphemer, a devil-tamer.


What strikes  me  most  forcibly  in  this  presentation is  the  aptness  and  terseness of  Avison's  phraseology;  men   trying   to  dismiss  God-in-flesh  "withheld   all honour", and  in such  Christ  "awoke only our distrust", and  juxtaposed with these phrases   those   describing  Christ's  real  actions:  "in  flesh,  across the   waves", "cleared mortal trouble" and   the  ultimate and  poignant "You   died". The  last four  stanzas  extend  the  mystery  and  outline  Christ's  reception  of men,  that  he is "all-men's-way", that  when  a man  turns  to him  he makes  "new  flesh"  and  leads constantly to Calvary where  he has fathomed "dark's uttermost".
The   "dumbfounding", then,  is the  person  of  Christ  himself,  and  Avison  has
painted   the  same  portrait as the  prophet Isaiah  of the  man  who  was  "despised and  rejected  of men" yet "bare the sins of many" (Isaiah 53: 3,  I 2).  The  other religious  lyrics  which   are  central to  The   Dumbfounding  examine other  facets of  the  poet's   newfound  relationship  with  Christ.   "The  Word" deals  with  the problem  of disciplineship, specifically  as it is the subject  of the statement in Luke
I 4: 33:   "whosoever he  be  of  you  that  forsakest  not  all  that  he  hath, cannot  be my  disciple". The  essential   comparison, skilfully  used   by  the   poet, is of  the measure  of  our  "forsaking" with  that  of  Christ's  "being forsaken", and  comes to  the  conclusion   that  his  death explodes  preconceived notions  about  the image of Jesus,  destroys  the  picture of  the  intellectual, physical  or  even  spiritual  bene­ factor-for  he  has  crossed  the  line from  "benefactor" to  "saviour":

The  line we drew, you crossed, and cross out, wholly forget,
at the faintest stirring of what you know is love, is One
whose name has been, and is and will be, the
lAM.


53

A CORE OF  BRH.LIANCE



"... Person, or A Hymn  on and  to the Holy Ghost" discovers a pattern for prayer whereby  the  poet's  self is "released  from  facelessness"  and  given  spiritual power:

so that where you
(unseen, unguessed, liable
to grievous hurt)  would go
I may show him visible.

Yet  perhaps the  most  complicated and  effective  of  the  poems  in  the  volume is the one  entitled  "Branches". It is almost  a poetic  thesis on  the confrontation of Christianity and  the  modem  world;  it is remarkable for the various  uses to which its central ideas are put, and for the way in which the poet ties them together. Contemporary men  are first compared to the  branches of a dying  tree:

The diseased elms are lashing in the hollowing vaults of air. In movie-washroom-mirrors wan selves, echoing, stare.

In  the  context  of "Toronto's whistling  sunset", asks the  poet,  "who  would  hear wholeheartednessj and  make  the world  come  true?"; this inability  to apprehend the  Light  causes  us to seek some pseudo-solace  in darkness :

The cinnamon carnation blows funeral incense here. In darkness is a narcotic,
a last rite, silenced care.
the value of which  the poet questions: Can this kind of blanking
bring us to our knees?

Again,  in  contrast to man's  ignorance, we see the  knowledge of Christ,  what he accomplished for  man:

But he died once only
and lives bright, holy, now hanging the cherried heart of love on this world's charring  bough.

In  tasting  this fruit  of love, we can  come into  the  joy of the  knowledge of life in
Christ,  which  in tum gives a reason for fellowship  and  discipleship:


54

A CORE  OF  BRILLIANCE



Wonderingly, one by one: "Gather.   Be glad."
We scatter  to tell what the root
and where life is made.

It seems to me  that  the  two symbols in this poem  are  cunningly interwoven, so that   each  imparts some  meaning to  the  other.  The  overworked poetic  motif  of light  and  darkness is  given  a  new  vitality: the  light  of  the  world   ("Toronto's whistling  sunset")  is  contrasted to  the  "Light that  blinded  Saul"; the  four  dif­ ferent  meanings given  to the  word  "light" in the ninth  stanza  do not, because  of the  seriousness  of  what   precedes  and  follows  it,  become  merely  an  experiment with  words,  but  the  accurate summing-up of a modem attitude:

Stray selves, crowding for light make light of the heart's gall and, fly-by-night, would light on the Light that  blinded Saul.

The  tree-symbol is also  put  to striking  use-as  the  tree of humanity, with  its diseased  roots  and  lashing  branches, as the  evidence  (in  a symbolically  tangible form)  of the  fruition of  David's knowledge  of wholeheartedness (the  lush  date­ palms), and  as the  handiwork of the Gardener who causes love to blossom on the skeletal  boughs  of humanity's tree.
Finally,  the  word  "root", left  for  emphasis  to  the  last  stanza, is the  organic
connection  between   the   two  symbols-for without   the  action   of  the  light  to create  the  necessary  life-energy  there  can  be no root,  and  without the  root  there can  be  no  tree.  The action  of  the  Light  parallels  this:  it is only in  the spiritual "photosynthesis" which  Christ  makes  possible that  "life  is made".
It may  be  contested that  the  visual  perspective  of which  I have  spoken  earlier as  characterizing  Margaret  Avison's  early  poetry  ha:s become,  in  The  Dumb­ founding, a blatantly Christian one;  admittedly, the "Jesus of resurrection power" has  had  a shaping effect  upon  her imagination, for he is as forceful  in  her work as  he  has  become  "forceful for  life".  But  one  who  contests  that  Avison's  vision has  been  twisted  to fit her  new  faith  must  still contend with  the other  four-fifths  of The  Dumbfounding that  is not overtly religious. Acclimatized as it has become to the  city and  its  rushing life, Avison's  vision often  penetrates  keenly into  some feature of urban existence,  as it does in "July   Man":


Old, rain-wrinkled,  time-soiled, city-wise, morning man ...

55

A CORE  OF  BRILLIANCE



In the sound of the fountain
you rest, at the cinder-rim, on your bench.

The rushing river of cars
makes you a stillness, a pivot, a heart-stopping blurt, in the sorrow
of the last rubbydub swig, the searing, and
stone-jar solitude lost, and yet,
and still-wonder  (for good now)  and trembling:

The too much none of us knows
is weight, sudden sunlight, falling
on your hands and arms, in your lap, all, all, in time.

Here  the  effect  of  "time-soiled" at  the  beginning and  "all,   all, in  time" at  the end  of  the  poem  indicate its  theme: the  burden ("too much")  of  temporality weighing   down   upon   humanity. This  penetrative  power   may  well  be  a  by­ product of  Avison's  spiritual experience,  as  may  the  increased interest  in  meta­ physical  connections rather  than   historical   ones.  "Natural/Unnatural",  for  an­  other  example, gives us an insight  into the nature of human hope  and despair:

Hope is a dark place that  does not refuse fear?
True, the natural  light is a pressure on my ribs:
despair -to draw that in, to
deflate the skin-pouch, crunch  out the structure  in one
luxuriant  deep-breathed  zero­
dreamed  already, this is corruption.

I fear that.
I refuse, fearing;  in hope.

As might   be  expected, though, the  core  or  pivot  for  which  the  early  poetry sought,  has been found  in the "strange heart's force", the very conscious presence of a living Christ  in the poet's experience. This is what  gives power to the basically simple  poem  "Christmas: Anticipation" where  the spirit  of Zacharias of the  first Christmas is contrasted with  the shopping-and-vacation spirit of its modern counterpart:

A CORE  OF  BRILLIANCE



The  patient  years in the appointed  place brought  Zacharias, dumb with unbelieving, flame-touched, to front
the new sky ...

The  buyers wedge in doorways waiting for lights, lifts, taxes,
The boy lonely in love moves with the wind
through  electric bright, through fading, light. The old man with his censer, dazed down the centuries, rays his
dry-socketed eyes, dimming
still, till he could believe, towards, with,  joy.

This  is  a  very  different treatment of  a  Christian  celebration than  that  seen  in "Easter" of  Winter  Sun;  there   Avison  approached  her  subject   in  terms  of  a season,  here  it is in  terms  of a Person.
Whatever else  may  be  said  about   Margaret Avison's  poetry,  it  seems  to  me that  her  "conversion" has given it a hard  core of brilliance from  which  her medi­ tations  upon  life radiate; and  this of course  connects  her  with  a poet like Gerard Manley   Hopkins  (whose  influence  she  has  acknowledged in  a  letter  to  me)   in the  tradition of what  T. S. Eliot liked to call "meditative verse". But  their poetry is  much   more   than   that   term  implies;   there  is  a  keenly-felt and  powerfully­ expressed  view  in it of the  relation  between  Christianity and  modem society,  be­ tween  the  resurrected  Christ   and  the  contemporary  individual, that   cannot be dismissed  as  pious  versifying.  What  has  been said  of  Hopkins in  this  connection (by  Louis  Martz in The Poetry  of Meditation, 1954), can  also be said  of Mar­ garet  Avison :
... the self created  in this poetry is one that  tries to speak with full awareness of a supernatural presence, one that  feels the  hand  of the supernatural upon  himself, and  upon all created  things. Thus  the learning,  the logic, the philosophy that  help to form this individual  self are easily joined with perceptions of a bird, or a broom, or a love-ballad;  for all these things are viewed as issuing, though sometimes once removed, from  an  omnipresent  source of creative  power. Such  meditative  poems, then,  are  composed  in  "current language  heightened",  moulded,  to  express  the unique being of an individual  who is seeking to learn, through  intense mental  dis­ cipline, how  to live  his life in  the  presence of divinity.





57



THE OLD AGE

OF THE NEW



Norman Newton





IT  WILL NO  DOUBT ,;eem unfair  that  I should  use the  woeipt of  review  copies of eleven  books of Canadian verse'  as an  excuse  for  writing  an
essay on  the state  of Canadian poetry.  Has  not  each  of these  poets his own indi­ viduality? Is it  fair,  then,  to  think  of him  as an  example of something?  Unfor­ tunately, while each  of these poets does necessarily  have  his own individuality, as a  human soul,  he  does not  as  a  poet.  There is  a  disconcerting  sameness  about  most  of  the  poems,  all the  more  disconcerting because  each  poet  clearly  believes his  statement to  be intensely  personal.   More  generally, one  cannot help  noting  the similarities between  this new Canadian verse and  that produced in the United States,  the  United   Kingdom and  other  English-speaking  countries. It  is as if all idiosyncrasies   were  being  ironed   out.  There are  those  who  would   convince   us that  this  monotony of  texture  is the  result  of that  shared vision  which  comes  at the  beginning of  a  new  and  exciting  era.  I  would  put  it  down,   rather, to  the exhaustion of a style.
Since  they  possess so little individuality, there  would  be very little  point  in my discussing  each  of  these  books  individually. Instead, I will select  some  passages which  best illustrate the  elements  these books  have  in  common.
It is true  that  the  critics  and  poets together  talk  as if we were  living in an  era of  literary   revolution. And  in  a  way,  we  are;  but  it  is precisely  the  same  revo­ lution  "begun" by Jarry's Ubu  Roi  (18gg)  or  by  Mallarme's Un  Coup  de Des
( 1897), a  revolution   which  had  already  settled  into  respectability by  the  time T. S. Eliot  came  along. In short,  we are living in an era  of permanent revolution, which,  as readers  of  Nazi  and  Communist history  will know,  is a  peculiar  kind of  intellectual stasis  characterized  by  a  very  rapid   circular motion   around  the same point.

THE OLD  AGE OF  THE  NEW



Kathleen  Raine,  a  good   poet,  has  recently  published a  fine  book  entitled
Defending Ancient Springs, in  which  appears  the following  perceptive statement
-"It  might  certainly   seem  that  revolution  for  its own  sake,  transformation  as such,  an  instantaneous gesture   which  expresses  finally  nothing but  its  own  in­ stantaneity, process  as such,  has  become  the  be-all and  end-all  of art;  process so accelerated that  all images  have  dissolved into the flux of continuous transforma­ tion, so much  so that  form,  in such art, can no longer be said to exist."
Now, in the  poems  to be reviewed,  form  certainly  does not exist;  but  then  true
form  is rare.  By form  I do  not  mean  what  results from  the  skilled  use of fixed rhyme  schemes,  regular   metres,  and   the  traditional repertoire of  tropes.  Every poet  should  be  able  to  handle these,  which  have  in themselves  some  kind  of  in­ nate  life,  just  as every  composer  should  be able  to write  a traditional fugue  and every painter paint  a convincing nude.  Even if the poet does not elect to use them in  his mature work,  the  ability  to  handle  them  intelligently  is  indispensable  evi­ dence  of  an  elementary but  necessary  seriousness  about   the  craft  aspects  of his art.  Yet  a  poet  may  be, like  Auden, a complete  master  of  all  poetic  techniques, and  rarely  succeed  in  creating work  which  is formally  beautiful. I am  referring rather  to  something which  has  the  coherent,  self-contained, living  beauty  of an apple  or a new-born child: a poet  without craft  knowledge  cannot realize such a work,  but  in itself it is the  product of  inspiration, and  is unpredictable. This  kind of formal  beauty  has been  rare enough at any time in the past;  it is much  rarer  in our  century, at  least  in  English.  It is found  in  Eliot's  Four  Quartets but  not  in The Waste  Land, in the last  poems of Dylan  Thomas, but  not in his earlier  ones, in  Yeats  but  very  rarely  in  Auden, in  Edwin  Muir  and  Vernon Watkins, occa­ sionally  in  MacLeish,  but almost  never  in  Pound. Should  we expect  such  a rare quality in  English-Canadian  poets,  always  provincial, but  now  provincial to  a decadent tradition? What can  we expect from those whose masters are such minor  figures  as  Olson,  Creeley  and  Ginsberg?  Among  Canadian poets  I make  an  ex­ ception  of  Layton  and  Cohen, who  are interesting examples  of split  personality: half  of  their  verse  is minor  but  good  post-Symbolist  work,  dependent upon  the European tradition:  the  other   half,  the  ostentatiously   North   American half,  is cheap,  loud  and  shallow.



l:E BEST FIRST;  and  it is depressing  that  the  best poet  in this collection  should   be  George  Bowering,  because  Bowering  is not  a  major   talent. His  advantage is that  he  has  a  clearly  defined  aesthetic.  It is a limited, almost  a

59

THE OLD AGE OF  THE NEW



JeJune  aesthetic; but  it  contains  an  idea,  if  not  of  the  beautiful, of  the  appro­ priate: Bowering  knows  what  experiences  his style  can  cope  with,  and  those  it must  leave  alone.  His  poems  are  more  or  less innocent of truly  poetic  form,  but they  do  follow,  though  obliquely,  an  "argument", and  one  finds,  when one  has finished  reading   them,  that  some kind  of coherent statement has been  made.
Bowering  is a fairly  close follower  of the  Black  Mountain poets of the  United States,  Creeley,  Olson  and  the  rest, who  are  in  turn  followers  of William  Carlos Williams,   and   that   eminent   Sinologist   and   Egyptologist,  Ezra   Pound, or,  as Bowering  calls him,  "Ez  Pound". Their remote  ancestor  is Walt  Whitman:  not the  prophetic oracular Whitman, who produced some of the most beautiful poetry of  his  age,  but  the  Whitman of  naturalistic snapshots, who  often  descended   to bathos.  This  group, like the surrealists, neo-metaphysicals and  Communists of the last  generation, has  a clear idea  of what  poetry  should  and  should  not  be, and  a corresponding set of political  and  social ideals. It also has the  advantage of being at  the  tail end  of one of the few poetic  and  political  movements truly  indigenous to  Anglo-Saxon  North   America.   Politically  it  springs,  if  one  traces  it  back  far enough, from  the  petit-bourgeois and  frontier radicalism of the  Jeffersonian and Jacksonian epochs  of United  States  history,  a kind  of quirky  utilitarianism which was reflected  in Canada in the movement led by William  Lyon  Mackenzie (some of whose speeches,  surely the most boring  ones, have  recently  been versified-by somebody   named   Colombo,   I believe). In   this  century, a  similar   impulse  has expressed  itself  in  Technocracy  and  Social  Credit. The Black  Mountain  poets have   a  Leveller's   concept   of  history,   and  an   obsession  with  tools,  whether mechanical or  hand-directed. There is  a  hatred of  "polite letters", in  the  old European and  Bostonian  sense  ("poetry -PAH!" George  Bowering  says some­ where); but  this understandable rejection  of a long-dead tradition hides a deeper  rejection both  of finely-tuned  wit and  formal beauty. Even  more  deeply is hidden  a  rejection   of  any  view of the  world  or  poetry  dependent upon  non-materialist cosmologies. These  poets are materialists to the core;  but because they are archais­ ing  materialists, this fact  is sometimes  missed: it is clear  that Olson,  their  master,  loves  flowers,  old  harbour-charts, sailing-ships and  hand-tools,  and   he  has  at times  vividly  evoked  18th-century America; but  things  do  not  become  spiritual by being  old,  and  he is still utterly  engrossed  in  the  world  of things.  (He  is also interested  in  astrology  and   the  "occult", but  simply  as  representative of  a  less tangible order  of the  material world.)   Their  world-view  is horizontal, but  has no place  for  the  vertical.  Thus,   in  language,  there  is  a  complete rejection   of  the idea  that  there  are  "high  words"  and  "low  words". One  word  is as good  as an-

6o

THE OLD AGE  OF THE  NEW



other,  just  a<>   one  man  is a<>   good a<>   another,  an idea  Olson  ha.<>   attempted  to justify by misquoting  Dante  on the use of "combed"  and "shaggy"  words. Words of themselves are considered to have no resonance or beauty:  how can they, when events  have  no  meanings  other  than  those the  poet gives to  them?  The  other side of the coin is a kind of Pelagianism of vocabulary; this is sometimes mistaken for  obscenity by casual  readers,  but is really evidence of an  odd flat innocence, which assumes that  the traditional associations of obscene words may be abolished by fiat. One  is reminded  of Gladstone  among the prostitutes.
There  are however, inconsistencies. Decadent  Europe is rejected;  but curiously
enough  decadent   Asia  is  accepted.   Bowering,  for  example,  has  expressed  his fondness for the extremely  refined, perhaps over-refined, Tale  of Genji, in which Lady  Mura.<>aki Shikibu  displays a sensibility one would have thought  quite anti­ thetical  to his own. If Lady  Murasaki,  why not Jane  Austen  or Henry  James? The  Black  Mountain  poets  and  poetasters  have  inherited  from  Ezra  Pound  a fondness  for  "exotic"   ancient   and  Asian  cultures -archaic  Greek,  Egyptian, Chinese and  Japanese,  to which ha.<>  been added,  recently, an interest in ancient Mexican  civilization.  These  cultures  are  used as standards,  against  which is set, to its disadvantage, the  culture  of the Christian  West.  Unfortunately, these cul­ tures are superficially understood  as a rule:  Olson's Mayan  Letters are, in places, ineffably silly. This superficiality seems to be a family curse, passed on from Old Ez. "I once asked Arthur  Waley," Graves says in The  Crowning  Privilege, "how much  Chinese Pound  knew;  Waley shook his head despondently."
Bowering's  Baseball:  A Poem  in the Magic  Number  Nine  is dedicated  to the United  States poet, Jack Spicer, who has described himself as "member  of the California  Republican  Army  which hopes by violent means to establish an  inde­ pendent  California  which will ally itself with France and China." In a very small way,  Bowering is trying  to  make  baseball, as Melville made  whaling,  a symbol of  the  cosmic  process.  In  the  first section, Bowering compares  the  world  to  a baseball thrown  out into space:

In the beginning was the word, and the word was
'Play  Ball!'

By references to the  players whose careers he has followed, and  who are now dead  or retired, Bowering laments  the fading of physical beauty  and strength;  in the eighth section he playfully fields his own lineup (left field Terpsichore, second ba.<>e   Polyhymnia  and  so on) ; in the ninth  section the end  of the game is com­ pared  to the  coming  on  of physical age, and  the deaths  of civilizations.

6r

THE OLD  AGE OF THE NEW



The  theme   is  a  very  traditional one.  Homer, Pindar  and   the   Elizabethan dramatic poets  (if it is not ridiculous  to mention such  names  in this context) had the  ability  to use games  as symbols of the  deep  movements within  the individual personality and  within  history.  Many  Amerindian games  had  a deeply  symbolic aspect,  particularly the Mexican  game  of tlachtli, to which  more  than  one  recent poet  has referred. Bowering handles  this old theme at a very low level of intensity. There is a certain wit here, but it rarely  rises above  amiable fooling:

God is the Commissioner of Baseball.
Apollo is the president of the Heavenly  League. The  Nine Muses, his sisters
the first all-girls baseball team.
Archangel  Michael the head  umpire. Satan  was thrown out of the game
for arguing with the officials.

These   are  images  one  might  playfully  develop  in  conversation over  a  cup  of coffee;   they  lack   resonance  and  inevitability. The   writing is  "clean", with  no words  wasted,  but  this is not quite  enough  to make  prose  poetic.  Bowering  often makes  the  fashionable mistake of confusing  the  conciseness of the poem  with  that of  the  telegram :

He's still got big black moustache,  shoots pool with his belly hanging over the  rail.

The  poem  has,  in fact,  the  thin  neatness  of  the  very  minor  poetry  of the  late
18th   century; the  images  are  pebbles  arranged side  by side,  and  a  tone  of  sub­ urban whimsy  pervades  even the "cosmological" parts.  Bowering,  in certain of his passages,  might  be a tone-deaf  John  Betjeman.
Like many  contemporary poets, Bowering  writes  manifestos which  only confuse us, because  they seem intended to compensate for the  defects  of his verse. "What do  I think  about poetry?"  he has written  on  the  jacket  of an earlier  book,  Points on the Grid, "Mainly that  the  job is a spoken  art  and  that  what  is written down is a score, poetry  being  closer to music than  any  other  artform The written thing is no  more  the  poem  than  the score is the  symphony. Scores  are  written because you can't take  an orchestra  or a poet to every farmhouse on the Canadian tundra. But  meticulous care  should  be taken  with  notation of the  poem,  because  you are trying  to make  a suggestion  of the things  the voice does".  And  he adds,  "Rhythm, I've  always been told, is my forte."
A somewhat ingenuous  way of disarming us. What we are  reading, it seems, is

THE OLD  AGE OF  THE NEW



not  the real  poem,  only its "score", so we are not to judge it until  we have heard Mr.  Bowering  speak  it; a chance few of us will have.  The  truth  is that  rhythm is  not   Mr.   Bowering's forte:  his  rhythms   (which   are  prose  rather than   verse rhythms)  are  few  and   repetitious, and  tend  here  towards short  lines  of  prose dominated by a thumping and  graceless ametrical  beat with vaguely trochaic tendencies.
An even more  obvious  use of the red-herring manifesto  is found  in the  preface
to  Pilgrims of Peace, by  Bonnie  Day.  "Some  of these  verses are  booby-trapped. They  look innocent and  old-fashioned and  on the surface  deceptively  simple,  and when  you least  expect  it,  they explode  with  meaning. So don't say I didn't warn you."  In  fact,  these  poems  are innocent and  old-fashioned, and  it would  be un­ kind  to say any  more  than  that  about  them.  It is strange to read such  a collection in  conjunction with  these  others,  which  are  so resolutely  "modem"  (though no less conventional) ; but  maybe  Pilgrims of Peace indicates one thing, that  a return  to  regular   rhyme   and   metrical  patterns,  and   an  avoidance of  self-consciously incongruous imagery will not  in itself "save" poetry.


A coNSIDERATION of these eleven books forces one to a con­
clusion  which  also arises, if with  less brutal obviousness,  from  a consideration of
the  more   complex   and   proficient   work  being  produced  in  the  United  States, namely   that   the  "experimental  age"  is  over.  "Free verse"  has  congealed   into thick  and  sodden prose;  and  perhaps it  is becoming  clear  that  there  never  was such  a thing  as "free  verse",  but  that  most  verse which  passed  under  that  name, if it  was  not  versified  prose,  was either  written in variable metres,  which  are  as old  as  the  Greeks,   or  psalmic   verse,  as  derived   from  Scripture  by  Whitman, Claudel and  others.  The use of  the  startling image  has  become  a  nervous  tic; the  desire  to  shock  the  bourgeois   has  become  either  a  childish  amorality or  a dogged  and  habitual obscenity; the  learned  evocation  of the  past  has  become  a superficial exoticism; and  the  poetic  demotic,  which  was to sweep  away  all "rhe­ toric" and  "fine  writing", has  become  a grotesque dialect  with  no relation  to the speech-habits of any  North  American class. The  "modern" techniques have been vulgarized; it is the  characteristic of a vulgarized  form  that  it becomes a universal  template into  whose  shape  the  most  incongruous materials are  all too easily cut.
Bizarre  forms  of  imagery, specifically  developed  to  embody  states  of  anguish or  visionary   derangement  are  used  to  express  perfectly   normal, indeed   rather

6g

THE OLD  AGE OF THE NEW



mediocre  emotions,  as in the following quotation from  Helene Rosenthal's "Better
Housekeeping" (in  Peace is an Unknown Continent)

In  the morning reading of race riots I wield the vacuum
cleaner, with less than
my usual assurance. I avoid
the space under the bed
where my responsibility lives like a hamster
fed on scraps of
vegetarian  pity.

(One might  also note,  parenthetically, a not  untypical carelessness  with  the  Eng­
lish language:  presumably it is the hamster, not  pity,  which  is a vegetarian.) Jagged rhythms, whose original  purpose  was to realize  an explosive tension,  are
used to express serene feelings or calm thoughts, as in the following strange tribute
to  the  Parthenon by Ralph Gustafson   (from  Mainline)

Proportion  is all things of beauty. Dimension, go beyond dimension.
It won't satisfy.  Measure  nothing, Only in relation, the cornice balanced Against the line, the line against
The  truth,  not as an existence
But as a meaning, the marble  line
The  respect to itself, the incumbent  gods.

The specialized  vocabulary of the exact  sciences  is used,  not  because  the  poet has  a  passionate  love  of scientific  truth, but  because  he  wishes  to give  his lines an  air, usually spurious,  of "wit" and learned  precision.

Perhaps enzymatic indolence dissolved the neuron sentries.
("No  Exit",  by Michael  Freedman)

Love  between  man  and  woman   (or  in some  cases a homosexual relationship) is seen  exclusively  and  stupidly  in terms of the sexual  act.  Indeed, in terms  of the specific discharge of semen, which  is usually described in language at once  brutish and  clinical.   (There is no  need  to embarrass the  reader by quotation.)

THE OLD AGE OF  THE NEW



There is  a  specifically   anti-Christian  bias,  and,  in  the  case  of  some  Jewish poets,  an  animus against   both  Christianity and  Judaism. More  generally, there is an  antagonism to  all  religions.  One  does find  occasional  references  to  Eastern religions,  but  these  are  usually  thrown  in in order  to score a point  against Chris­ tianity.  I see no evidence  here  of any serious interest  in Eastern religions, even in Buddhism: most  references  to  the  East  indicate no deeper  knowledge  than may be obtained from  a few  pocket  books. Instead, there  is an  interest  in  magic,  not as  a  form   of supernatural philosophy   (in  which  sense  it  has  deeply  influenced much  European poetry), but  as a reflection  of a "higher" state  of  matters. Some­  times,  indeed, magic   is seen  as simple  technique, an  easy  way  to  power  and  knowledge.  This  is the  world,  not  of Dr.  Faustus,  but  his servant, Wagner, who now-a-days would   probably take  LSD,  and  compulsively  play  the  I  Ching  and  the Tarot cards.

I know a white magic, a mystical magic-

Bonnie  Day  sings with  her  usual  candour; but  more often  than  not this obsession is beneath the surface.
When  political  ideas  are  expressed,  they are usually nihilist or anarchist, unless they descend  from  the  Jeffersonian radicalism  I have discussed earlier. There is a hatred of authority, not  because it is misused  (the  traditional argument of satire), but  simply  because  it is authority, whether moral  or  coercive.  Here, again, only the  activists  express  this idea  bluntly  and  openly;  usually it is one of the unstated premises  of the  poem.  Admittedly, such ideas do have  a certain  juvenile  dash.
A  very  high  proportion of  tl1ese verses begin  and  end  nowhere in  particular. It is not  a question, it should  be noted,  of implicit  form,  or of poems  which  are formed  according to new  principles.  They  are, simply,  boneless. Far  from  attain­ ing  the  formal beauty discussed  earlier,  most  of  these  verses  do  not  reach   the level  of  craft   competence. John  Hulcoop, in  introducing his  book, Three Ring Circus  Songs,  makes  a  rather touching confession-
Sometimes there's  everything  to say and so many ways to sing it that  you don't know where or how to start.  Departure is also a problem when there  are too many places you feel you might go to and too many earth-roads,  sea-roads, air-roads  you could travel  by to arrive  there.
I would  venture to say  that   no  true  poet  ever  feels that   way.  Rather, he  feels the  poem  has only one possible form  and  there  is only one possible way to achieve it: the  problem is finding  the form  and  the way.

THE OLD AGE OF THE NEW



There arc more ways of forestalling  criticism  than  those discussed so far. Freed­ man  makes  the  obligatory  references  to Dachau and  Hitler, but  it  doesn't  make his poems any better.  Indeed, it is from his collection  that  I will select my nomina­ tion  for  the  Worst  Image  of the Year-

... joy wells from your face lubricating  the distance.

A  strong   contender  in  the  Embarrassing  Self-Consciousness class  is  the  be­
ginning of his "Mistaken Boundaries" -

a hebrew's kiss frightens  you.




CAN ONE   DETECT ANYTHING NEW  at  all in  these  poems,  a "trend"? Perhaps one  can  detect  a  trend  towards giving  up  the  game  entirely, towards a  flattening out  of the  poem  to  the  point  where  it  becomes  simple  and manageable, a  "poetry for  everybody". The   best  poems  in  these  eleven  books (apart from  Bowering's  Baseball, which  does show,  as I have  said, some art) are little  descriptive pieces, "episodes  from  life",  which  might  well  have  been  para­ graphs in short  stories or novels. The  best of them  are  those in which  the imagery  is thinnest, is either  conventional or non-existent; and  the  reason  for  this is prob­  ably  that   a  materialistic point  of  view, which  does  not  recognize  a  higher  level of  events  to  which  physical  events  may  be  compared, is  not  favourable to  the development of  effective  imagery, indeed   has  no  need  for  it.  There are  many  verses in this category-Helene Rosenthal's "First Noel''  and "Domestic Poetry", Dorothy  Farmiloe's  "Goodbye, Linda",  Len   Gasparini's  "Union  Station, To­  ronto" and   "The  Photograph of  My  Grandfather  Reading Dante" and  David McFadden's "The Flowermaster".

Every morning  I look
and  my dahlias are come bigger. Every second day I water em every third  I hoe.

Soon I'll have to get out the stakes for tying support,  then
a little nitrogen, some chlorodene just before blossom time.

66

THE OLD  AGE OF  THE NEW



Then they  will blossom and  I'll  find out how  I'll  make  out  at  the fairs
am  I first  prize  material this year or second  or  third

and  the  thought sticks in my mind leaving  a weird  series of afterthoughts
the  thought of vandals  hopping the fence kicking  all my dahlias  down.

It is doubtful whether this  can  be  called   a  poem,  but  it  does  make a  simple unified statement. The inability to make a more  complex metaphorical statement is shown by  Helene Rosenthal's "Peace is an  Unknown Continent". I  will quote the  first  half  of the  poem. I might have  chosen  others just  as bad  by other poets: indeed, most  of  these  poets  are  much worse  than Helene Rosenthal, who  has,  at least, read  a few books.

By degrees configuration
of the  heat-hazed land subsided
at  the  zero parallel.

It was a  plotting time  for  her a spacing  time  but  slow ... pajamas didn't fit well
and  she slept  poorly.

It is my seasonable  job she said
to navigate
a mutinous crew.

The trouble was her dreams which  charted	by old instinct, while  she  held  a compass learning how to read
small,  faceless digits that  shivered
ever  north 	past  alien  forms to magnet icecaps.

Moby  Dick makes  exiles of us all

THE OLD  AGE OF  THE NEW



she said.
My brain is a white monster.

Sometimes the sea grew multiform remembered shapes,
sargassos of vegetal nets
she had to cut through to hold course.
The  days kept keel trimmed to the steel point of the north  star's gleam.

Necessity is a good tool she said.
Always	it is contemporary.

At Cancer
she cut the tropic cord, pulled with an even knot
to secure the cyclone	latitudes and went below.
The  current  warmed
a green pocket of sleep wedged
between advancing
arctic
floes.


Snow logged the days. Wind thinned  the hours.


A  psychological  crisis of some  unidentified kind  (at  first I thought it was the pain  of  giving birth, but  this  approach didn't  work)   is figured  as  a  journey by  ship  into  the  polar  regions.  Apparently it  is  not   important that   we  know what  this crisis was, since the poet does not  tell us; but  we are entitled  to ask that the  image  of the  journey  by sea be itself consistent, and  carry  us through a  con­ vincing  analogue of the  experience the  poet  wishes to embody. It is thus in The  Ancient  Mariner,  and  in the magnificent odes of Claude!. But genius is rare,  and we  are  not  entitled   to ask any  more  than  that  the  image  be  adequately  realized within  the  context  the poet  has set himself -realized  as well, perhaps, as the sea imagery of Olson's  Maximus  Poems.

68

THE OLD  AGE OF  THE NEW



If the  following  exegesis seems bizarre,  the reader  must  blame  my literal  mind. I  take  the  first verse  ("By  degrees ... zero parallel") to mean  that  as the ship moved  towards the equator, the land,  as seen from the sea, became  less mountain­ ous.  The  voyage  seems  to  have  started  below  the  equator; I  could  not  guess at
the  coast-line  referred   to.
I  take  the  next  verse  ("It was  a  plotting  ... she slept  poorly")  to mean  that the  captain-poet coped  with  the  boredom  of the voyage by finally getting  down  to plotting  a course.  The  fact  that  her  pajamas didn't fit well may seem trivial,  but such  apparently small  matters become  very important in the  tropics.
I  take  the  next  verse  ("It is my  seasonable  ... a  mutinous crew")  to  mean that   the  crew  is mutinous, which  is not  surprising,  in  view  of  the  revelation  in the  next  stanza ("the trouble ... to magnet  icecaps")  that  the  captain does not yet know  how  to  read  a  compass.  However, we  are  to  understand that  she  has sailed  these  waters  before  "by  old instinct", which  must  have  been  quite  a trick.
I  do  not  know  what  is  meant,  in  the  next  verse,  by  the  line  "Moby Dick  /
makes exiles of us all"; but it has a fine ring.
In  the  next  verse, she is in  the Sargasso Sea, which  lies between  20 ° north  and
35°  north.
The  observation in  the  next  verse, that  "Necessity  is a good  tool"  also has  a good,  somewhat brassy  ring,  though  it  lacks  the  fine insouciant clangour of  the statement about   Moby  Dick.
In  the  next  verse she has reached  the Tropic of Cancer (231'2° North), where
she  performs a  mysterious,   but  apparently efficacious  operation which  makes  it possible for  her  to get some sleep. We must  assume she falls asleep almost imme­ diately,  and  sleeps  for  several  days,  since  she  awakes  (no  time  having  passed)  to  find  herself  surrounded by ice-floes.
The last  two  lines  I  translate roughly  as "there was snow  and  wind". I had some difficulty  with  the  word  "logged", since in verse 6 the  days have  been com­ pared  to ships.  A ship's  log is used to measure  distance  travelled, and  one would assume  the  poet  means  that  snow  measured   the  distance  travelled   by  the ship;  but  since  the ship  is itself a measurement of time this does not make sense. If the poet  means  that   the  days  were  remembered by how  much  snow  they  had,  then  the  word   "logged" is  inappropriate, because  of  its  very  specific  meaning as  a nautical term.  It is also difficult to understand how wind  thinned the hours, since, on  a sailing  ship,  a  wind  would  increase  activity,  and  thus  "fill  out" the  hours,  and  lack of wind would  cause them to drag.
It would  be  cruel  to  continue further. Enough  has been  said,  I think,  to indi-


6g

THE OLD AGE  OF  THE NEW



cate  that  the imagery  has neither  been thought nor felt out,  but  is quite meaning­ less  when   read   carefully,  though   it  sounds   vaguely impressive if  one  gallops through it. This  is true of many  of the poems in these books, most of  which  really do  not  merit  discussion. It is true  also of many  more  sophisticated  poems written in the United  States  and  England. Helene  Rosenthal's poem,  and  the other  poems under  review,  are  specimens  of a literary  tradition in  the  last stage  of senility.


Is POETRY DEAD?  I can  hardly think  so. It has merely  reached
a  very  low  point.  There have  been  such  nadirs   before -when the  mediaeval
tradition degenerated into  dry  pedantry and  abstraction, when  the  metaphysical image  became  first far-fetched, then ridiculous,  when  all Augustan heroic  couplets began  to sound  the same. Something new replaced them,  and  something new will replace  the  present   tradition. It will  necessarily  be  "modern", since  this simply means  poetry  not  written  in the  past. It will hardly, however,  be "in  the modern tradition". If the  "modern movement" really  began  with  the  publication of Un
Coup de  Des in  1897,  it  probably  ended  with  the  1929  crash. The poets of the
thirties  discovered   little  that  was  new;  if  anything, they  settled   territory   which had   already   been   explored.   By  the  forties,   perhaps,  the  land   was  exhausted. Since  the Second  World  War,  we in the  English-speaking world  have  been living off our capital, and  the account is now overdrawn.


' Typescapes by David  Aylward  (Coach  House  Press); Lebanon Voices  by Bill  Bis­ sett (Weed and Flower Press);  Baseball by George Bowering  (Coach  House Press); Pilgrims  of Peace  and  Other Poems  by Bonnie Day  (Coach  House  Press);  Main­ line, edited by Dorothy Farmiloe  (poems by Fred Cogswell, Alden Nowlan, Eugene McNamara, Dorothy  Farmiloe,  Algirdas  Kryzanauskas,  Andrew  Suknaski,  Jose­ phine Ryan, Al Pittman, Donald  Polson, Len Gasparini,  Rick Homsey, Ralph  Gus­ tafson, C. H. Gervais, D. B. Kuspit, N. West Linder, Linda Wagner, George Bower­ ing); 21 x 3  by Dorothy Farmiloe,Len Gasparini and Eugene McNamara (Gryphon Press);   Poems   from  Ritual   by Michael  Harris   and  Through the  Telemeter  by Michael  Freedman  (privately  published,  Montreal); Three-Ring Circus  Songs  by John  Hulcoop   (Talonbooks); The  Saladmaker by  David   McFadden   (Imago); Peace is an  Unknown Continent by Helene Rosenthal (Talonbooks).




 'eview a,.ticle.s



AN OPEN GAP

Desmond  Pacey


A  Century  of Canadian   Literature:  Un  Siecle  de  Litterature  Canadienne edited by H. Gordon  Green  and  Guy  Sylvestre, Ryerson/HMH.  $4·95·


To  REVIEW THIS  BOOK is an extremely  difficult  and  delicate task. No­ one  wants  to knock  an  act  of piety, or to play  the  cynic  in  response  to  an  effusion of  centennial  enthusiasm. Nor  does  one lightly  incur  the  inevitable charge of sour grapes,  and  as one  who would  have liked to  edit   such   an   anthology,  and   as  an author  (one   of  a  select  few)   who  was omitted from  its  pages,  I am  doubly  vul­ nerable    to   this   charge. I  admit   quite  frankly   to  having  approached  the  book with   an   adverse  bias.  I   had   suggested the  editing  of  a  similar   centennial an­ thology   to  the   Ryerson   Press  some  ten years ago, and  the  late  Lorne  Pierce  had given   me  his  enthusiastic approval. In the meanwhile, of course, Lorne  Pierce retired   from  the  editorship of  the  Press, and   later   died,   and   his  successors  were less enthusiastic. I  eventually abandoned the  project on  the  advice  of  the  current editor,  and  I was  naturally a  bit  piqued to find  that  my  publishers were sponsor­ ing a similar  volume  under  different edi­ torship.  However,  I   think   that    I   am sufficiently   broadminded  to   have   swal­ lowed  this  slight,  to  have  conquered my bias,  and  to  have  given  warm   approval
 to  the  book  if  it  had   been  a  good  one. It  is not.
I   think   one   can   safely  maintain  the
proposition  that   books  edited   by   com­ mittees   are   bad   books,  if  bad   only   in their  dullness. A corollary  of this proposi­  tion  would  be  that   books  edited  by two committees   are  doubly  bad   books.  This  book  was edited   by two  committees.
The  anthology   was  planned,  we  are
told  in  a  publicity  release,  by the  Cana­ dian  Authors  Association  and  La  Societe des   ecrivains canadiens. The   English portions    of   the   book   were   edited    by H.  Gordon Green  of  the  Family  Herald with  the  assistance  of  a  committee con­ sisting  of  Fred  Cogswell   (poetry), John  Patrick   Gillese   (fiction),  and    Earle Beattie     (non-fiction) .   Thirteen   other  persons  are  also said  to  have  had  a  part  in   shaping  the   English   section   of   the book:    John   Robert  Colombo,  the   late John  Drainie, Dorothy Needles, Vernon Pope,    Hugh    Shaw,    Craig   Ballantyne, Guy  Sylvestre, H.  R.  Percy,  Phyllis Blakely, Gladys  Taylor, Lynda Muir, George  Bowering,  and  the  late  Fred Swayze.  What   a  multitude of  cooks  for such  a  thin  broth!

REVIEW ARTICLES



The French portions  of the  book were also  chosen  by a  committee, in  this  case under   the  chairmanship of  Guy  Sylves­ tre.  The  French  committee, however, was much  more  homogeneous:  it consisted  of fifteen   eminent  men   of   letters,   all  but three  of  them   professors  at  leading  uni­  versities,  and  representing between  them the   collective  critical   conscience   of  the French-Canadian literary  world.  As a result,   the   French  items   in   this   book give evidence  of being far  more  carefully and consistently chosen than the English items.   There  are   no  conspicuous  omis­ sions  from   the   list  of  French   writers, with   the  exceptions  of  the  members   of the  committee, who   very  modestly  and  properly omitted  themselves  (their   Eng­  lish  counterparts,  by  the  way,  were  not equally  modest:  both  Cogswell  and  Gil­ lese are  in  the  book, Gillese  with  a  long and    grossly   didactic  and    sentimental short  story  ironically  entitled  "Especially Worthy".)
I am   not   really   competent  to   judge the  French section,   but  I  am  struck   by the  fact  that   everyone  seems  to  be here, down   to  the  most  recent  and  radical   of young  writers  such  as Marie-Claire  Blais and   Hubert Aquin.   I suspect,  however, that   a  young  French-Canadian  critic might    be   inclined    to   charge    that   the French selections  represent   the  views  of the   present   French-Canadian   establish­ ment,   and   that   the  committee  failed  to gamble   on   new   and   relatively   obscure writers.   It  is  notable   that   practically all the  writers  in  French were or are  fellows of Section  I  of  the  Royal Society of Can­ ada   and/or   members    of   the   French­ Canadian Academy.  Another possible criticism   of  the  French  portions   is  that the  editors   have   been  so  anxious   to  in­ clude   everyone   who   counts,   that   they
 have  been  forced   to  give very  small  and often  virtually flavourless samples of their work.  Was  it  really  necessary  to  include over   eighty   French-Canadian  writers, and   thus   restrict  each   of   them   to   an average space   of  less  than   three   pages? Would   it   not   have   been  wiser  to  omit some  of  the  minor   writers  entirely,   and thus  give the  major writers  such  as Nelli­ gan,   Garneau,  Hebert, and   Blais  more room  in  which  to  display  their very  dis­ tinctive talents?
Be that  as it may, at least the French selections  in the  book are well edited:  in­ variably    they   seem   to   represent   their authors  at   or   near   their   peaks  of   per­  formance, and  the  introductory  notes are concise  and  informative. We  are  told  of Arthur Buies  (I 840- I go I),  for  example, that   "Apres des  etudes  agitees  au  Can­
ada,  a Dublin et  a Paris,  il participa a Ia
campagne de Sicile dans  l'armee de Gari­ baldi,    puis   rentra  au   Canada,   fit   du journalisme, fonda  La  Lanterne   (I 868-
9), et  fut   un  des  chefs  du  mouvement liberal    et   anti-religieux  dont    le   siege
etait    l'Institut   canadien  de   Montreal. Plus  tard,  il  travailla  a  Ia  colonisation
sous Ia direction du cure Labelle et ecrivit plusiers  monographies geographiques" - which,  in  about seventy-five  words,  gives us a pretty clear idea of that gentleman's career  and  output.
Compare this  with  some  of  the  head­
notes  to  the  English  selections,  and  you will   have   some   idea   of  how   relatively sloppily  the  English  selections  have  been edited. This,   for  example, is all  we  are told  of Goldwin Smith: "Historian, polit­ ical  journalist and   professor  at  the  Uni­ versity  of  Toronto, Smith  is  regarded as being  Canada's first  essayist".  Now  that  gives   us   almost    no   information  about  Smith, and   a  good  deal  of  misinforma-

REVIEW ARTICLES



tion.  Smith  was a professor at Oxford and Cornell, but  he  was  never  a  professor  at Toronto and  he  is not  regarded as  Can­ ada's   first  essayist   (an   honour,  if   such it  be,  which   belongs  to  Joseph  Howe) . And   who   would   ever   guess   from   this headnote  that    Sara   Jeannette   Duncan spent   most   of   her   life   in   India,  and gained    her   greatest   fame   as  an   inter­ preter    of   Anglo-Indian   society?   "This writer   was   born   in   England  but   grew up  in  Brantford  where  she  later   taught
school.  She  frequetly [sicJ  wrote  for  the
Toronto Globe, was once on the editorial staff of the Washington Post and  in 1888 became   parliamentary  correspondent for the  Montreal  Star."
In   the   English   sections   of  the   book, the  length   and   fullness  of  the  introduc­
tory notes seem to be in direct  proportion
 to the amount of commercial success the writers  achieved.  Thus on  p.  194 poor Raymond Knister  is described merely as follows:  "Novelist, short  story  writer  and poet, Knister  grew up in southwestern Ontario and   much   of  his  work   reflects the influence  of the  rural  life he knew  as a  boy.  His  untimely death  cut   short   a literary   career   that   was   just   beginning to  win  recognition," whereas  on  the  fol­ lowing   page,   195,   R.  Ross   Annett   is given    the   following  long   encomium: "Practically all  of  Annett's  short   stories are  centered  around the same characters
-Babe and  Little Joe and  their widowed father. In the days when  the Saturday Evening   Post  was  the  richest   market  in the  English  language and  a  magazine of considerable literary repute  as  well,  An­ nett   and   his  Albertan characters  made




LOST &  FOUND
Uncollected Poems
by RAYMOND SousTER
One   of  Canada's leading poets,   winner  of  the  Governor-General's  Award  (in I g64),  Raymond Souster is  renowned  for   his  outstanding craftsmanship and compassionate vision  of  modern life.  This selection of  I Io  works  fully  demon­ strates Souster's genius  for  powerful emotional statement. "The style  of  Souster's poetry is  deceptively plain, an  imagistic method  that   is  capable of  sudden in­  tensities of  wit  or  beauty."-Letters in Canada 	$3.50

NEW  CANADIAN WRITING,  rg68
Stories by DAviD LEWIS STEIN, CLARK  BLAISE AND  DAVE GoDFREY
Interesting in  itself  because of  the  work  of  the  three  young writers who  intro­ duce it,   this   new   addition  to  the   increasingly popular  series  of   Clarke  Irwin  Canadian Paperbacks  is important for  another reason: it  is  the  first  title  in  an  exciting new  program designed to  demonstrate the  vigour  and  diversity of  liter­ ature in  Canada. Stein, Blaise  and  Godfrey all  have something vital  to  say,  and they  say  it  with  force  and  originality.                                                         CI  34  $2.95

CLARKE IRWIN
TORONTO/VANCOUVER



73

REVffiW ARTICLES



its  pages  on  seventy-five  different  occa­ sions,  a  record  never  approached  by any other  Canadian writer.  This  is  the  very first  story  in  his  series  and  appeared in the  Post,  April  g,  rg38."
The  English    editor    seems   to   suffer
from   anti-academic  bias.  In   the  intro­ duction he  tells us that  he has "included writers   whose   appeal    has   been   to   the millions   rather  than   to  the  professors",  and  in  the  headnotes he  seems  to  avoid, whenever  possible,  identifying writers  as members of   university  staffs.  The   head­  note  on  George   Johnston, for  example,  states  baldly: "Johnston has  written   two books  of  poems,  The Cruising   Ark  and Home  Free.  His  work  has  been  printed in  various   magazines,  from  the  London Mercury  to   the   Atlantic   Monthly"­ and  the  fact  that   he is a  member  of  the Department of English  of  Carleton Uni­  versity  is entirely  omitted.  Similar  omis­ sions  of   reference  to  academic appoint­ ment  are  to  be  found   in  the  headnotes for  Fred   Cogswell,  Louis  Dudek,   James Reaney, Eli  Mandel, and  Jay  Macpher­ son.
Anti-academic  bias  is  also  evident   in the    English selections. Whereas the French editors   have  included samples  of the  work  of most  of the academic critics and   historians  of  French-Canada,  men such  as Louis  Dantin, Camille  Roy, Vic­ tor    Barbeau,   Lionel    Groulx,   Gustave Lanctot,  Guy   Fregault,  Marcel   Trudel and   Michel   Brunet, the  English  editors  have  omitted  academic  literary   criticism and   history   entirely.  One looks  in  vain, then, for examples of  the  work of North­ rop   Frye,   George   Woodcock,   Marshall McLuhan,   Malcolm   Ross,   and   E.   K. Brown,  or  of  Donald Creighton, A. R. M. Lower,  Charles  Stacey,   W.  L. Morton, F.  H.  Underhill and  J. M.  S.  Careless.

74
 Literary criticism  is  represented only  by a very slight  piece by Lister  Sinclair, a selection  not at all in his best or most characteristic vein, and  the "history" is supplied mainly  by such  journalists as William    Arthur   Deacon,  Orlo  Miller, Harry Boyle, Blair  Fraser,  Miriam  Cha­ pin,   Leslie   Roberts  and   Pierre   Berton,  or   by   such   amateur   historians   as   Sir Cecil Denny,  P. T.  Bone, and  William  C. Borrett.
A  similar   arbitrariness is  apparent  in
the  other   English  prose  selections.  There are  a  number of  short  stories  in  the  an­ thology,   but   they   are   not   by   Duncan Campbell Scott,  Frederick  Philip  Grove,  Raymond   Knister,    Morley    Callaghan, Sinclair  Ross,   Ralph   Gustafson,  Hugh Garner,   Brian    Moore,  Henry    Kreisel,  Jack   Ludwig,   Mordecai  Richler,  Nor­ man   Levine,  Margaret  Laurence,  Alice Munro,  Douglas   Spettigue, Alden  Now­ lan,   Mavis   Gallant,  James   Reaney,  or Hugh   Hood.   Who   on  earth,  then,   are they by? A few of them are respectable enough   choices-stories by Charles G. D. Roberts, Ernest Buckler,  and  Ethel  Wil­ son-but  the  others  are  by such  writers as  R.  Ross  Annett, John   Patrick  Gillese, Michael Harrington,  Gregory  Clark  and Vicki  Branden.
Even   in  such   a  relatively "popular"
medium as humour the choice is sadly lacking   in  discrimination. Stephen  Lea­ cock   is   missing-and   so   are   E.   W. Thomson, W.  H.  Drummond, Peter  Mc­  Arthur, Tom   Mcinnes, B.  K.  Sandwell and  Robertson Davies  (although the  lat­  ter   does   rate   a   page   and   a  half   as  a serious   sage-a    role   in   which    he   is singularly  less  attractive) .  Again   one  is moved    to   wonder    who   can   be   there,  when  so  many  have  been  passed  over­ and   again   one   is  disheartened  to  find

REVIEW ARTICLES



that   the  substitutes  for  the   masters   are Bob   Edwards   (with   a   very   bad   piece from  The Eye  Opener), Don  W.  Thom­ son   (with   a  dreadful  hunk   of   doggerel about   income   tax),  Paul  Hiebert  (isn't  it  about   time  someone  said  what   every­ one  must  feel, that  the Sarah Binks jokes are   now  dead   as  mutton?), Eric   Nicol (who  can  be  very  funny,   but  is terribly  laboured in  this piece)  and Barry Mather (of  whom   it  is  said  that he  "has   long been   a  favourite  humorist  in  his  home province." He should  have stayed  there). An   occasional   bow  is  made  towards sport,  certainly  an  important part  of the Canadian   experience.  But   is   the   best sports-writing  in   Canada  here,   in   the cliches  of  David   Macdonald on  hockey, as written for The Reader's Digest? What about   Ralph Connor on   Varsity   versus McGill,   or   pieces  of  reportage  by  Jim Coleman,  Elmer  Ferguson  or   Dink
Carroll?
Poetry   in  English   is  much   more  ade­ quately  represented  than   prose.  Almost all  the  poets  whom  we  might  expect  to find  are  here -together  with  a  few who have   no  right   to  be.  The  inclusion   of Louis  Ginsberg  is  hard   to   justify,  as  is that    of   Don    W.   Thomson,   especially when  Earle  Birney, Roy Daniells, Miriam
 Waddington  and   Douglas   Le   Pan   are missing.  But  the  weakness  in  the  poetry selection   is  less  in  the   choice   of  poets than   in   the   choice   of   poems.   Presum­ ably  Cogswell  was  hampered  by  the  edi­ torial  admonition  "to  find  good  writing  which  is  not  yet  so  widely  known"; at any  rate,  in several  cases he  has  avoided those  poems  which  are  generally  held  to be  their   authors'   best,  and   has  chosen more   out-of-the-way   pieces.   If he  had come up with some pleasant  surprises,  his method   would  have  justified  itself.  As it is, unfortunately, we too often get second­ rate   poems   by  first-rate  poets.   For   ex­ ample,  the  poetry  of C.  G. D.  Roberts  is represented by one of his weaker sonnets, "The  Herring Weir";  Bliss  Carman  is represented not  by  "Low  Tide on Grand Pre"  or  one  of  the  Sappho lyrics  but  by
the doggerel  of "The Juggler"; and  E. J.
Pratt   is here  not  as  the  author of  "The
Truant" or "From Stone  to Steel"  but of "Newfoundland". The  selections   by  the more recent poets, however, are generally made   judiciously,  and  on  the  whole  the poetry  section  is by far  the  most  reward­ ing  part   of  the   English   portion  of  the anthology.
Before leaving  this  matter of selection,
I should   like  to  make  my  own  position





RJchaRb asel &  company, 1nc.


Scholarly Books in the Arts and Sciences



PORTLAND, SAN  FRANCISCO, LOS   ANGELES, DENVER, CHICAGO, NEW YORK



75

REVIEW ARTICLES



clear.   It  is  obvious   that   the   choice  of material for  an  anthology   is  to  a  large extent  a  matter  of  editorial   taste,   and that  there  are  bound  to be omissions and inclusions   which   will  not   please  every­ body.  All  one  can  reasonably  demand is consistency,   at  any  rate  if  the  anthology is  presented  as  a  personal  choice.  Con­  sistency   is  precisely   what   is  lacking   in this  anthology. The  French  editors  have obviously   set   about   to  select   what   the literary  establishment of   I 967  considers to  be  the   very  best  work   published   in French-Canada  since   r867-and in  so doing   they   have   at   least   assured   that  their   part   of  the  volume  will  have  his­ torical  interest. The English  editors  seem to  have   had   an  entirely   different,  and virtually  incomprehensible,  set  of  aims. An  anti-academic  bias  has  led  them   to omit, as  we  have  seen, all  academic  his­ tory   and   criticism; some   prejudice,  or perhaps merely  ignorance,  has  led  them to  omit   virtually all  our  best  writers  of short    stories;    a   misguided    desire   for novelty   has  led   them   to  omit  many   of the  best  poems  of  our  best poets. On  the other  hand,  they   have   included  work which  is not  literature at  all-pieces  of mediocre   journalism  such   as  Bob  Ed­  ward's  "The  Eye   Opener   Race", John  Archer  Carter's  "When  Leacock   Inter­ viewed  Himself", and  Ed  Arroll's  "The Chinese   Cafe". If  the   English   editors had  set  out  to  produce an  anti-establish­ ment  anthology, and  stuck  to their  guns, I   would   have   respected   them:   instead they   have   produced  a   melange   which will  satisfy  neither the  academy   nor  the populace.
Moreover,  this  anthology   is  not   pre­ sented   as  a   personal   choice,   but   as  a semi-official  document, "published on the occasion   of  the  Centennial of  Canadian
 Confederation and subsidized by the Centennial Commission." It seems to me that    the   French  editor   chose   the   only possible   course   in   response   to  such   an official    challenge:   of   the    whole    an­ thology,    as   of   the   French   section,   it should   have   been  possible  to  say  "Here is  what   the   best  critical   minds   believe to  be best  that  has  been  written in  Can­ ada   over   the   last  hundred  years."   Try  fitting   that  formula  to  the  English   sec­ tion  of the  book, and  you realize  at  once how  inadequate the  section  is.
In view  of  the  semi-official  and  sub­ sidized  nature of the  volume  we  had  the right   at   least   to   expect   accuracy  and good    typography.    Instead,    the    book abounds  in   errors.   Some   of  the   errors  are   presumably the  editors' -the mis­ take  about Goldwin  Smith,  for  example, on   p.  37;   the  inaccurate  statement  on p.  75 that  Orion  and  Other Poems  was published   at   Chatham;  the   howler   on p.  427  to  the   effect   that   Ethel   Wilson selected  her  story  "From  Flores"  "from her  book  of  the  same  title". The   errors  in   typography,  however,    must   be   the joint  responsibility of  the  publishers  and the   editors.    I  have   never   seen  such   a sloppily    printed   book   issue   from    the hands   of  reputable  publishers. A  casual inspection, by  no  means  exhaustive, has revealed  no less than  fifty typographical errors.   Many page  numbers   are  omitted (see,   for   example,  pp.  68-73,   I8I-I89,
I 94- I 95, 265-268, 503-504, 5 I 6-520, 525-
527,  542-543),   lines   of   type   are   mis­ placed    (see  the   top  of  p.  IV),  Charles G.  D.  Roberts  is  called  Charles  C.  D. Roberts on  p.  XIX,  Sylvain  Garneau is called  Slyvain  Garneau on  p. XXX, let­ ters  are  omitted  (see, for  example, "fre­ quetly"  p.  9I)   and  the  wrong  type  face is  used   (see "dont voici''  on  p.  I09).

REVIEW ARTICLES



Is  the  hostility  of  this  review  the  pro­ duct   of  prejudice on  my  part? I  hope not.  I have  tried   to  document  my  case fully   in   order    to   show   that   this   book can  be  condemned on  objective,  empiri­  cal  evidence.   It would   have  been  valu-





THE KANT OF
CRITICISM
 able  to  have  a  really  representative  an­ thology  of  the  best  Canadian  writing in both  languages and  in all the major forms over   the   last   hundred   years,   but   this book,   in   its   English   section   at   least, leaves  the  gap  wide  open.











Louis Dudek




NORTHROP  FRYE,  The Modern Century. Oxford  University   Press, Toronto. $3.00.


THIS LITTLE BOOK  containing three   lectures   is  perhaps  the   most  free and  liberal -at any  rate,  to me the most congenial-of all Dr. Frye's impressive theoretical studies  in the mythology of literature.
It is also  highly  intriguing, since  it  is not  concerned  primarily  with  literature, in   this  case,  but   with   the   world,   with social  and  political  reality   as  this  is  re­ lated   to  literature  and   education.  The  Anatomy  of Criticism,  as we know,  took the  stand   that   literature is  "a  structure of words  for its own sake" ... an "auton- omous  verbal   structure" ... an  "autono- mous  language" ... "pure  literature" ... "useless  as  propositions".  Here, now, we have  a  study   of  impure  realities,  social chaos,   violence,   "alienation,   absurdity, anxiety,  and  nausea"-considered in  re­ lation   to   literature. One  is  deeply   in­ trigued  to see what will emerge from  the mixture.
 I  am   especially   intrigued,  since   my own response to Dr. Frye's ideas has now passed through several stages and I am curious  to  follow  our   joint  evolution. I used to read  Northrop Frye  in the Cana­ dian Forum and  other  literary periodicals in  the  1940's.  He  seemed  at  that  time  a rather eccentric but  very amusing, intelli­ gent  critic-in  general  on  the  right  side also  (which  in  those  days  was  of  course very important).  Later, when  I read  the Anatomy  of Criticism,  I thought him  the most   unbearably irritating  and   wrong­ headed  writer  I had  ever  read.  I suppose he   was   deliberately  aggressive   in   that book, provoking the poet-as-thinker, the representational  realist,    and    the   poet­ critic  with  barbed  ironies  and  Apollonian assertions.  The job was to define  his own special  theory,  and   this  required  a  cer­  tain  impatient  dogmatism  to  quash   the  opposition, no  doubt, within the  theorist  himself.

77

REVIEW ARTICLES



Since  then,  Dr.  Frye  has  been  loosen­ ing  his  tight   bolts  somewhat,  and  books like The  Educated  Imagination and  The Modern  Century  are  much   more  read­  able and congenial to my mind. Dr.  Frye, of   course, would  hardly  consider  these observations as  having  any  objective  va­ lidity.  "The poet  speaking  as  critic  pro­ duces,  not criticism,  but documents  to be examined by critics." But  then,  Dr.  Frye himself   is  producing  documents   to   be examined  by  critics   (they  have  recently been  examined  in  a  book  published   by Columbia University  Press), so where  do we stand?
Northrop Frye is the Kant of criticism. He  has  discovered   that   the  understand­ ing of literature  is determined by certain  containing forms,  or  "categories" of  the imagination,  which  he  calls  myths.  But like Kant, and Freud also, he has rushed ahead  perhaps a  bit  prematurely to  fix and   define   these   categories   specifically. The  discovery  of a  process to  be investi­ gated  is immensely  valuable,  but  the for­ mulations at  first  may  be  too  arbitrary; and   these  may  have  to  be  relaxed   with time.
The outstanding characteristic of Frye's criticism,   I  think,   is  a  capacity   to  gen­ eralize   imaginatively,  so  that   disparate elements  are   brought  into   meaningful patterns and  unities.  In  this he illustrates the   operations  of   the   metaphorical  or myth-making mind,  which  is his  special subject. Thus,  when  in  the  present  book he identifies Rousseau's theory  of natural order   underlying  the  social  forms   with the myth  of the sleeping  beauty,  we have a  brilliant  poetic   metaphor, the  aspects of   one   story   being   dramatically  trans­ ferred   to  the  other. Freud   did  the  same thing  with  the  Oedipus complex,  making a  single  story  the  general   abstract of  its
 type-a familiar poetic  procedure-but Northrop Frye  is  a  prolific  poet  of  this kind,   scattering  metaphorical  unities   to left  and   right,  as  the  forms  of  so-called poetic  myth.
In   other   books  he  has   been  able   to
organize literature into  a  compact and lucid system of such mythological unities. (Although  according  to  Dr.   Frye  poets are  not  supposed   to  be original  thinkers, it  has  always  seemed   ironic   to  me  that the  gist  of  these  myths  is  derived   from the   poet   William   Blake,  so  that   Blake must  be at  least  one  shining  exception of the poet-as-thinker.) Dr. Frye is prolific, however,   and   what   seemed  at  one  time too rigid  a system, with  a fixed empyrean of mythologies, complete and  determined for all time, has now become much more flexible  and  "open". This,  for  me, is the redeeming virtue   of  The   Modern  Cen­ tury.
The first lecture, a powerful  and  com­
pact   essay,  describes   the  twentieth  cen­ tury   as   one   increasingly   paralyzed   by mass conformities, collectivist control, in­ doctrination,  anxiety, alienation and  the like.  The  second  deals  with  the  relation of the  arts  and  literature to  this  state  of the  world.  At first, literature seems to be providing  a   counter-discipline  or   anti­ dote  to  the  tyrannies of our  time,  to  the advertising and  propaganda that  corrode the  individual mind. But  as  the  lecture  proceeds,  we  find   that   the   arts   them­ selves suffer  from   reactions of  tragic  ex­ cess and   disorganization, and  even  they become   helpless   against   the  ills  of  the century.
The  third and   final   lecture  offers  a
vision  of some  healthier procedures,  pro­ poses a  larger   perspective of  critical de­ tachment, and  offers  some  possibly more promising ways of  looking at  the  human

REVIEW ARTICLES



situation. This is, in  effect,  an  argument for  one  unifying   myth   in  preference to another.  The    so-called   "myth   of   pro­ gress"  comes  under   severe  criticism. As an alternative, we have "the world of the tiger",   in  which   we  find  ourselves,  and "the  innocent vision", to be set off against the world's  evil. So the lecture  ends on a note of mild  philosophical optimism.
These   are   brilliant  lectures,   in  their
close  texture and  wit,  complex  develop­ ment,   and   powerful   thought.  But  what  fascinates   me,  particularly,  is  the  para­  dox  of  Northrop  Frye's  method applied  to the  raw  materials of  life instead  of to pure  literature. The  autonomous mental  structures  of   mythological  imagination are   now   the   shaping  forms   of   a   real world.  The  thesis  of  a self-contained lit­ erature  organized by internal patterns of myth  is  now  faced  with  the  inescapable dilemma  that   these  are  only  metaphors to  explain  the   real  structure of  reality. Life  itself,  history,   ideas   can   be  inter­ preted   through  the   forms   of   myth,   so that  what  the artist  does in  creating liter­ ature, can  also  be  done  to the  facts  of history  and   the  course  of   contemporary events.  Reality   is  the  content  of  myth­  ology, and  the  forms themselves  are quite fluid.
In  the  Anatomy, Dr.  Frye  had  already posed  the  question:  "Is  it  true  that   the verbal   structures  of  psychology,  anthro­ pology, theology,  history, law, and  every­ thing  else  built  out  of  words  have  been informed  or   constructed  by   the   same kind   of  myths   and   metaphors   that   we find,  in  their  original  hypothetical form, in  literature?" In  these  three  lectures  on the Modern Century, it would seem, he answers  the  question  in the  affirmative.
But if this is a mythologizing of history and  of the age we live in, then  a circular
 



THE IMPROVEMENT OF
MANKIND

The Social and
Political Thought of
John Stuart Mill

JOHN  M.  ROBSON

One of the most important studies to appear in the current
re-evaluation of John  Stuart Mill. Professor Robson  is associate
editor of the Collected  Works of Mill  (published by University of Toronto Press)  and  as such, commands an outstanding knowl­ edge of all Mill's writings. He offers, in this book, a new interpretation  which  establishes an essential unity in Mill's  thought.

$6.so


UNIVERSITY OF  TORONTO PRESS
Toronto, Buffalo







79

REVIEW ARTICLES



trap may   be  apparent. Just as  Sigmund Freud  and   the   Freudians were   open   to the  charge of  projecting their own  imag­ inative  complexes in  their  psychology­ if  they  imputed this  to  others-so  Nor­ throp  Frye,   should  he  insist   too   much, might  be   trapped   within  his  own   self­ created  myths. Sir  James Frazer  would  surely be surprised  to find  that of  all  the  mythologies  contained in  his  eleven   vol­ umes   the  central  myth   is  one  found  in the  writings of  the  English poet  William Blake. Surely there  is a  certain amount of  subjective  arbitrariness  here,  so  that one  may  imagine other temperaments de­ ciding for  other "central  myths" to  order their human experience. If the  myths are  Platonic forms, we may well ask, "Mighty myth, who  made thee?" But if, as I think Dr. Frye  would  answer, man made them, then man can   unmake  them,  and  create afresh -and  find  that  none  are  central.
Mythopoeic criticism, after  all,  is  ex­ tremely  subjective  and   mental. In   The  Modern Century even  the  truth  of  science  is  made subjectively relative to  the  pro­  jecting mind:  "Science is a  vision  of  na­  ture which perceives the  elements in  na­  ture that correspond to  the   reason  and  sense  of structure in  the scientist's mind." How, then, can   the  critic who  observes mythological   structures  be  any   less  the poet, or  any  less subjective in  his visions?
The  kind   of   vision   with   which Dr. Frye  is himself  sympathetic includes, of course,  William  Blake   and   follows   the path of  what he  describes as "revolution­ ary  realism". In the  second  lecture, "Im­ proved  Binoculars", we   follow   the   de­  velopment of  modern  art, very  much in this  tradition, till  everything comes  to  an explosive  mess  in   the  final   pages:  "All  these anti-social  attitudes in  modern cul­  ture  are,  broadly  speaking, reactionary.

8o
 That is, their sense  of  antagonism to existing  society is  what is  primary, and it is much clearer and more definite than any   alternative social   ideal." Literature, for  the  modern artists, is terribly involved with   actuality, under the  premise that  it reveals reality, or   that it represents and releases creative  power, so  that our  my­ thologies and   our   lives  are  fatefully  en­ tangled together. These are consequences which  I  do   not   think   were  foreseen  in the  Anatomy  of Criticism.
The modern century is a dark century.
And  we  are  passing through what Henry Miller describes as  "the time of  the  Hy­ ena". How we  got  there is  both   a  ques­ tion  of social  history and  of the history of ideas, as  these  are  outlined in  Dr. Frye's book.  But  I would suggest, in  the  light  of the  facts, that "revolutionary  realism" it­  self   is  one   of  the   main  sources  of   this century's disorders; that   natural  events and   technologies  are    important   (this crumb for   McLuhan),  but   that  history would be  quite  different  without Blake,  Shelley, Marx,   Freud,  Rimbaud,  Nie­  tzche, Lawrence, and other such  extrava­ gant  'makers of  modern thought'.
At   one    point  in   the    third   lecture, where Dr. Frye  considers the  excesses  of modern art, he  observes that  "Study, as distinct  from  direct  response, is  a  cool medium, and   even the  most   blatant ad­ vocacy  of   violence and  terror  may   be, like  Satan in  the  Bible,  transformed into an  angel of  light by  being regarded as  a contribution  to modern  thought."  I  be­ lieve,  however, that this  is much too  op­ timistic. The  time  when the   classroom could   be    considered   as    an    insulator against  the   practical impact of  ideas - even  literary ideas-is  past.  I would say from experience that, for  most  students, to  be  exposed  to  the   writings of  Blake,

REVIEW ARTICLES



Nietzsche,   Pound, D.  H.   Lawrence, or
Allen  Ginsberg is to transform their  lives
-and   not  always  in  the  direction that parents and  teachers would  desire.
In other  words,  I believe  that  the  lib­ eral   optimistic  thesis   which   still   forms the  conclusion  of Dr.  Frye's lectures falls down   because  events   have  moved   even further than   he  has  carried  them.  He  is pessimistic,   but   not   pessimistic   enough.  Having described   a  world  in  chaos,  and literature at  the  extreme of  anarchy, he yet  believes  that   these   consequences  of modern thought   and   of  "revolutionary realism" merely  show  us the  face  of  the tiger,   and   that   we  may   yet  seek  after innocence.  Humanism, he  would  like  to believe,  can  absorb  the  nihilism  of mod­  ern  thought. But  unfortunately, the  revo­ lutionary mythology beginning with  Wil­ liam   Blake  has  set  its  face  against  the real   achievement  of  society  in  its  con­ crete     manifestations,    from     the    very source,  and   this  anti-social doctrine has now  reached  its  practical culmination as
 a democratic ethos  of  the  most  dynamic kind.
The  analysis of history  and  of the  his­ tory  of ideas  in  The  Modern  Century  is masterfuL  I am  in  accord  at  every  point  in the last lecture.  But  I  believe that  our reconstruction  now   must   begin   with   a critique of  the  very  foundations of  lit­ erary  thought that  have  brought us from Romanticism  to  the present. I  do   not think,  as Dr.  Frye  seems  to  do,  that  we can  still  accept  these   premises   and   yet hope   to  domesticate  the   violent   conse­ quences  of  our   thinking. The  myth   of the  tiger  and  of innocence will  not  save us. The myth  of  progress  is not  the  eviL (In  fact,  these  two  myths   are  to  some extent  identical, both  rejecting the actual and real for some intangible possibility.) Man's  relation  to his society, that  is, the relation  between  imagination and  reality, must  be  reconstructed. It  is  the  idea  of their    separation -as   in   the   myth    of absolute innocence-which may be the dram  of ilL





MOORE'S
NEW PERSPECTIVE
 





Hallvard Dahlie



BRIAN MooRE, I  am  Mary Dunne. McClelland  &  Stewart. $6.g5.


READERS OF Brian  Moore's previous  five novels will  be familiar with the fictional  ingredients he so skilfully handled in those books:  marginal Irish characters  struggling  to   achieve  some mark   of  identity and  status   in  environ­ ments   which   generated  only   loneliness,
 despair,  and  frustration. Whether that environment was Moore's native  Belfast (Judith  Hearne, The  Feast of Lupercal, The  Emperor  of Ice-Cream), or  his adopted cities of Montreal (The Luck  of Ginger Coffey)   and  New  York  (An  An­ swer From Limbo), his  characters  could

REVIEW ARTICLES



rarely  overcome  either  the  limitations within  themselves or the stultifying  forces of their  Irish  inheritance to achieve  even a  temporary  compromise, let  alone  any kind  of triumph. Only I 7-year-old  Gavin Burke  of  Emperor  manages   to  make   a clean   break   with   these   forces   and   to achieve a  meaningful triumph; speaking of that  book recently,  Moore said that  he had   achieved   a  new  perspective  on  the world  at  the  time  of writing  it, and  sug­ gested  that  any  subsequent fiction  might take   a   different  tack.   "I  don't   know whether I'll   be  a  better   writer,"  he re­ marked   on  that  occasion,  "but  I'll be a different writer."
His  sixth   novel,  I  Am   Mary   Dunne, reveals  clearly  that   Moore  is both  a  dif­ ferent writer  and, with some reservations, a  better  one.  Perhaps he  has  never  been better   than   he  was  in   Judith  Hearne;  that  first  novel  remains,  even  after  thir­  teen   years,  somewhat  of   a  masterpiece, and  nothing he  has  written  since  carries its  total  impact.  But  what  Mary   Dunne  loses in over-all effect, it gains in its more complex  and sophisticated technique, and in   its   more   profound   exploration   of woman's  dilemma. For  where  Judith in a sense was a special  case -an  alcoholic
spinster   sinking   into   lonely  oblivion -
Mary  Dunne is more  of a  representative figure; she is the  twentieth-century eman­ cipated  woman    who   suffers   not   from being   emancipated,  but   from   being   a woman   in  a  world   ordered  for  and   by man.
Moore   depicts   one  day  in  the  life  of Mary   Dunne,  a  32-year-old   Nova  Sco­ tian   living  in  New  York  with  her  third  husband,  Terence  Lavery,  a  reasonably  successful  theatrical figure.  On  this  par­  ticular Thursday nothing out  of the ordi­  nary   happens to  Mary:   she  has  a  hair
 appointment, she is rudely  propositioned on  a  street   corner, she  receives  a  letter from   her  mother, she  shows  her  apart­ ment   to  a   prospective tenant,  she  has lunch  with  a former  Montreal friend,  she makes  love  to  her  husband,  and  she  in­ vites  another Canadian  acquaintance to dinner. But such  is her mood  on this day (she  is suffering from  pre-menstrual ten­ sion)    that    all   these   events   generate  a series of associations  relating to the ques­ tion  of her  identity, and  so obsessed does she  become  with  this  problem   and  with the  guilt  she  feels  over  some  of her  past actions that  she for  a moment finds  her­ self  on  the  point  of  suicide.  But  in  the act  of  remembering her  past,  she attains the   identity  spelled   out   by   the   books title: the identities she had  temporarily assumed   as  Mary   Phelan,   as  Mary  Bell, and   now  as  Mary   Lavery,   can   not  ob­ scure   the  only  unchangeable fact  about  her,  that  she is, and  always will be, Mary  Dunne.
Mary's problem  is partly  sexual   (both her  first  two  husbands were  incompetent in bed)  but chiefly psychological and philosophical  (she  recalls  that   as  a I 5- year-old  student she  questioned the  Car­ tesian  dictum, cogito  ergo sum;  should  it not  be, she  asked,  memento  ergo sum?)  She  feels,  too,  that   the  fact  of  being  a woman  is in  itself  a  real  threat to  iden­  tity;  men  use  her,  they  accost  her,  they threaten  her,   and   they   ignore   her;   as Mary    observes,   "you   can't  fight   male solidarity." What Moore seems to be say­ ing   is  that   being   a  woman   in   today's  world,   even   such   an   enlightened  and emancipated  one  as  Mary  Dunne, is  to be  a  threat  to  the  traditional concept of woman.   Though  she   bears    the   same name  as  the  archetypal symbol  of  chas­ tity  and  faithfulness,  her   acquaintances

REVIEW ARTICLES



refer  to her as the "un-virgin Mary," and charge  her  with  being  promiscuous. In  a very  real  sense  her  mission  is sexual  ful­ fillment,   but  for  her  the  sexual  act  is a spiritual  experience  (it  is  not  only  her name  that  reminds  one  of John Donne), an  act  of  being  re-born, of   attaining a real  identity, and   it  is  not  primarily  a manifestation of  nymphomania as it  was with  Jane  Tierney in  An  Answer  From Limbo.  It  is  the   cycle  of  sexual   inter­ course  and   menstruation  which   defines woman,  and   it  is  in   the   fulfillment  of these   functions  that    Mary   Dunne   dis­ covers  who she is.
Moore   handles  all  this  material  with competence and clarity, and  it is a tribute to his craftsmanship that  he  manipulates the   frequent  shifts   in   chronology and point   of  view  without  a  sense  of   awk­ wardness.    Only   the   abruptness   of   the resolution,   I  feel,  is likely  to  raise  some questions.   It is  difficult   to  tell  whether Mary's attainment  of  calm  results  from her  mother's phone  call-"You  haven't changed  for   me.  You're  my   daughter, you'll  always  be  the  same   to  me"-or from   the   purgative effect   of  the  Ernie  Truelove   episode;  the   direction  of  the book  implies,  of course,  the  latter, but  in relationship to  the  length of this  episode
 (the   last  fifty  pages  of  the   novel) , its emancipating effect  doesn't  seem entirely convincing.    On    the    whole,    however, Moore  suffers few lapses  in  technique or in structure, and  this novel, like his five previous  ones,  reveals  its  creator in  firm control  of his material.
As   a    memorable   character,    Mary Dunne may  not  achieve  immediately the stature of Judith Hearne, but  this is due in  part   to  the  fact   that   her  situation is neither   as  dramatic nor  as  catastrophic as Judith's. She is, however,  a more com­ plex  person,  and  I  suspect  she will  grow more on subsequent readings than Judith does. Moore explores  sensitively the many facets  of  Mary's  mind   and   personality,  and  the result  is a remarkable portrait of a woman who is essentially very ordinary. The   other   characters  in   the   novel  are also  ordinary-this  has  become  a  hall­ mark  of Moore's work-and  because we see  them   only  through  Mary's   recollec­ tion,  they  tend  to  be somewhat shadowy and   incomplete,   although  Moore   cap­ tures the essence  of even  the  most minor characters  with   a  few  brilliant  strokes. Particularly  memorable  are   Mary's   two Canadian  acquaintances,  Janice  Sloane and   Ernest   Truelove:  I  suspect  Cana­ dians  will not  be too happy  with  Moore's




Write  or Phone

THE UNIVERSITY  BOOK  STORE
Vancouver  8,  B.C.	
 Text
Trade
Medical

whenever  you need

BOOKS
 
Technical Hard Back Paper Back

REVIEW ARTICLES



treatment  of  his  erstwhile   countrymen, for it is difficult  to find two more  boorish and  priggish  characters in  Canadian  fic­ tion  than  these  two.  Ernest  in  particular becomes    a    grotesque    caricature,   but Moore   saves  him -as  he  earlier   saved Bernard Rice  and   Post  Officer  Craig - by investing  him  with a convincing touch of humanity and  reality.
It is interesting to note that  this is Moore's first  novel  without either  first or second-generation   Irish   characters.   All the major figures except  Terence Lavery, who   is  English    (although  his  mother's
 people    originally  came   from   Ireland) , are   indigenous North Americans. Thus the  odyssey  of  Moore's   characters is  for the  moment complete: from  native  Bel­ fastians  to  immigrant  North   Americans to  permanent  North  Americans, and  on the   whole   Moore  has  lost  none   of  his sensitivity  and  craftsmanship in  the  pro­ cess.  I  Am  Mary   Dunne   is  a  satisfying  affirmation  of  Brian  Moore's  talents  and should   do  much   to  establish  him  as one of   the   important   contemporary  North American  novelists.





POET AND  POLYMATH

lkferedith hor.njJson


WATSON  KlRKCONNELL,  Centennial Tales and  Selected Poems  and   A  Slice  of Can­
ada:  Memoirs. University of  Toronto Press.  $7.95 and $8.50.


IT  IS  PROBABLY more   than foolhardy to attempt in this brief space anything like an  appreciation and  honest appraisal of the contribution of Watson Kirkconnell. Nor  should  it  be necessary: few   Canadians  are   better   known;  few have  participated more  diversely;  few  if any  have  written so much; few so decor­ ated   and   internationally  lauded   in  the painful periods  of  citation  prose.  Never­ theless, the  two  most  recent  of  his forty­ odd  books  (besides  a  hundred  brochures
·   and  countless  articles) -that is, Centen­
nial  Tales   and   Selected   Poems   ( r g65) and    A    Slice    of    Canada   - Memoirs ( 1967)  -may   be   his  most   important, and  deserve  further comment.
Some  apology  usually introduces mem­
mrs.  Says  A. R.  M.  Lower   (whose  My
 First Seventy-five Years has also just appeared):  "No   one  who  has  scribbled most of his days could consider existence complete without  a  speech   as  he  bows out.  I do  not  propose  to inflict  on suffer­ ing  readers a  chapter-and-verse  account of a  career  that  has  had  only  minor  im­ portance"  (etc.).  And  Kirkconnell:  "A microtomic slice of  tissue may  be quanti­ tatively  insignificant, but  placed  under  a microscope it  can  add  its  minute quota of   fact   regarding  the   major    organism from which it came" (etc.). Canadian Literature readers   who  know  both  these men  (and many  do)  may find such utter­ ances  and  book  titles characteristic. Both offer  fascinating "slices"; but  there  is an academic   thoroughness  about   Kirkcon­ nell's   which   makes   it,   not   always   the

REVIEW ARTICLES



lightest   reading,  but   an   extremely   in­ formative  account  of   many   important and  some  neglected aspects  of  twentieth­ century  Canada-as  it  were,  indepen­ dent  of its  author-which  will  make  it an  important  source   book  for   years  to come.
Both  Kirkconnell and  Lower  came  of age    professionally      at     Wesley     (later United) College,  Winnipeg; both spent approximately eighteen years there, over­ lapping each  other; both  have  had highly distinguished records  since  they  left.  But now,  looking   back   30-40   years,  Lower can   still  write   that   his  time  at  Wesley served  "in  many  respects,  to  crown" his career  (p.  162), and  Kirkconnell that  he spent  there  some  of  "the most  satisfying years  of  my  life"   (p.  136).  Others have felt  the same-despite the  climate,  ugli­ ness,  and  depression wages.  For  this  was the   golden   age   of  Wesley-United:    be­ neath    the   same   roof   were   Arthur L. Phelps,  Jack  Pickersgill,  H.  Douglas Woods-none of them  such  "stars" then
-and  various  others  who  contributed to the  humane atmosphere under  J. H. Rid­
dell   and   W.  C.   Graham.  The  student body,   writes    Lower,    "had  a   dynamic quality  ... I  have   never  been  quite  able to explain  this compelling creative  elan, though  I   am   sure   that   it  existed"    (p.
166). Unfortunately but  inevitably, Kirk­
connell left in 1940 (to head the English department at  McMaster), Lower  a few years  later.
Shortly  after  coming  to Winnipeg, the first   Mrs.   Kirkconnell  had    died -in bearing  their  twin  sons. To  console  him­ self, her  husband did  what  only he could have  done.  He  set  to  work  on  A  Euro­ pean  Book  of  Elegy,    an   anthology  of poems  translated by him  alone  from  fifty different  languages. His   publisher    was
 naturally  sceptical   of   the   project;  but when  the  work  was  issued   (by  another publisher),  it   brought  Kirkconnell   rec­ ognition   all   over   the   world.   This   was followed   by   numerous   volumes,   large and  small,  of translated  poetries, notably  of   the   Icelandic,  Magyar,   Polish,   and Ukrainian-to a total  of  some six thou­ sand  pages, of which  those in Centennial Tales   (pp.   41 1-528)    are   but   a   small sample.   Such   breadth  of  linguistic   ver­ satility   cannot   have   been   attained  by many men, if indeed  any, throughout the whole  of history.  It has  joined  Kirkcon­ nell   to  the   literary  cadres   of  a  dozen countries  and, more  importantly perhaps, made   him  poet-laureate and  often  gen­ eral  spokesman  of  practically all   (non­ Anglo-Saxon)    "new"   Canadians.  Of course,  the  latter do  not  need  his  trans­ lations-except  probably  for  their  chil­ dren   and   certainly  for  their   grandchil­ dren.  The  real  value  of this  stupendous, life-long  endeavour lies in  the  rendering into  English  for  English  readers of  thou­ sands and  thousands of fine poems which,  in  the original, they  would  never  be able to  read  for  themselves.  At  least  through the  translucent  windows   of   translation, he  has  revealed   countless   virtually  un­  known   phases   of   European   poetry   and  culture, and  thus  immeasurably widened  our  view.  This  is  the  crowning achieve­ ment  of his  highly  varied  life. A parallel  project-in  itself  a sufficient  distinction for   an   extraordinary  man -is   repre­ sented    by    three    volumes    of	Milton sources   and    analogues  in   translation: The  Celestial Cycle  ( 1952),  That  Invin­ cible Samson  ( 1964),  and,  among  works yet  to  appear,  a  similar   collection   for Comus,  Lycidas  and  Paradise Regained.
Kirkconnell's translations --on highest authority-are accurate. Here   they  can

as

REVIEW ARTICLES



only be appraised as (perhaps the most neglected)  part  of  his  poetry.  Two  con­ trasts   with   his  "original" verse  are  ap­  parent:  (I)  a  genuine  lyric   note   and ( 2)  a  greater  purity   of  style-perhaps because   (in  translating)   the  very  words are  less easily  won.  One  example,   from the  Romaic of Lambros  Porphyras, must suffice:

Without, a deep-voiced  spirit  of the  waste
Wails  round  the  roof-tree; while from
couch  and  chair
The  sobbings  of each  corner  you have  graced
Blend  in  one  anguished  outcry  of despair.

Whoever   does  not  know  how  much  this is  the   art   of   Watson   Kirkconnell  has never  attempted  to  translate verse;  and yet  it  is most  often  the  ars celare artem. But  another  Kirkconnell writes  most  of his  "original" verse.  This  is mainly  nar­ rative:   at   its   very   best   in   the   early, daringly imaginative, chthonically  Mani­ toban  Flying Bull stories;  less  lively when restrained  by  historical   fact   plus  some hardening of  his  own  political  views  in many   of   the   recent   Centennial  Tales;  least  successful  perhaps  in  his  most  am­  bitious  Eternal  Quest, where  the  burden  of  allegory  must  sometimes  be  too  great for aesthetically effective  concrete expres­ Sion.
No  final  judgment of Kirkconnell's poetry   can   be  attempted  here-merely a few  general  comments. For  instance, it is of  no  decisive  importance that  he  has chosen  to use traditional forms  and  style; but  whatever some  (and  he?)  may think, he has chosen  the  harder way, partly  be­ cause  the  traditional muse  may  demand a surer  technique (no  obstacle  to  W.K.)  and   chiefly   because,   at   this   late   time, every  effort  at  resuscitation  may  fail  to restore  her  to  anything  like  vibrant life.

86
 And  it  must  be  admitted that  Kirkcon­ nell has  often  not  succeeded  in  doing  so. Without listing  his  "faults,"  one  regrets that    many   fine   lines   and   phrases   are probably  lost  on  impatient  readers, be­ cause  surrounded  by  a  somewhat faded  profusion:   perhaps,    for   example,   the italicized  words  in

His heart  seem'd  free as air,  his thought as white
As foam or snow;  there  kindled  in his breast
The  sweet  exultant ardour of an  ageless quest.

It is a brave  man  who  attempts to fatten up   hundreds  of   Spenserian  stanzas   in these lean  times. But not only form-filling and  traditional rhetoric, also rhythm and rhyme,  ever  ready  and  often  over-obtru­ sive, become  typical  pitfalls.  (The reader  is asked  to consider what  happens to  the good  "tight" writing of  the  following­ in its last  three  lines, here  italicized.)

Hemm'd by our  shores  there  stretches  forth That mare  nostrum of the North, Mediterranean but  cold,
Which  Manitoba's coasts  enfold
And  bleak  U ngava,  white  with  snow,
And  tundras of Ontario,
While  to  the  north  its  path  is spanned
By glacier-fjords of Baffin Land -
A wan  and  eerie  inland  ocean
Of which  the  world  has little  notion, Leaving  to  tracts  thus  far asunder
Its  width  and  wealth  and  wizard  wonder.

This poet  needs far  more editing and selection  than   the  present  volume  repre­ sents.  At  his  best,  he  is  very  good -as when  he  mourns a lost  brother:

We  who are  left  will slowly wither  out To  tottering senescence  and  a drought Of  youthful  dreams,  though  touch'd
to wistfulness
By memories  of old springtime and
your  face.

Watson  Kirkconnell's  other    publica­
tions   may   remind  some  of  the   perfect

REVIEW ARTICLES



undergraduate who  is  a  "brain",  excel­ lent   in   all   subjects    and   winning   the Governor-General's gold  medal  for  profi­ ciency.  "But  what  becomes  of  such  peo­ ple?"   we   ask-to   hide   our   envy!    In Kirkconnell's  case   this   all-round   bril­ liance  meant  pursuing at  least  a  dozen disciplines  as  mutually remote  as  botany  and   linguistics,   to  the  point   of  original  research,    publication   in   appropriate learned    journals,   election    to    relevant  learned   societies,  etc.  For  the  individual chapters  of  A  Slice,   he  lists  staggering bibliographies -all  his  own -of  which a  random sampling  includes:  Botanical Survey  of  South   Victoria, The  Palaeo­ geography   of    Ontario,  Mendelism  and the Cephalic  Index, Canadian Toponymy and  the  Cultural  Stratification  of Can­  ada, The  First  Authentic History  of our Internment Camps, Canada, Europe  and Hitler,  Research    into   Canadian  Rural Decay,  Liberal   Education in  the  Cana­ dian   Democracy,  International   Aspects of   Unemployment,  Einstein's   Influence on  Philosophy, The  Twilight   of  Cana­  dian  Protestantism, The  Quebec Tradi­ tion,  Seven   Pillars  of  Freedom, etc.,  etc. Admittedly, he adds to superlative intelli­ gence  and  memory a  journalist's flair  for rapid   production,   and   his  prose   pages will need more sorting out  some day. But the  same  man  was  well  enough   thought of  to  be  offered  university  appointment in   History   at   Queen's,  in   Classics   at Wesley-United, in  English  at  McMaster, etc.
Obviously, to  produce so much  erudi­ tion,  he  must  be a cross between  a mole and  an  owl?  Wrong again: few  men  in
 Canada have  been  more  actively  associ­ ated  with  public  causes. That is  why  his meticulously   detailed   Slice   will  long  be consulted  on  such  subjects   as  the  Prison Camps  in  World  War  I, the  foundation of the John  Howard Society, the Writer's War    Committee,  the   Humanities  Re­ search   Council,   the  Canadian  Authors' Association,  the  federation  of  Canadian Baptists, etc.  in  each  of which  he  played a  leading  role-and   went   on   writing. From  1948-xg64, as President of Acadia University,  he  gave  a  struggling  institu­ tion  greatly  advanced  intellectual status  plus  the   necessary   financial  backing­ and  (of course)  went  on  writing.
The   reader   of  these   two   among   his most  intimate works  will  not  necessarily feel that he has come to know Watson Kirkconnell. There remains   a certain aloofness  (rooted  in  unwarranted  mod­ esty?), a limited  empathy perhaps and  a lack  of theatre. But  there  is also  a  Ren­  aissance  mind  (more  than  a  Renaissance sensibility?)    and   an   honesty  so  singly­ natured  that   proportion  may   yield   to data,  ironic  or  humorous opportunity to clear   cold   fact.  Here   is  much   remem­  brance  of  things  past -more  past  than Kirkconnell and  his generation may real­ ize-ere versatility,  prized  in  pioneering, was  ousted  by ever  more  centripetal ex­ pertise;   ere  schooling   at  any  level  that  equipped   a  lad   with   at   least  some   of Kirkconnell's  knowledge  was  ousted   by so-called  orientation and  superficial   dis­ sent;  ere poetry  lost  touch with  tradition and   meaning,  as   much    criticism   with good  sense-the  dear  time's  waste!





A DISTURBING VITALITY

JOHN    REID,  Horses   With  Blindfolds.   Long­
mans. $5-95·

Horses  With  Blindfolds is  a  novel  that deserves  far  more  critical  attention than it  seems  to  have  received.  If the  state  of the  Canadian novel  is as  lamentable  as the   professional   Jeremiahs  tell   us,  one would  think  that  they  would  seize grate­ fully  on  a skilful,  sophisticated  work  like this.  Horses  With  Blindfolds  meets  most of  the   exacting   requirements   necessary for  that enlargement of perception which a  reader  is entitled   to demand from  fic­ tion.  John Reid  has  a  talent   for  estab­ lishing   a  viable  world; his  puppets are handled with  compassionate  understand­ ing;  and  he effects that complex  alchemy by which  our  emotions are engaged  while our  critical  intelligence stands  alertly  de­ tached.
Horses  With  Blindfolds is a love story. Love  is a  precarious subject  for  a writer since  it  necessitates   an  assault   on  most readers' initial   resistance.  Passion  is  ac­ ceptable if it takes  the guise of  obsession; attraction will be admitted if it  is treated  sceptically, mordantly, or comically. What is most difficult  of all is a simple, straight­ forward account of  love,  tender, absorb­  ing,  transcending  all  other   human con­ cerns.  It is so  extraordinarily difficult  to handle since  most  of  us are  embarrassed by   the   spectacle    of   sentimentality  in others,  yet  sentimentality is an  unavoid-

88
 
able aspect  of love. Only  the great  writer, of  the   stature  of   Tolstoi   perhaps,  can tread  the  precarious line of feeling  which lies between  the  banal  and  the  maudlin.
John Reid  has  managed a fine control of tone, an achievement that  makes it possible   to   overlook   flaws  in   the   con­ struction of  his  book.  His  hero,  Harold Windsor,  is  an   unprepossessing,   unde­  fined  cipher who  expands into  tragic  di­ mension through  his  total  commitment to  love.  Externally he continues to strike people  as  timid,  unadventurous, and  in­ hibited.  Those   who   lecture   him   about  guts   and   blood   are   the   hollow   people who  have  never  been  filled  with  a  con­ suming fire.
A middle-aged widower, Harold has found himself  holidaying in  Spain  at  the insistence of  his  domineering  daughter­ in-law. Crushed by the  burden of  mem­ ory,  he  wanders  apprehensively through the  present.  John  Reid's   evocation of  a paunchy   nonentity  whose   inner   life   is gradually  revealed   to  the  point  of  com­ pelling   interest    is   a   moving    piece   of characterization.
Harold  has   grown    up   in   the   stiff­ necked,   Scottish-Gothic  respectability  of an   affluent   Ontario   home.   Most   trau­ matic of all his memories is that  of being trapped into shooting a horse  which  was supposed   to  have  killed  his father. This image    of    the    blindfolded   horse,    be­ wildered   and   tormented  by  a  situation which   he  can   neither  comprehend  nor control,  becomes  the  pervasive symbol of Harold's  life.  Pushed   into   an   unhappy marriage  with  a  selfish harpie, he  leaves her  for  a young  Italian immigrant. Julie,  with   her   erratic,  hysterical moods,   de­ vours   his   life.   The  long   scenes  of   re­ criminations  and   anxious   solicitude are painfully credible.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



The  real mtensity  of this  love, continu­ ing even  in  death, is contrasted  with  the stagey   posturing  of  the   bull-fights,  the self-conscious    artists    and    sharp-nosed tourists   who  are  on  the  prowl  for  local colour   and   "life",   whose   reality,   Reid suggests,  can  never  be  found   in  pictur­ esque  vistas and  passing  thrills.
Reid  possesses a remarkable ear  for the
sound  and  meaning of speech,  an  eye for the  peculiarities of  manner, and  an  un­ derstanding of suffering  in its unique and terrible aspects.  He  has written a book of disturbingly radiant  vitality.
PHYLLIS GROSSKURTH


IT COULD HAPPEN

ELLis   PORTAL, Killing   Ground. Peter  Martin
Associates. $6.so.

FoR  THE   AVERAGE CANADIAN,   Killing Ground  must  be a startling and  bizarre combination of two things  with  which  he is quite  familiar separately-the brutal violence  so  commonplace in  other   parts of the world  and  the soil of Canada. The book  is  based   upon   two  major  hypoth­ eses:  that  an  independentist  government can  gain  control of Quebec  and  that  the majority  of   people   harbour   an   innate savagery   ready   for   release   at   any   mo­ ment.  Granting these  two  hypotheses,  the novel   becomes  something  more   than   a fantasy.  It is a  vivid, sobering,  often  hor­ rifying  spectacle of  what   could   happen here.
Told  from  the  point  of view of a hard­ rock Canadian Army  officer who has  just returned from  a U.N. peace-keeping mis­ sion in South  Africa, the story  traces  step by step  the  development of  Quebec sep­ aratist  assassinations   into  full  scale  civil
 war.  Reluctant to publicize  the  gravity  of the  situation   and  fearful of  losing  face, the   federal    government   defers   calling back regular  military units  from  commit­ ments  to NATO, SEATO and  the  U.N.  With   available    opposition   thus   spread thin,  the  separatist  Provisional  Govern­ ment   of  Quebec  acts  quickly,   blocking roads   and   the   St.   Lawrence  Seaway, mobilizing hordes of youths  (by poignant analogy  called   the   "Whiteshirts"),  and skilfully  deploying provincial  police,  mi­ litia  and   French  Canadian  troops   who have defected  from  the  Canadian  Army. English-speaking  residents   of  Montreal, in desperation before the Whiteshirt-led mobs advancing from  the  East  End,  jam the  highways  and  flood  Dorval  Airport. But  Dorval   falls  into   the   hands   of  the young  terrorists,  hungry   for   blood   and flesh. The more obviously luscious of Westmount   women    are    stripped  and raped  in the plush  V.I.P. lounge,  while terrorist  girls, armed to their  bulging bosoms,  sprawl   on  top   of  Air  Canada, BOAC  and  other airline  counters, amus­ ing   themselves   with   the   panic-stricken crowds  of  men,  women  and children in the   main   lobby.   When   a   unit   of   the federal  forces  eventually  attacks Dorval, hundreds are  slaughtered.  Atrocities   are committed   by   both    sides,   the   federal troops  gaining  the  edge  in  shooting the breasts off  young girls and  tossing prison­ ers out  of  helicopters in  flight.  The  con­ flict  continues with  raids  on  Ottawa, St. Hubert and  Quebec City  and  various private    escapades,  the   author   demon­ strating an impressive knowledge of mili­ tary   manoeuvres,   weapons   of  war,   the  geography  of  Quebec and  the  techniques of    cliff-hanger    suspense.    The   climax comes,  of  course,   when   the   Americans begin to get impatient.

8g

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Killing Ground, then, is not a pleasant book to read, and obviously the author planned it  that   way, as a  kind  of  warn­ ing.   Only   those   who  know   nothing  of history    (especially    the   civil   wars   and  struggles  for  independence)  and who  do not   read   newspapers  would   claim   that  what  Portal describes, complete  with  de­ tailed   horrors, could  not  possibly occur.  It could,  undoubtedly.  Anything is  pos­ sible.  And  there  has  always  been  a  can­ cerous  undercurrent of racist ideas in Canada.
But  as one who  was born and  raised in
the  above-mentioned East  End  of  Mon­ treal  and  has  worked  with  young  French Canadians for several years, I don't  think it  will occur.  I  don't think,  for  example, that   brigades of  fanatic youths  such  as Portal's Whiteshirts could  ever  be  mobi­ lized. There are  always a few-the sad­ ists, the  misfits, the paranoiacs-but the majority of young  French  Canadians are too individualistic, too well informed, too accustomed  now  to  a  wealth   of  oppor­ tunities, to sex and  to free self-expression,  to   be  reduced   to  marauding  bands   of killers. The "mentalite de mouton" is one of  the  things  against   which   the   young people   of   Quebec  have   reacted    most strongly.  Twenty or  thirty  years ago,  be­ fore  Quebec began  to move, when only a handful  of  elite   went  to  college  and   a static  culture left  people oozing out  their frustrations in a rocking  chair while  con­ traception demolished the ancient dream  of the  revenge  of the cradle -then  per­  haps   a   brigade or   two  of  Whiteshirts might  have  been  possible. But  now Que­ bec is culturally  more  dynamic than  the rest  of  Canada;  the  old  inferiority com­ plex  is buried  with  Duplessis and  Lionel Groulx. There  are  many  here  who,  nat­  urally enough, would  like an independent

go
 state,   but   I   feel   sure   that    those   who would  wish  to  achieve  it  by means  por­ trayed  in  Killing Ground  are exceedingly  few.   Many  Quebeckers, in   fact,   have come   to  realize   that   political   indepen­ dence  and  cultural independence are  not synonymous.  The   legitimate  desire   and struggle  for  greater  autonomy in  French Canada  have  already   resulted   in  a  veri­ table  cultural explosion.  New  challenges, new   horizons,   a  new  awareness   of  the universal   implications of  ethnic  co-exis­ tence    are   in   the   winds   now   blowing across  la belle  province.
Then, too,  there   is  the  factor of  the
mixed  families, such  as the French-speak­ ing  McCarthys who shelter the  protago­ nist's  son.  Portal  has  one  such  family  in Killing Ground, but Canada and  Quebec have  many  thousands; and   the  number is increasing  as  old  barriers break  down and  the  influence  of the  Church steadily diminishes. For  as  Portal himself  repeat­ edly  implies,  a good-looking  Quebec girl can  be a powerful medicine against  prej­  udices    and   narrow-mindedness.  Mixed  families  constitute a  kind  of  ethnic  ce­ ment-we may grant Portal's hypothesis about  man's  innate  potential  for   sav­ agery,   but   more   powerful still  is  man's  innate loyalty  to  his immediate  circle  of human  beings.  Canadians, it  seems,  are at    last    abandoning   the    old,    deeply­  ingrained notions,  so close  to  the  threats of  nineteenth-century  racists,  that   there  can   be   anything   factual,  beneficial    or commendable  about  so-called   purity   of blood.  And  as the  number of people  with bicultural  backgrounds increases, the  op­ portunity   for   fruitful   dialogue  corres­ pondingly  increases.
Killing  Ground  is a  completely  nega­ tive  book.  If indeed  it  acts  as  an  instru­ ment   to  clear  the  air,  then  perhaps it  is

BOOKS IN REVIEW



well  that  it  was  published. Personally,  I should   have   preferred  a  counterbalance of  positive  elements, a  protagonist  some­ thing   more   than    the   stoical   execution  machine whose heights  of  compassion  are mild  regrets  about having to chop  attrac­ tive  girls  in   two   with   blasts   of  a  sten gun.   But  then   perhaps  a  spell  in  race­ torn  South  Africa-far  removed  from  a country where  the  ingredients of mutual understanding,    increasing   communica­ tion  and  respect  for  the  dignity   of  dif­ ference, are evident enough to offer limit­ less  potential-can do  that  to a man.
RONALD SUTHERLAND


BORDERLAND OF TRUTH

KILDARE  DOBBS,   Reading  the   Time.  Macmil­
lan.  $5.95.
DAVE   GODFREY,  Death Goes  Better with  Coca­ Cola.  House of  Anansi. Paper  $r.95,  hard­ back  $4.50.
Man Deserves   Man, edited by  Bill  McWhin­
ney  and   Dave Godfrey. Paper  $3.95,   cloth
$6.5o.

KILDARE DoBBS begins  Reading the Time with  a  preface  gauged   rather  accurately to  shock  and   annoy   truth-loving  Anglo­ Saxons   whose   minds   go  round   in  pre­ Edwardian grooves.

I often   see  writers praised for  telling the truth,  for   showing  the   way   things  are.   I think   this  praise is  ill-conceived. The world around us is  quite as  senseless  and  unread­ able   as  the   Encyclopaedia   Britannica. We have  to make it up  as we go  along. It would be  more   appropriate   to   praise  writers  for the  beauty and  consistency  of  their lies.

Kildare Dobbs   and   I have   in  common that   we  hide,   under    Anglo-Saxon   sur­ names,   Celtic   forebears and   shreds  of
 Celtic  nature, the  main  difference being that  while Mr.  Dobbs  belongs to the gen­ erous  and  expansive   Irish  stem  of  Celt­  dom,  I  belong  to  the  suspicious  and  se­ cretive  Welsh  stem,  delineated  by Cara­ doc  Evans  and   gloriously  lied  about   by Dylan  Thomas. My  Welsh  suspicions  led me to the year  I 88g, when another Irish­ man   (Anglo-  and  Church  of Ireland like Mr.   Dobbs),  published  "The Decay   of Lying".

The only  form   of  lying   that  is  absolutely beyond  reproach [said Oscar Wilde on that occasion]  is lying  for  its  own  sake,  and   the highest   development  of  this   is ... Lying   in Art ... Lying,   the   telling  of  beautiful   un­ true   things,  is  the  proper aim  of  Art.

I  am  bringing  no  accusation  of   bor­ rowing; it would  be pointless, since  I  be­ lieve  that  one  of the  secrets  of  becoming  a  good  artist   is  to  be  not  only  an  un­ ashamed   liar,   but   also   an   incorrigible thief.  But  I  am  placing  Mr.  Dobbs  in  a tradition, that  of the  free-wheeling Irish wit,  entertaining  the  Saxon   thanes   and  churls  of England and  its Canadian hin­  terland  with   beguiling   re-arrangements of actuality. Wilde's  elaborate patterns of entertainment of course  disguised  a mind more   serious   and   beleaguered  than   he dared   admit   until   z88g  had  passed  into r8g6,  and  in  the  same  way  one  detects in Kildare Dobbs  another self which  he describes   in  a  typically   Irish   phrase­ "a   mind   on   the   run".  Not   only   Irish rebels  went  on  the  run; so  did  conscien­  tious   objectors,  and   much   that   Dobbs writes  can  be  read  as  a kind  of one-man resistance   to   the   war   of  extermination that   the  facts  in  our  world  are  waging  against  us.
There is  a  curious   non-truth  on   the dust  cover  to  Reading the  Time.  It tells us  that   Kildare  Dobbs'   previous   book,

gr

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Running  to Paradise, won  the Governor­ General's  Award    for   "non-fiction"  in
1962. An  embarrassingly factual  memory tells  me  that   the  book  in  fact  won  the prize  for  "fiction", which  surprised  me  a little  at  the  time,  since  I  took  it  to  be a  collection  of autobiographical essays. I afterwards  recognized   the   essential   jus­ tice  of  the  award:   autobiography  is  a form  of fiction,  a  re-arrangement of  ac­ tuality, and  the  less facts  get  in  the  way of the  pattern-making fancy,  the better  it is likely  to  be. Running  to  Paradise was good, so I imagine a great deal of fiction­ making  really did  go into it.
In  another way,  the  same  applies   to Reading  the  Time. It  purports to  be  a series of essays, on  post-war  fashions in literature,  on  styles  in  war   throughout the  ages, on  travel  in  Canada and  other odd   ends   of  the   earth. It  concerns   in its own  way actuality, the  mad  world through which  we canter, grabbing facts and experiences on the way. The author warns  us against   his opinions; he  warns us  against   his  writing-"I pretend   I'm
a writer." But  he opinionates and  writes superbly,   assuming   with   equal   amateur felicity  the  cloak of literary  sociologist, of critic  of  the  arts  of  war,  of  traveller   on the  hop,  catching  the  flashes  of  reality that  rebound from  the  resident's  armour of   familiarity.  He    explains    admirably why  the  so-called   "Angry   Young  Men" of the  British  Fifties  each  wrote  only one good  book;   he  shows  up  Marshall  Mc­ Luhan as  a  schoolman overcome  by  an intolerable nostalgia for what  is irretriev­ ably  past;   he  demonstrates  how  Ameri­  can   rebellion   is  motivated   by  the  same group    values    and    group   reactions    as American  orthodoxy:   not   perhaps  very original    points,    but    splendidly  made.  Such   inspired   lies -if  one  must  accept

92
 their  author's description of them-take one   further  in   understanding  our   con­ temporary   lunacies   than    most    men's  heavy  truths.
It  wasn't merely   the  fact   that   Dave Godfrey's stories  appeared mostly  in  Sat­ urday  Night  under the  editorship of  Kil­  dare   Dobbs   that   made   me  pair   Death Goes Better  with  Coca-Cola  with  Read­ ing the Time. Both  are criticisms of their  era  in  the  sense  that  all  immediate writ­  ing  is criticism.  Both  cultivate that  most promising  of   territories, the   borderland between   the  factual  and   the  imagined, and  if  Dobbs  deserves  prizes  for  fiction, perhaps  Godfrey  should  be a laureate of non-fiction. Certainly he uses the  kind  of illuminated realism  and the lapidary craftsmanship that  are appropriate to a fiction  we can  regard  as contemporary in the  sense of being  alive to the  day.
Once Edmund Wilson made  the odd statement  that    Morley    Callaghan   re­ minded  him  of  Turgenev. Made  about  Dave    Godfrey   (and    tied   up   with   no flummery about  comparative  greatness) it would  not  sound  so odd.  It isn't  mere­  ly that  Godfrey has  taken  the same  kind of  frame as  Turgenev  used  at  the  start
-the hunting  story   of   A  Sportsman's
Sketches.  He  is  also  using  his  stories  in the same  way  as Turgenev-though  not at  all  imitatively-to express  an  enor­ mous,  almost  Russian feeling  for  the  sur­  face  of  the  earth over  which  he  travels,  and   to  criticize  idiosyncratically the  hu­ man  world  through which  he hunts. The real  sportsman who  sees even  a glimmer of   what   Godfrey   is  getting at  when   he trails   us  through  the   hemp   after   one­ eyed pheasants will be disinclined to read on.
The third book -in  its  turn  -is  not reviewed   here   just  because  Dave   God-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



frey  happens  to  be  one  of  the  editors. The  link is more  compelling. Here,  I suppose,  is something as  near  fact   (and very  meaningful  fact  for  our   times)   as one can  get.  Man  Deserves Man  is about CUSO, the  organization of Canadian volunteers who  work  in  the  colonial countries where,  in other days, Kildare Dobbs   was  one  of  the  last   bwanas.   In Running  to Paradise Dobbs  gave some extraordinary  vignettes of  the  final  days of the colonial regime in Africa. Man Deserves Man  sketches  out,  in  the  words of  volunteers, the  life  of  a  new  genera­ tion  of  "Europeans" who  seek  to  move among the  people  of the so-called under­ developed  countries as equals  rather than  lords.   Every   now   and   then   a   gust   of rather  stale  rhetoric  blows  through  the book;  such  organizations  as  CUSO in­ evitably  attract a  few  of  the  Important Ernests  who  in  other   days  would   auto­ matically have   become  rather  sanctimo­ nious   curates.  But   their   proportion  is surprisingly small,  and  many of  the  nar­  ratives,   letters   and   diaries   included  in Man  Deserves Man  are  either   good  re­ portage,  or   constructive  discussions   of how  best to serve  the  people  of countries  like India and  Sarawak and  Ghana with­ out   introducing the suspicion  of neo­ colonialism.  The best contribution is a brilliant socio-political essay which  God­ frey  himself  wrote  in  Ghana  just  before Nkrumah's downfall. Man Deserves Man,  apart from  its  intrinsic  interest, is highly conducive to  the  understanding of Death Goes Better  with  Coca-Cola;  it  presents the  other  face  to  the cynicism  that  some­ times  cuts  like  a  sharp blade  out  of  the stories.
GEORGE WOODCOCK
 ON ETHEL WILSON

DESMOND  PACEY, Ethel Wilson. Burns McEach­
ern.  $5.'25·

To  EXPLAIN  why  I find  Ethel  Wilson  by Desmond   Pacey  disappointing, I should say immediately that   I am  interested in how  Mrs.  Wilson's   books  go  their   own way,  make  their  own  way,  idiosyncratic and  anomalous. Too  often,  for  my sense of them, Desmond Pacey is trying to categorize  or  classify them.  True, he says that  "it  is difficult  and  indeed  finally im­ possible  to  attach a  neat   label  to  Ethel  Wilson's  fiction."   But  he  does,   just  the same, spend  considerable time  in classify­ ing, in generalizing, in  measuring by aca­ demic  rule.
When Mr. Pacey settles to particular comments on  the  novels, especially  when he shows similarities of theme or  attitude or role, he talks real Ethel  Wilson. "Both novellas  (in The  Equations of Love) demonstrate the ambiguity of a moral judgment." "Both  ... give  us glimpses  of the  boredom, the  horror, and   the  occa­ sional glory of ordinary human life." The similarities   he  points   to  between   ample,  natural  Maggie   in   Swamp   Angel   and will-pared Lilly  in  Lilly's Story,  between  Aunty  Emblem  in  Tuesday  and W ednes­ day and  Mrs. Severance in Swamp  Angel, are   revealing  in  a  way   no  study   of  a single  work  can  be.  They   suggest  other similarities  (in   the   use  of  the  observer,  episodic structure, web and  sea imagery) which   might   give  even   more   sense  of these novels. When  Mr. Pacey quotes  pas­ sages  about   Mrs.  Severance, he  calls  to mind  not  only  her  role  in  Swamp  Angel but  roles  and  views  characteristic of  all of Ethel Wilson's work. Mrs. Severance's view  is  given  as  "both  constricted and

93

BOOKS IN REVIEW



universal," the  view of an  observer,  past passion  and  uninhibited by beauty, com­ passionate,  ironical,  amused.  This   atti­  tude   is  basic  to  each  of   Ethel  Wilson's novels  and  many  of her  short  stories.  As Desmond  Pacey  shows,  her  interest  is in observing,   in  both  presenting   and   com­ menting  on  the  stubborn  endurance  of very ordinary  people  in their  never  quite  known   world,   their   failures   and   their occasional  "compassion, courtesy,  and courage."
When he generalizes, Mr. Pacey moves away from  the exact quality  of Ethel Wilson's  work;  indeed,  he  often  distorts it. "Swamp Angel  . .. is really,  by  impli­ cation   at  least,  a  prose  poem  about   the cosmic  web  of life,  about  time  and  eter­ nity,  man's   relationship with  God,   vir­ tually  all  aspects  of  man's  relations  with his  fellows   (parent  and  child,   husband and  wife, employer  and employee, friend­ ship  and  envy), the  individual's struggle for  survival   in  a  universe  which  at  least seems   to   be   profoundly  indifferent   to him,   and   the   relations   of  the   animate creation  with   the   inanimate."  But   this novel   is  not   "a   parable   of  the   whole human  condition, of  indeed,   the  whole cosmic  rhythm   and  web,"  and  to  call  it so  seems  to  mock  it. So do  all  the  com­ parisons   (of  Lilly's  Story  to  Moll  Flan­ ders,   of   Hetty   Dorval   to   the   Faerie Queene and  Pilgrim's  Progress)  and  the section   of   the   "introduction   in   which Mr.  Pacey  tries  to  locate  Ethel  Wilson's  work  in  terms  of  the  week  of   Fielding,  Proust, E. M. Forster, Trollope, Compton­ Burnett,   Virginia   Woolf    and    Arnold Bennett.
The  mockery  is surely as unintentional as  the  condescension in  such  comments as "This is not  a fault,  for it simply indi­ cates  that   Mrs.  Wilson  is  observing   the

94
 sound  rule of writing out of her own experience," or "an  important element  in structure is point  of view. To  give a sense of  unity  to a short  story,  the  single  point of  view  is almost  always  preferable and Mrs. Wilson  uses it in no less than  twelve of her  eighteen short  stories."
Why  should   Mr.   Pacey  speak  of  rules and   classes  and   cosmic  webs?  He  says, finally,  that   Ethel  Wilson  "is  one  of  the very few Canadian writers for whom one need   make   no  apology   in  offering   her work  to the  world." Here  is, I think,  the basis  for   the  dissatisfaction I  feel  with Desmond Pacey's book;  if he doesn't apologize,  he  does  seem  to  scramble for big names  and  big phrases  and  safe rules to   justify    "offering  her   work   to   the world." But  that  shows a shift  in interest from  the  work  to  the  critic's  evaluation of   it.   What  I  want,  in   anyone's   talk about  any  writer,  Canadian or  not,  is in­ sight  into  the  work,  not  a defence  of  the critic's   taste.   Mr.   Pacey   has  seen   true  things  in Ethel  Wilson's  novels. I wish he had  spent  more  time  on them.
H. W. SONTHOFF


MINI-NOVEL EXCELLENCE

AUDREY CALLAHAN THOMAS,  Ten Green
Bottles. Thomas  Allen.  $6.25.

THE  SHORT STORY  expresses  a  succinct and   personal   reaction  to  some   specific aspect  of life  that   has  moved  the  writer at  a  particular moment; the  short  story exists  as  a  separate point  on  the  canvas that    is  the   writer's   experience,  yet   it exists  as  a  point   that is linked,  irrevoc­ ably,  to  other   points  within  that  experi-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ence. The  fortunate thing  about the short story  is  that   it  can   be  considered  as  a small,  isolated   unit,  or  it  can   be  com­ pared  with  other stories.  The  short  story writer   needs  only  to  consider  the  form and  development of a particular moment, and   is  consequently  freed   from   the  re­ sponsibility  of  expressing  that  moment in relation to other moments; this  a  reader  may  do  if  he  so  wishes.  Rarely, if  ever, does a short story  writer  express  the free­ dom  that  is essential  to  the  form.  Rarely  does  a collection   of  short  stories  express this  freedom.
But  Audrey  Callahan Thomas has caught the  essence of the  freedom  of the form  in  her first collection of short stories, and  caught it with  something that  is peculiarly her own. The variety  is impres­ sive. There is a  range  of  subject  matter
-from studies  of  social  bores  and  their
 effect  on  people  around  them,   to  racial consciousness  in  a  Negro   Peace  Corps­ man's  emotional changes,  to  thoughts on childbirth-that lifts this  book  above so many   collections   of    short   stories;   the range  in situation is  reflected,  too, in  the geographical  range   presented   by   Mrs. Thomas. Her   heightened  awareness   of some special  moment that  makes  a short story, gives to  Mrs. Thomas the  predomi­ nant  characteristic that  in  a good  writer separates  the  short  story  from  any  other literary  genre.  The fluid  moments which are  examined  in  this  book  change   and flow   easily.   The  reader    perceives   the awareness   behind   the  story,  the  fluidity which  surrounds the  particular  moment. Mrs.  Thomas leads  on  into  a vast  reser­ voir  which  is  her  interpretation  of  life. It is a clear,  no-nonsense view;  it  makes sense. Her  stories,  alone,  or in the collec-





0
,>_
 "Carnival is one  of  those  curious  novels  you  never  finish.... It's  there,  like a fact  of life, like a fable, or like a distant society out  of Franz Kafka.... The only clue the  reader  needs is that the  book is about  a carnival  of carnality. It's  either a puritan's feast  or  a  profligate's fast-it  depends  on  you. What has  to be said  is that   Nigel  Foxell  can  write,  and  that  he  writes  for keeps.  His   first  novel  is  etched   onto   the   page ... and   is  as splendidly  economical  as  poems  used  to  be  but  aren't  these days" -John Robert Colombo

Nigel  Foxell   has  "rendered  his  v1s10n with   tense  wit  and   a sureness   of   language  rare   among   younger   writers   today ... creating places  that  belong  only in the  imagination and  char­ acters  who  inhabit imagination's autonomous world.  Carnival is a  fine  achievement" -George  Woodcock

Carnival fa novel  by Nigel  Foxellfsoftcover j$2.50

Oberon Press


95

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tion,  reach   pinnacles that   I would  sug­ gest   few   writers    of   the   contemporary short   story -in  Canada,  and  elsewhere
-have  reached.
It is not  the  plots  that  are  interesting alone,  not  the  style, not the rhythms,  but a combination of  these  things  that  make Mrs.  Thomas an  artist  in the short  story. It  is,  after   all,  her  whole  technique, or her   technique  of   wholeness.   It   is  the unique approach that she has to what happens, to  the  importance of  the  mo­ ment   she  is  examining, to  the  function of  language  within   her  expression.  She works  in  easy  circles,  moments   of  time that  circulate about  her  past, future, and present,  into   a   particular  mosaic   that  lacks  sequential  structure. At  times  it  is what   is  happening now  that   asserts  the
story;  sometimes  it is something that  has
happened,  or  something  that   will  hap­ pen.  But  finally,  it  is the  reaction  within  the  now  that  validates  the  story.  On  one hand  there is isolation  within  experience, and   then   Mrs.  Thomas  leads  her  story away   from   sequential   occurrences  and lets  incident  and   time  weave  her  story for  her.  For  her  characters, real life stops temporarily,   and   in   its  stopping  is  its essence.  Character  and   plot   define   the moments -or  the  latter  defines  the  for­ mer -and  so it flows on.
There is no doubt that  Mrs.  Thomas's book is more  than just a "tour de force" in  technique.  Everywhere in  the  collec­ tion   are  signs  of  a  writer   with  a  keen observation, or  someone   who  has  obvi­ ously reacted  to life with an almost  limit­  less sensibility.  The  language  is beautiful and   controlled;  her  choice  of  words  is admirable without being pretentious. She is  a  born  short   story  writer   in  an  age where  lucidity seems  to  be  often  lost  in short   stories.    I   recommend her   book

g6
 highly.  Reading it is an experience not  to be missed.  It is, as Kjeld  Deichman  used to  say  about   his  feeling  on  opening  his kiln   after   a   firing   of   many   pieces   of pottery, "like  Christmas morning;  every­ thing  becomes  a surprise."
DONALD STEPHENS





PRESS PERSPECTIVE


A  Century  of  Reporting/Un siecle  de  repor­ tage,  edited  by  L. Brault, J.-L.  Gagnon, W. Kesterton, D.  C.  McArthur,  F.  Underhill, C.  Young.  Clarke,  Irwin.  $ro.oo

OF ALL  THE PUBLICATIONS which  marked I g67, perhaps none is more  interesting to the  amateur Canadian historian than  this centennial  project of  the  National Press Club  of Canada. The decision,  doubtless taken   on   grounds  of  cost,  not   to   pro­ vide  parallel   translations is  unfortunate, doubly so  since  it  leaves  the  unilingual English-speaking Canadian  unable  to ap­ preciate  not  only  the  French  selections, whose  significance   at  least  is made  clear in   notes   by  Frank  Underhill,  but   also the  avant-propos of  Jean-Louis  Gagnon wherein  is  ably   sketched   the   evolution of  Canadian  journalism. Newspapers in
I 867  were   primarily, as  he  points   out, political  organs; they  were  changed into sources   of  information  by  the  develop­ ment   of  rapid  means  of  communication and    diffusion,  and   now,   surpassed    in speed  by  the  electronic media,  they  rely on    provision    of    critical   commentary and   background   information  for   their strength. The  gradual  nature  of   these

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



changes  is borne  out  by the  character of the  selections  themselves.
Of  course  choices  were  necessary  and
opinions  will  vary  on  the  importance of both  inclusions  and  omissions.  There are no  articles   which   demonstrate,  for   ex­ ample, the  anti-confederation  feeling  in the  Maritimes or  the  reaction to Britain's handling  of   the   Alaska   Boundary  dis­ pute,   none   which   discuss   the   meaning for   Canada of  the  appointment of  the first  ambassador in  1926, of  the  Statute of  Westminster, or  of  Canada's role  in the    United    Nations.    Nonetheless,   the events    of    the    nation   are    admirably chronicled:   the   deaths  of   McGee,    of Riel,  of  the  statesmen  Macdonald  and Laurier; the disasters  at  London, at Hali­  fax,   at   Springhill.  Some   were   events which  caught the  eye of  the  world:  the birth   of    the   quints,  the   discovery   of Gerda  Munsinger,  and   Expo   67;  some were   essentially   national:  the   glory  of Percy   Williams,   the   Regina "riot",  the shooting of  "Red" Ryan, and   the  Dou­ khobor   march   to  Agassiz.  More  than   a quarter of  the  articles deal  with  Canada at  war-in victory  at  Vimy,  in defeat  at Dieppe, in  conflict   over  conscription  at home-and   these   vary   in   style  from Rudyard Kipling's moving  description of a Canadian  memorial service  in St. Paul's  to the equally  emotional eyewitness  radio reports  of Matthew Halton.
Beyond   this  brief   survey  of  the  con­ tents,  it  is  necessary  to  note  the  literary  and   political   aspects   of  this   anthology,  for  in  both  the  editors have  managed to evoke  many  faces  of  journalistic writing.  Prose  more  purple  than the   account of Macdonald's death  can  scarcely  be imag­ ined:

The  hand  of the  Death   Angel  had  knocked for  seven  anxious  days  and  seven  sleepless
 nights, and the door had  at last  been open  d and   the  spirit   of  the   dauntless   Ch1eftam winged  its way  into  eternity.

If the  style  in   all  its  floridity   has  dis­ appeared, the   spirit   remains in   Perlin's  farewell  to Newfoundland's separate exis­ tence and,  indeed, in  Newman's "I came to  the  fair  a  nationalist, full  of  pride  in Canada, I left it a humanist, full of hope for   man,"   which    concludes  the   book. Humour,  as   usual,   proves   itself  a  rare gift  in  Canadian writers; far  better  than  the conscious attempts are  those where  it is  only  a  part   of  the  fabric, as  in   the court   cases  reporter  on   page I 8  or  in Charles    Lynch's   "To   Charlotte   with Love."   Two   articles,   those  by  Heming­ way and  Sinclair, represent the  journalist as   free-lancer,  writing  what    amounts more  to supplement than  "news". Above all,  there   are   the   varieties  of  political prose,   fiercely   partisan  in   slanting  of news  as  exemplified  by  the   contrasting editorials of the  Globe  and  the  Montreal Gazette   on   the   Pacific   Scandal  or   by those  of   L'Evenement  and   Le  Solei!  on the  St.  Roch  meeting: impassioned   in  a plea  for  votes,  as  in  Joey  Smallwood's "Mothers-Read  This!"; or  analytical, a style  seen  in  its  rational  best  in   the articles  by Dafoe,  Laurendeau, and  Gin­ gras.
At   this   moment,  Canada  is  in   the
midst  of a  major political   crisis, a  crisis of   unity   which    has   two   closely   inter­ related   aspects.  One  of  these,  the  prob­  lems of  French-English  relations,  is well­ delineated in  the  anthology, but  only for the  reader   who,  equipped  with   French, can  gain insights into  the  historical  roots of  French  Canadian  attitudes from   the unsigned  articles   on  the  death  of  Riel,  from  those by and  about  Henri  Bourassa, and  from  more   recent   ones  by  Harvey,

97

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Laurendeau, and  Leger.  Where  are the reasoned  articles  of equivalent honesty  by English-speaking  journalists?  The   other and   even  more   immediate, perhaps  in­ separable,  side   to   the   present   crisis   is constitutional  and   herein  lies  the  major  fault   in  emphasis in  this  anthology.   No attempt has  been  made  to  include   jour­ nalism  which  marks  the  stages  by which Canada   has    achieved    sovereignty,    by which  the  BNA  Act  has  been  modified. Most  of   these  events   were  fully  as  im­ portant in  their  time  as, say, the  Pipeline debate or the resignation of James Coyne, which  are  included, and  some,  such  as the   early   actions   of   Aberhart's   Social Credit  party    in   Alberta,    involved   the press itself as well as the constitution of Canada. It is hard  to see why, especially with   Frank    Underhill  on   the   editorial board, such  an obvious  consideration  was overlooked. Perhaps it is ultimately neces­ sary  to  accept  the  words  of  Christopher Young   in   the   Introduction   and   agree that  the  reporter's "perspective is today's view of yesterday's event," and  that  that  view  is  general  rather than   expert. In­ deed,  asking  for  more  from  this  book  is praising  the  achievement made.
JANE FREDE MAN


SPRING AND
SORE FEET

BRUCE HUTCHISON,   Western Windows. Long­
mans  Canada.  $4·95·

THE   PASTORAL   MYTH has   been   most assiduously cultivated  in  Canada  by newspaper men-allegedly a hard-bitten disillusioned   lot,  who,  however,  at  sight of   a   derelict    shack   surrounded  by   a

g8
 tangle  of greenery (preferably with a cow or  two  submersed in  the  greenery)   lose all sense of decorum and  restraint, particularly as applied to the English language and  record   their  emotional  re­ actions   in   prose   as   luxuriant and   un­ controlled  as  the   rural   growths   which inspire them.
Bruce   Hutchison's Western  Windows,
a   collection  of  fugitive  newspaper  bits and  pieces  wedged  between  a substantial chunk of  autobiography at  one  end  and what  appears to be a recantation of sorts at  the  other, reduces  anything written by such  earlier   enthusiasts for  the  rural  re­ treat   as   Peter    McArthur  and   David  Grayson-newspaper  men  both-to the level   of   pallid   understatement.  Spring is   Mr.   Hutchison's  season;   he   and   it burst  out  simultaneously in embarrassing fecundity:  "Here  in   the  wilderness   are great  trees  now gushing  with  the  upward surge  of sap;  tall firs, their  bark  wrinkled and    smiling   in   the   March  sun,   their needles   humming  a   cheerful   hymn   to spring; alders  already dripping with  the purple wine  of  their  catkins; maples  in­ flating their   fat   buds; sword  ferns  cau­  tiously 	loosening    their	rough 	curled fronds;  swallows   skimming  the   lake;   a darting  brown   wren   in  the   underbrush like a shrill  little  exclamation mark  punc­ tuating the steady  prose of the forest; the wail  of  a  loon  who  owns  the  lake  as  no human ever  owned  it."  And  so on.  And on.  And  on.
Such   ecstatic  carollings  tend   to   pall
after  a while.  Particularly when  Mr. Hutchison-striving to outdo even  him­ self  in   praise   of  all   things   pastoral  - suggests  that  to  a man  of taste  and sensibility the smell of a cleanly cow is preferable to "the city's  most expensive perfume,   worn    by   its   most    beautiful

BOOKS IN REVIEW



woman." The   heroine   of  one  of  Robert Stead's  novels, a farm girl named  Minnie, says to the hero,a city man, "I could write a scenario  for a film, Why Country Girls Leave  Home, and  I'd use only one actor." "Who?"  says  the   hero.   "A   cow,"   says Minnie. For   those  of  us  who  have  ac­ tually   milked   cows,  felt  the  caress  of  a heavy   tail   across   the   face,   the   sticky warmth of a  pailful  of milk  upset  in  the lap   by  a  well-placed   kick-Minnie is our   girl.   Preferably  drenched -if she's been   near   a  cow   recently-in Chanel Number 5·
When  Mr.  Hutchison isn't  on a nature
binge  he  is  often  very  shrewd   and  very funny.   The  chunk   of  autobiography  is fine-in  part   because  it  has  something in it  besides trees and  cows and  crocuses. It has  people.  And  though Mr.  Hutchi­ son  is  frequently  repetitive,   prolix   and purple, he  writes  always  with  gusto.  For this, much-indeed  nearly all-may be forgiven   him.
The  recantation is a curious  item.  Mr. Hutchison would  have  us believe that  all those splendid things  he said  about  what life  in   the   Canadian  outback  does  for one   by  way   of  muscle,   character,  and soul-building aren't  true.  "After quarter of  a  century of  the  dream   life,"  he  re­ ports,  "I am  broke,  friendless,  ignorant, insular,  prejudiced, calloused, cantanker­ ous  and   prematurely  aged,  and  my  feet hurt." Further-"I   am   personally   re­ sponsible   for   dragging   down   countless others   with   me,  breaking  up  marriages and  blighting the  lives of  little  children. This  I have  done  by writing and  selling for  profit  innumerable sweet  and   soggy articles  on  the  joys of the  country. Hun­ dreds,   perhaps  thousands  of  contented folk   have   read    and   believed   me   and moved to the  country and  lived  to curse
 my  name."   And   a  new  dream   has  re­ placed   the   old-"of   a  two-room   flat, somewhere  in a nice high concrete tower, where  Ican  smell  the  perfume of  auto­ mobile  engines  and  listen ... to  the  soft vvhisper of steam  in  the  radiator  and  the click of an  electric  thermostat."
Of  course  we  don't believe  a  word  of it. Come  spring  and  Mr.  Hutchison, sore feet   and   all,   will   be  heading  for   the woods  and  the  woodpile.
EDWARD MCCOURT



COSTIVE CRITICISM

JOHN   M.  STEDMOND, The   Comic  Art  of  Lau­
rence  Sterne.   University  of  Toronto  Press.
$s.so.

TRISTRAM SHANDY, fictional  offspring  of the   Rev.   Mr.   Laurence  Sterne,  parish priest of Coxwold  in Yorkshire, leaves his "gentle readers"  in  no  doubt  as to  what prompted him  to write  his now immortal book, The  Life  and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman. It was  not,  he says, "wrote  against    predestination,   or   free will, or taxes -If 'tis wrote  against any­ thing -'tis  wrote,  an'  please  your  wor­ ships,  against  the  spleen; in  order,  by a more  frequent and  more  convulsive  ele­ vation  and  depression  of  the  diaphragm, and   the  succassations of   the  intercostal and   abdominal   muscles  in   laughter,  to drive   the   gall   and   other   bitter    juices from   the  gall-bladder, liver,  and   sweet­ bread   of  his  majesty's   subjects,  with  all the   inimicitious  passions   which   belong to  them,   down   into  their   duodenums." For  "true Shandeism . .. forces  the  blood and  other  vital  fluids  of the  body  to  run

99

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



freely  thro'   its  channels,  and  makes  the wheel   of   life   run   long   and   cheerfully round."
Just   to  make   assurance  doubly   sure, Tristram  also  tells  us,  his  readers,   that he  dislikes "set  dessertations," is repelled by "relicks  of learning," and  despises the jargon  of criticism: "Grant me patience, just   heaven!-Of   all  the  cants   which are  canted  in   this canting  world,­ though the cant  of hypocrites may  be the worst,-the cant  of criticism is the most tormenting!"
Yet  in spite  of these warnings, or  per­ haps  because  of   them,  critics   have hovered  around the  works of  Sterne, like moths  around a bright candle, ever since the  first  two  books of  Tristram  came  off the   presses  in  York  in  December  I759· They  have   analyzed  and  dissected; praised    and   damned;  sought    sources; studied   the  text  to  establish  charges   of plagiarism;  attempted  to  discover  what really motivated Sterne to write  what  he wrote,   as  if  Tristram's  clear   statement was  not  clear  enough.
Professor Stedmond now seeks to grasp this  Protean figure  in  order   to  find  the subtle   methods of  his  "comic  art." The blurb   on  the   jacket  of  his  book  and   a prefatory statement within  its covers establish  Mr.  Stedmond's credentials. He is a  thoroughly trained scholar  (Univer­ sities of Saskatchewan and  Aberdeen); is a   Professor   at   Queen's   University  and Chairman of  Graduate  Studies  in  Eng­  lish;  is a  member  of  "the  newly  formed  Laurence Sterne  Memorial Trust set  up to    purchase    the   freehold    of   Shandy Hall";   and   has   had   portions    of   The Comic  A'rt  previously  published   in  four most  respectable academic  journals.
Confronted by these qualifications and by  the   four   scholarly   blessings  already

100
 pronounced  over  large  swatches   of  this work,  I do  not  question its  solid  worth. Mr.  Stedmond  obviously knows his Sterne, and  has, I think,  a genuine affec­ tion  for  him.
But the affection is smothered in the highly  serious, straight-faced approach to the   magic   of   true   Shandeism. In  the books  seven  chapters, Mr.  Stedmond tackles context and  meaning, genre and Tristram  Shandy, style, Tristram as a satirist  and  as a clown, the faces of Yorick as seen in the Sermons and  A Sentimental Journey, and  Sterne's comic view. But the chapters are  sadly  unbalanced. Two  are short,  slightly  better  than  extended notes; two  would   make   respectable articles   in the  journals  of the  profession; one has respectable girth; and  one,  "Tristram as Clown," which  is the  core,  the  heart, or the   belly  of  the   book,  is  Falstaffian in size. It also reminds me of Falstaff's com­ ment: "I have  more  flesh  than  another man,   and   therefore more  frailty." Flesh it  does  have   (it  is  much  more   than   a third   of  the  study),  but,  alas,  it  has  its frailties   too,  for  it  is  a  quietly   plodding examination,  volume  by  volume,   of  the nine   volumes   of   Tristram   Shandy.
And  so, gentle  reader, what  have  we? An   academic  exercise,   with   well   mar­ shalled  facts  and  some  perceptive  obser­ vations,   written  by  a   thoroughly   com­ petent  scholar   for   the  benefit   of  other scholars.   For   them   it   may   shed   some glimmering  light   on   the   more   obscure  corners  of  the  art  of  Sterne, and  it  may even give good  guidance and  some useful quotations to  earnest students faced  with the  task  of   writing  term   papers   on  the English  novel  in  the  eighteenth century.
But  it  will  not,  I fear,  add  one  iota  of pleasure  to  the  reader who  already loves the Shandy family,  and  the Widow  Wad-

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



man,    and    Corporal  Trim,   and    poor Yorick,  nor  will  it  encourage the  unini­ tiated   to  open   the  pages  of  one  of  the most   memorable  novels  in   the   English language.




AUSTIN CLARKE IN CANADIAN REVIEWS



IN A RECENT  RADIO INTERVIEW  on the Canadian  Broadcasting Corporation  the American  singer   Odetta  declared that she  would   never  seek  the  services  of  a white  psychiatrist. Her   remark is  a  wry comment  on   the   racial    impasse   in   a society  where  interracial  communication is   hampered  by   what    she   regards    as white  incapacity or  unwillingness to com­ prehend  black   experience and   cultural values.   It  has,  of  course,   been   a  well­ established Canadian  tradition  to assume that   such  barriers to  understanding be­ long  elsewhere,  particularly south  of  the border, and  are hardly  relevant to Cana­ dian   society.   Instead,  many   Canadians cherish  comforting  notions   of  tolerance and  understanding in  a  manner that   is highly  reminiscent  of  Great Britain  be­ fore  the  Notting Hill  riots  or  the  North­ ern  States  of  the  pre-Watts era.  Herein lies  the   significance  of  Austin   Clarke's arrival  on   the  Canadian  literary  scene, for  the  reactions of  reviewers  and  critics to the  Barbadian  novelist  have  so far  be­ lied  the  Canadian tradition of  flattering self-assurances. Clarke's portrayal  of  the
 For  here  we have  no "succassations of the   intercostal  and   abdominal   muscles in   laughter."  Serious   scholarship  is  all too  frequently slightly  costive.
S.E.READ












Lloyd W. Brown

new black consciousness  that  has emerged over  the  past  ten  years  has  elicited  only the  hackneyed  responses  (and  expressions of disconcerting ignorance)  that  have customarily   replaced  insight   and   pene­ tration  whenever  black  society  and   art  are  the objects  of study.
Miriam  Waddington's recent  review (Canadian   Literature    36)    of   Clarke's novel,  Meeting  Point,  is  typical   of  this failure.  First, she is disturbed by the "un­ reasonable"  and   "uninteresting"  hatred in  the  novel:   "you   get  the  feeling that  the   writer   is  taking out   on  the   reader  what   his  characters ought  to  be  taking  out  on  one  another."  What   disconcerts the  critic  is  the  inevitable intensity   en­ gendered   by  the  novel's   theme of  con­ flict,  for  conflict   is  the  very  essence  of Meeting  Point-the social  and  cultural confrontation   between    white    Toronto and   its  black   West   Indian  immigrants. But Miss Waddington is not the first to deplore  the  "unreasonable"  bitterness of racial  strife  in  black  literature. In  a  re cent  survey of black  fiction  in The Com­ monwealth   Pen  A.  L.   McLeod   rejects


101

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



the disturbing truths of conflict in favour of the "more universal"and "realistic" portrayals of black experience (by white artists  of  course) , choosing  as  his  ideals Conrad's pre-historic myths on the  "dark continent"   (Heart    of   Darkness)     and Oliver  Schreiner's superficial  nineteenth­ century  irrelevancies  (The  Story   of  an African  Farm).  Another  critic,   Robert A. Bone,  bases similar  arguments on  the mystifying   proposition   that    "the  color line  exists  not   between  the   pages  of  a book   but   outside,    in   the   real   world" (The  Negro  Novel  in  America, 1958).
Miss  Waddington's  squeamishness   on
the  subject of conflict  is matched by the equally   familiar  overtones   of  her  racial judgements.  Her   contrast  between   the "tropic nature" of  the  West  Indian and "northern Christianity" is repugnant, not only because  it ignores  the  novelist's  very strong  emphasis on  the  Christian  values (even  prudery) of the "tropical" heroine, among  others,  but  also because  it smacks of  the  patronizing air  that  so  often  ac­ companies   pseudo-liberal   condescension  and  even  outright  racism. Miss Wadding­ ton's   thesis  is  hardly an  unfamiliar one  for  it  recalls  the  oldest  of  the  colonial  motifs:    the   "tropic   nature"  of  incorri­ gible  "natives" in  conflict  with  the  "su­  perior"   moral   discipline    of   "northern Christianity"  and  European civilization.
The  reviewer's judgements also  suffer from  the  white  critic's  age-old  ignorance of  the   black  environment  and  situation upon which Clarke  bases his novel. She dislikes the fact that the heroine Bernice Leach   has   been   cast  in  the   role  of  a "live-in" domestic  because the "built-in humiliations" of her status supposedly contribute to  the  unrealistic  "short-cuts" of the work. But there  is nothing artificial or  unrealistic  about  Bernice's  status.  Un-

102
 til   just   over   a   year   ago   the   de   facto racism of Canada's immigration policies (now acknowledged by the Canadian Government) effectively excluded most black   West   Indians  with   the  exception of   students   and    domestics    (including those  pretending, for  obvious  reasons,  to be  domestics). The humiliations of  Ber­ nice's   role   have   not   been   built   in   by Clarke, for  the  majority of  domestics like herself    were    contractually   obliged    to work   as   live-in   maids   for   a  stipulated period  after  their  admission  to  the  coun­  try.   Far    from    being    an    "unrealistic" short-cut, Bernice's   economic position  is an  accurate reflection   of  the   degrading status of  many   black  West  Indian  emi­ grants to Canada.
Miss  Waddington  also  argues   against
the  facts  of life when  she complains that only  "confusion" results  from  Clarke's choice  of  Jews  as  the  white  protagonists in  the  racial  conflict,  that  it is  unreason­ able    to    "compound  the    problems    of black-white with   those  of  Jew-Gentile". As  Bernice's   employers,  the   Burrmanns symbolize  the  incontrovertible fact   that  Jews  are  the  largest  single  group  of em­ ployers  of   black  West  Indian domestics  in  the  Toronto  area. The  "compound­ ing"  of  the  cultural problems   is  not  an Austin Clarke fantasy, but  a fact  of life: the   Jew   is  as  prominent  in   the   social and  economic experience of West Indian domestics,  as he is in the black  American ghettoes. This  parallel is important, for what James Baldwin  writes of ambiguous Black-Jew  relationships in  America is largely  true  of the  cultural and  economic conflicts between Bernice and her Jewish environment. The  devout    Negro   com­ pares   himself   with   the  Biblical   Jews  in their    bondage, suffering, and   eventual freedom; but,  paradoxically,  this  imple-

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



ments  a  special   bitterness, for  the  Jews who, it is felt, should  "know better" are identified (rightly or wrongly), as trades­ men,  with   the  hated,  oppressive  society (Notes of a Native  Son, 1958).
Not  surprisingly, the  white   reviewer's
ignorance of black  experience extends  to the  psychological  realities  formed by that experience. Hence Miss Waddington dis­ misses  as  "unbelievable" the  psychology of   the   relationship   between   the   black Henry   White and   his  Jewish  girl-friend Agatha.  Henry's   ferocious   approach  to interracial  sex  as  a  means  of  avenging  himself    on   white    society   remains    in­ credible   only  when  abstracted from   the "unbelievable"  actualities of  current so­ cial  attitudes. Henry's tactics  are  instinc­  tively  in  response  to  white  taboos  on  in­ terracial sex:  hence  he strikes  back at the
 racism that has denied his humanity, by asserting  his manhood in the very area  in which  it  has  been  most  feared   and  ma­ ligned  by white  superstition.  Grotesque? Perhaps,   but   then   white  attitudes  have always imparted a touch of  the bizarre  to this  subject-ranging  from  the  ambiva­ lence  of  a  fictional  Henry   to  the  near­  hysterical  curiosity of white  reporters and commentators   ("Do  you  think   that   this is the  beginning of a  trend?")  whenever  a   prominent  "mixed"  marriage  makes the  headlines.
However, Henry   White's sexual  rela­ tionships  must  also be  related  to  another important area  of  the  psychological  and social issues of the  novel.  Hence  his anti­ white   exploitation   of   Agatha  must   be contrasted with his deliberate use of the affair,  together with  imaginary bank  ac-




Canadian Dimension
The most   exciting and   original magazine of  political commentary ever  to  appear in  Canada. Includes lively  literary  articles, poetry, and movie reviews. Completing its  fifth  year  of  publication.
"Canadian Dimension  has  quickly   become the  most  notable forum for  left-wing thought in  Canada."
-DOUGLAS FISHER and HARRY  CROWE

"Lively, aggressive."           -ROBERT FULFORD in  the  Toronto  Star

SOME RECENT CONTRIBUTORS: Gad Horowitz, George Grant, C. W. Gonick, Charles Taylor, David Lewis,  Jacques Yvan-Morin, Neil Compton,  Abraham  Rotstein, C.  S.  Burchill, Laurier  LaPierre, John Munro, Alfred Purdy, Farley Mowat, Eric  Kierans, G.  David Sheps, Paul T. K. Lin, Dennis Lee,  Melville  Watkins.

One-year  subscription  ( 8   issues)    for   $4.00  plus    15¢   exchange
( $3.00  for  students).  Two-year subscription $7.oo.

Canadian  Dimension,  P.O. Box  1413, Winnipeg 1,  Man.



103

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



counts   and   real   estate   holdings,   as   a status   symbol   of  his  "whiteness"  (note the ironic  suggestiveness of his surname) . Henry's internal  conflicts  are   paralleled by Bernice  Leach's rapid  oscillations  be­ tween  Black  Muslim  literature and  com­ plexion   "lighteners".  These   paradoxical attitudes symbolize  the  tensions  released by  the  black  revolution,  the  conflict  be­ tween  the  new  "blackness" and  the  old self-depreciation.  This   in  turn   leads  to the  rna jar  moral  and  psychological  issues that  Miss  Waddington completely  misses when  she  complains that   Meeting   Point lacks  the   reconciliation  implied   by  the title,  that  there  is "no  let  up in  the  war­ fare    between    white    and   black".   But "meeting  point"  denotes,   not   the   har­  mony  of  reconciliation,  but the  conflicts that   have   been  sparked  and   intensified by the  black  revolution-the inner  ten­ sions of the  black  individual and  the  ex­ ternal  confrontation between  black  mili­ tancy  and   the  white  status  quo.  To  de­ plore  this  as  a  theme,   as  the   reviewer does, is to demand that  the novelist sacri­ fice  the  palpable facts  of   experience in favour of some  transcendental resolution,  what  Miss  Waddington terms  a Toronto "more real" than  the one she knows.
This  is really  a  kind  of  escapism  that seeks refuge from  the portrayal of social realities in literature (especially black literature) , and  is sometimes  manifested in the  remarkable failure  of critics  to de­ tect   the   representation  of  very  obvious and   basic  conflicts.   Hence  Janice Tyr­ whitt  finds  that, with  the  exception  of a single   isolated    incident   in   one   work, Clarke's first two  novels do not  deal with racial   problems   but  are  simply  on  "the  frailty  of human  relationships there  [Bar­  bados]  and everywhere." (Tamarack Re­ view  38) .  But  this  is hardly  an  adequate

104
 summary of a novel  (Survivors of the Crossing)  that   portrays  the  tragic  con­ flict   between    a   black   peasant   and    a powerful white   plantation  supported  by pro-white,   anti-black    negroes.    Nor    is Miss  Tyrwhitt's  statement  applicable to Among  Thistles   and   Thorns, in  which a  Barbadian  school-boy,   Milton   Sobers, seeks to  recapture his  blackness,  symbol­ ized   by  faraway  Harlem,  in  spite   of  a hostile   environment  created    by   ( r )   a white  colonial   power,   ( 2)  a  white  edu­ cation system  that  militates against  black self-awareness and   pride,   and   (3)   a  so­ ciety  dominated  by  the   black  colonial's apathy and  acquired self-hate.
Miss Tyrwhitt is not  alone  in minimiz­
ing  or  distorting the  obvious.  Where  she fails  to  see  racial   repression   and  suffer­ ing,  David   Watmough  glimpses  them­ and   apparently finds  Clarke's  treatment rather  amusing. Thus  he  speaks  indeter­ minately of a "Negro experience" in Sur­  vivors  that   he  characterizes as  "humour in  affliction", surely  a somewhat odd  de­ scription  of   a  work   that   details   the  in­ tense savagery  of racial  and  economic re­ pression,  black  treachery and  self-hatred, and, finally,  the  despair   that   drives  the hero  Rufus to  become  a  hunted outlaw (Canadian  Literature 23).  Such   a  de­ scription seems  to  be  less in  response to the  experiences depicted  by  Clarke   and more  in keeping  with  hoary travel  agency assumptions about   happy  natives   peren­  nially singing  and dancing in their "tropi­ cal  paradises".  It  is  really  the  converse of   Miss   Waddington's  revulsion   at   the unpleasant realities   presented  by  Clarke
-and both   responses,   like   Miss   Tyr­ whitt's, suggest  a  myopic  optimism  that  refuses  to see black  life  and literature as they  really  are.
