l2.oo  per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·59
Winter, 1974


LOVERS ]IND LOSERS



Articles

BY  JEANNETTE  URBAS, LOUIS DUDEK, PIERRE CLOUTIER,
LINDA HUTCHEON, W. J. KEITH, F. P. GROVE, MARGARET STOBIE


Poems

BY IRVING LAYTON, SEYMOUR MAYNE


Review  Articles and Reviews

BY D. G.  JONES, W. H. NEW, BARBARA  OPALA, GEORGE WOODCOCK, MORRIS WOLFE, ANN P. MESSENGER, R. W. BEVIS, ANDREW PARKIN, PETER HAY, CONNIE BRISSENDEN, ROTA LISTER, S. E. MCMULLIN, DOUGLAS BARBOUR, T. E.  TAUSKY, FRASER SUTHERLAND,  MIKE DOYLE, HECTOR COWAN, WAYLAND DREW



A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW








TRAPPING THE BIRD OF LOVE






"IT's LOVE that makes the world go round," sings Papageno  in The  Magic  Flute, and  even if Mozart  and  his librettist were concerned  mainly with masonic esoterica relating  to the ultimate cause of being, the phrase describes the  conclusion  one is tempted  to  reach, speaking in  the narrower  sense of love between human  beings, if one spends a great part  of time in the world of  litera­ ture.  Love has been the mainstay  of most of our fiction and  drama, of  much  of our  poetry,  of a  great  deal  of our  biography.  It  has  dominated   the stage,  the cinema  screen, television;  it provides the emotional  force behind  most  opera;  it is  the  eternal  standby  of  popular  song.  Anthologies  of  any  period  would  be notably  thinner  without  the love lyrics; so would the profits of record companies.
The  reason  is simple  enough.  It is hard  to imagine  any  human  relationship that  does not contain  some element of love (or inverted  love called  hate) , even though  the sexual element  may  be disguised. The  psychoanalysts  long ago demonstrated   that  parental   and  filial love project  incestuous  overtones.  In  its emotional  content the most humdrum  friendship is the poor relation  of the most passionate  love  affair,  or  it  is no  friendship.  And  unfortunate is the  man  or woman   who  has  not  experienced  that  passionate  sharing  of  work  with  some member  of the opposite or at  times of the same sex, in which  unspoken feelings and  desires build to a fine edge of peril that  by sublimation  becomes a summit of creativity. We need love as a fish needs water, and desiccate without it.
All this means that  there is, among  readers and  writers and  all who speculate on  the  endless  ambiguities   of  human   relationships,  an  apparently  insatiable curiosity about  the nature  of love as distinct from merely physical or neurological

3

EDITORIAL



sexuality.  Why  was  Helen's  "the  face that  launched  a  thousand  ships"?  What generated  Petrarch's morbid  but  creative  obsession with Laura  or  Dante's  with Beatrice?  What   made  Turgenev   the  slave  of  a  woman  like  Pauline  Viardot? And  how  did  these exalted  and  presumably  unfulfilled passions differ from  the manic  urges that  drove Rochester and Byron from bed to hated  bed? And where, among  high romance  and  low libertinism, fit the average loves of most mankind? Or are there average loves?
Certainly  writers  over  the  ages  have been fascinated  by  these  problems  and
often led to treat  them outside their imaginative writings, in treatises or essays, as Lawrence  did,  and  Ovid,  and  Ortega  y Gasset, and  Denis de Rougement,  and Hazlitt   (an  ill-starred  lover  if  ever  there  was one)  in  the  Liber   Amaris, and Stendhal  in De C amour. All these writers tended to mingle literature  and experi­ ence, some  of them  using  their  essays on love to work out-or  to  explain­ amorous themes in their fiction or poetry.
It  was  time,  given  the  tendency  of Canadian  poets and  novelists during  the
past  decade   to  write  with   an  unaccustomed   zest and   frankness  on  love,  its varieties  and  aberrations,  that  a treatise  on love as seen in  our  time  and  place should  find its way into print  among us. It now appears  as Colours  of Love: An Exploration of the  Ways of Loving, by John  Alan Lee (new  press, $9.95).
Lee is not a poet or a novelist; he is not even a psychologist. He is a sociologist,
formerly   employed   as  a  trade   union  official, now  teaching   at  Scarborough College, and  author  of books on faith  healing  and  the  educational use of  tele­ vision. Cythera,  of course, is every man's country if he chooses to make it so, but I mention  Mr. Lee's background  for its suggestion that  he is not the kind of man to  go on  high  romantic  levitations. And,  indeed,  his treatise  is  conducted with exemplary  restraint,  its only  real  flutter  being the  business  about the  "colours" of love, which  reduces itself to the fact that  in order to illustrate  to his students his typology of ways of loving  he made  a colour chart  based on the  colours of the  prism;  but  that  adds  nothing  to  his argument,  though  it  provides  a  good title, and it need trouble us no further.
Colours   of  Love   is  based  on  interviews  and  questionnaires   by  which  Lee gathered   information  from  lovers of both  sexes, heterosexual  and  homosexual, and  covering  as wide a span  of approach  as he could discover. The  samples of actual statements  he presents suggest that many of his subjects were not especially articulate  or self-analytical,  and  often he must have had  to rely on what seemed to be implied  rather  than  what  was said. I have the impression that  he deliber­ ately avoided especially articulate  people, writers and artists, and in general those


4

EDITORIAL



inclined  to live largely in the world of the imagination,  for it is precisely in the loves of such  people that  his samples seem to be lacking. He  is presenting,  one feels, l' homme moyen  if not necessarily sensuel.
Thus  his typology has its limitations. His manic love, for example,  might  well
include Stendhal; it would certainly not include Petrarch.  Indeed,  I find no place at  all  in  his  typology  for  that  obsessive and  usually  unfulfilled  passion  for  la princesse  lointaine    ("I   did  but  see her  passing  by,/ And  yet  I  love  her  till  I die ... ") which may be morbid  but which has shaped so much  of our literature and  has  existed so often  in  real  life. Does this mean  that  love is, as  Mr.  Lee suggests, a largely cultural  matter,  liable to change  its forms  /society
and  to  vary  according  to class and  background  even within  a single time  and culture?  To  a  great  extent,  I  think,  this  is true.  But  cultural  matters  are  not merely the  products  of man's  life in any given spot in social history;  they have deep  roots in the  psyche, and  here  I suggest lies the  major  limitations  in Lee's approach. He is dealing with love in terms of behaviour principally. His attempt to create  a typology without  even mentioning  the most important of all  psycho-­ logical typologists, C. G. Jung,  is evidence of his failure  to penetrate  far  below the surface of statement  and  action.  A typology of love cannot  be complete  if it fails to take into account the great psychoanalytical discoveries.
Still, as an attempt  to assess what loving means in our age, Colours  of Love  is
a  good  preliminary  study,  and  a fascinating  book to read  for what  it does say, even if it does not say enough.  Any reader  with love in his thoughts  is likely to study  Mr.  Lee's types in a frame of mind rather  like that  of Jerome  K. Jerome's character  who consults a medical  dictionary  in an attempt  at self-diagnosis and ends up finding  he suffers from every sickness in the book but  housemaid's  knee. Are  you manic,  erotic,  ludic, storgic, pragmatic  or agapic?  None,  I suspect,  in any pure form;  and  this Mr. Lee seems willing to admit.  He is talking of  inclina­ tions rather  than absolutes, and taken in this pragmatic way his typology is useful.
What -one hopes-it  will lead to is a thorough  study of ways of loving, by
Mr.  Lee or someone else, as portrayed  in Canadian writing, which might tell us as much  about  the  authors  as about  their  characters,  and  perhaps  more  about Canadian mores than  about  either. Mr. Lee actually stayed far from home in his chapter  on "Love  in the Arts". And wisely perhaps. For the writer  must be pre­ pared  for  pitfalls who attempts-say-a  comparative  study  of ways of  loving in  Richler,  Cohen  and  Atwood. Or  a thesis on  Manic  Passion in  MacLennan! Or  Grove  on  Love!!  I  doubt  if Mr.  Lee's simple typology would  be adequate there. 	GEORGE WOODCOCK

5


THE PERQUISITES OF LOVE


Jeannette Urbas



TE WORD  "love"  appean;  m the  titles of  two of  Ethel
Wilson's books:  The   Equations  of  Love  and  Love  and  Salt  Water. Combined,
these suggest the complexity  and  multiple ramifications of this human  sentiment, its somewhat  fragile  equilibrium,  as well as its propensity to be associated  with tears.  Love  is  also  a  major  element  of  her  other  novels:   Hetty  Dorval,  The Innocent  Traveller  and  Swamp   Angel,  and  of many  of her short  stories. It  is presented as a many-faceted  experience, perceived in the main from the woman's point of view. So fundamental is the theme of love that through  it we are brought into  contact  with  the  basic  assumptions  of Mrs.  Wilson's work and  are  better able  to appreciate her  attitudes  towards life and  human  relationships.
Ethel   Wilson's  first  novel,  Hetty   Dorval,  which  shows  two  very  different
responses to love, deals with  the question of responsibility. The  experiences and emotions  of  Hetty  Dorval  and  Mrs. Burnaby  are  developed  against  the  back­ ground  of a young girl's growth  into self-awareness and maturity,  which prepare  her for participation in a love-relationship of her own.
The novel contains  the only detailed study in Ethel Wilson's work of "a woman of no reputation". As is to be expected, Hetty is very beautiful.  It is stressed throughout that  her beauty is of the angelic variety and not, for example, the "odalisque" type  which  is  attributed to  Laura  in  the  short  story  "Truth  and Mrs. Forrester".  The  sensuous side of Hetty's  nature is concealed by the angelic aspect,  which  is  first  apparent. This  is  symbolized  by  the  different  reactions provoked  in  Frankie  by Hetty's  profile and  Hetty  seen full-face. Of  her  profile in  repose Frankie  says:  "I can  only describe it by saying that  it was very pure. Pure is perhaps  the  best word, or spiritual, shall I say ... " The full face, how­ ever, seems to  be at  variance  with the  profile:  "Ordinarily,  Mrs.  Dorval's  full face was calm  and  somewhat  indolent. The  purity  was not there,  but there  was

6

THE PERQUISITES OF  LOVE



what  I later  came to regard  as a rather pleasing yet disturbing sensual look ... " These  contrasting  views and  interpretations  of one and  the same  person  are linked with a basic preoccupation of Ethel Wilson:  the gap between illusion and reality,  which  makes  the  search  for truth  and  its ultimate  revelation  extremely
difficult.
Hetty's sensuality is clearly indicated  but never explored in its own right in the novel. There  are no flaming  love scenes. When  Frankie  "eavesdrops", what she sees is  described  with  relative  restraint:   Hetty  and  the  supposed  Mr.  Dorval could  be  any  happily  married   couple spending  a  quiet  evening  of  reunion  at home.  This  may  be  explained   by  considerations  of  a  practical   and  technical nature:  the  story  is told  through  the eyes of an  innocent  and  sensitive young girl, whose contact  with  Hetty  would have terminated  abruptly  under  the stress of exposure to strong physical passion.
It may  also result from  the  fact  that  Ethel  Wilson is primarily  interested  in
Hetty's  impact  on other  people. Hetty is a destructive force in their lives, break ing  up  marriages  and  marriages-in-the-making. She has no scruples and  is con­ cerned  only with her own immediate  comfort and security. The  dominant  traits of her character  lie not in the pursuit of sensual gratification  but in her passivity and egoism.
This  passive quality  is brought  out  more  than  once. When  Hetty  sings, it is
always  not  loudly  but  very  sweetly. On  board  ship  Frankie  notices that  "she engaged  the attention  of too many  men without seeming to try to dt> so ... Her very activities  were  passive, not active ... " Her  utter  passivity prevents  Hetty from  assuming huge  proportions  of wickedness; she does not  consciously scheme to wreck and  ruin lives for her own advancement  or for personal gain. Hers is a force  of  evil that  operates  in  a somewhat  negative fashion  only when  her own comfort is threatened.
Hetty's  concentration  on self-indulgence requires her to eliminate  other  people
as individuals who might  have feelings and desires commensurate  with her own. They  are  not  really people but  more like objects that  periodically intrude  upon her vision. Frankie sums up the implications of this attitude:
She  endeavoured to island  herself in her own  particular world  of comfort and irresponsibility ... But  "No  man  is an Iland, intire  of it selfe"; said  Mother's poet three  hundred years  ago,  and  Hetty  could  not  island  herself,  because  we impinge on  each  other,  we  touch,  we glance,  we press, we touch  again, we cannot escape. "No  man  is an Iland."

Hetty's  lack  of  commitment to  the  responsibility that  love should  engender,


7

THE PERQUISITES OF  LOVE



suggests that she is a freak of some kind, an anomaly of nature.  With unconscious irony Frankie, who at the moment is adoring Hetty, says:
It  flashed through  my mind that  here I  was, all alone, looking at  the beautiful Mrs. Dorval, while at  the other  end of Lytton hundreds of people were paying money to gaze upon Torquil  the Lobster Boy. They should have paid money to see Mrs. Dorval.
Hetty  Dorval  is really a study  of self-love. She is the  only woman  to whom the  author  attaches  an  obvious  label  of immortality.  Other  women  created  by Ethel  Wilson engage  in activities that  can hardly be considered moral, e.g. Lilly in The Equations of Love, yet Lilly is never judged "a woman of no reputation", for  the  mainsprings  of  her  behaviour   are  different.  The  immorality  seems to reside, not in promiscuity  but  in imperviousness to the existence of other  human beings, in attempting to be an island unto oneself.
To  complement  and  possibly offset the image of Hetty  Dorval, the novel deals
with  a type of relationship  that  is to recur in the work of Mrs. Wilson and  that is treated  here at greater  length than  in other novels. This is the perfect love that exists in a truly happy  marriage,  perfect to be accepted here without ironic over­ tones. Such  a  relationship  is exemplified by  Mr.  and  Mrs. Burnaby,  Frankie's parents.
True  love is a source of strength  in the recipient who is also the giver and it is
imperishable.  Death  does not  alter  its reality or its validity. Sister Marie-Cecile wrote to Frankie:
... just before your father ceased to live he said to her "Dear, our happy, happy life together" ... Your mother did not break down, she is very strong and she is good, and I want you to be aware, Frances, that your parents have between them the perfection of human love.
Note  the  present  tense:  even after  Father's  physical passing "your  parents  have between them the perfection of human love."
Frankie  perpetuates  this meaning  into a vision of her own:  "As I read I saw
my mother  leaning  over my father  in the immortal  attitude  of love." The  great lovers that  Ethel Wilson celebrates "in  the immortal attitude  of love" are not the romantic   tragedy-stalked  figures  of Tristan   and  Ysolde or  Romeo  and  Juliet. Her  poetic vision is concentrated on Mr. and  Mrs. Burnaby, an ordinary  couple who have suffered and  worked  hard, whose love bums with an everlasting flame in the midst of every-day activities. Her heroes and heroines are drawn  from the mainstream  of Canadian life.
Where  this perfect love comes from, how it is created and maintained, is never

8

THE PERQUISITES OF  LOVE



revealed  or discussed. If the relationship  is there, it usually exists full-blown and is presented  as such to the reader.  In so many instances where it does occur, the husband  is dead and  the wife is left with memories. There  is Maggie  Lloyd who had  it  with  Tom  and  does  not  have  it with  Eddie  in  Swamp   Angel.  Which explains  why Tom,  though  dead  and  not  to be seen, is her  reality  rather  than Eddie  who is so irritatingly  alive. Mrs. Severance and  Philip  had  it and  its aura persists even after Philip's death.
It  is suggested  but  never stated  that  involved in  the  creation  of this  perfect
love is a compatibility  of tastes or temperament  or both. Is it accidental also that these three  women -Mrs.  Burnaby,  Maggie and  Mrs. Severance -are strong, well-developed personalities in their own right? Did they bring a certain  maturity to marriage  with them or is this maturity  a result of a happy  marriage?  Perhaps Mrs. Wilson outlines these relationships rather than exploring them because she believes with  Mrs. Severance  that  "No  one can write about  perfect love because it cannot be committed to words even by those who know about it."
Not  all  couples can  attain   perfect  love but  there  are  varying  degrees  of it
which  can suffice to make a  happy  marriage.  Mrs. Severance  writes to  Maggie about  Hilda  and  Albert:  "They  will not have perfect love but  I foresee a nice kind of happiness and  am  thankful." One  is inclined to feel that  Mr.  and  Mrs. Cuppy  had  this moderately  perfect yet happy love relationship  in Love  and Salt Water.



LovErs ACCOMPANIED by and stimulates self-discovery. Love for  Richard  makes Frankie  grow  up and  comfort Hetty  as a woman  struggling for the happiness she desires. There  are indications that  the Richard-Frankie relationship  will be modelled on  the  pattern  of that  of Mr.  and  Mrs. Burnaby. Not only does love persist after  death  but it perpetuates  itself in repetitions  with variations from generation to generation.
The   Innocent  Traveller  adds  some interesting  commentary  to  the subject  of love. It  has already been suggested that Ethel Wilson is a realist in her approach. Father   Edgeworth's  choice of a  second wife is strongly  motivated  by practical reasons:   "his  need  for  a  house  partner  who would  maintain  the standards by which he wished his children  to grow up, and could run smoothly and  easily his pleasant  home and  keep it happy."  Eventually a love relationship  does grow out of this need, modulated  and framed  by the exhausting demands of a large family.
In  Ethel  Wilson's work, love spans all age levels, from the young Frankie  to


9

THE PERQUISITES OF  LOVE



the  very  elderly  Great-Grandfather Edgeworth  who, at  the  age of ninety,  pro­ poses in  quick  succession to  Maria  Grimwade,  who is eighty-seven, and  to her' "little" sister, Sarah  Raphael, who is seventy-nine. But while love is a matter  of intense seriousness to Frankie,  it has lost its urgency for  Great-Grandfather and,  as an emotion  or sensation,  its edges are blurred  into other  emotions and sensa­ tions  equally  or  even  more  insistent:   "Great-Grandfather  Edgeworth   ceased speaking.  He  had  said  what  he wanted  to say, and  to tell the truth  he did not much  mind  what  Miss Raphael decided, but he would abide by her decision and he was feeling a bit hungry."
Ethel Wilson skilfully indicates with a few deft strokes a whole relationship, sometimes extending  over a  period  of years. As a result, certain  minor  episodes stand out with remarkable vividness. An example of this is the love affair between Edward  Shaw and  Mary. How clearly two sentences reveal their situation  at the time  they  are  reunited  in  India: "He  overflowed with  tenderness,  compassion and  his desire.  Mary  broke  into  weeping which she could  not  restrain,  sprang forward  and cast herself, more in homesickness than love, upon Edward's beard." Another  example is the relationship  between Mr. and  Mrs. Porter, the academic beauty  married  to the man  who finds it hard  to live with "one  of your damned Greek statues".
Topaz'  unrequited   passion for  William Sandbach,  a tragic  widower of about thirty-five, is an important contribution  to the theme of love. When she is rejected by him, her reactions  are  understandably violent:  "She  had spent seven years of her life in the preoccupation of love, and  there was no return  but this emptiness. The  placid,  bearded  figure  passed and  repassed smiling before her eyes and she whispered:   'I hate  him'."  Her  stepmother,  standing  hesitantly  outside Topaz' door, hears the fearful  words:  "Curse him! I call Heaven  to witness that  I curse William Sandbach !"
This is the period of greatest suffering in Topaz'  life. But time is a great healer and  she  recovers to  the  point  where, years later,  "She  who  had  wept so much could  not  now  evoke  even  a  spurious  sigh. 'How  could  he  have  made  me so unhappy?'   she  asked  herself in  surprise."  Time  reverses even  the  impact  that provoked the curse.
In  the  fictional world  created  by Ethel  Wilson people love and  are  not loved but life goes on and  the wounds inflicted by love are absorbed, as are the joys, in the  cumulative   process of  day-to-day  existence. Her  characters   do  not  resolve their  problems by desperate  measures or extreme undertakings.  Their  way is the not-so-spectacular  solution  that  life itself provides in most instances:  a gradual


10

THE PERQUISITES OF  LOVE



adjustment to  or partial  compromise  with the situation.  In  the  novels only one person  tries  suicide,  Vera   Gunnarsen,   and  she  is unsuccessful  because  she  is unable to summon up enough courage to go through with it.
Topaz  does not marry  after  her initial disappointment. She is a woman  with­
out  of  a  private  life of  her  own,  unaware  of the  "human relationships  which compose  the  complicated  fabric  of living. The  limitless treasure  and  absorbing motions of a continuous  hidden  life had neither  enriched nor depleted  her."
Topaz   remains  an  innocent  traveller,  but  the  ability  to  skim  the  emotional surface  of life is not  necessarily characteristic  of the woman  who never marries, as the depiction  of the "reserved  Rachel"  indicates. Rachel  had  apparently had offers of marriage  before coming to Canada but she turned  them down. The implication  is that  some strong bond between herself and  her mother  motivated her choice. None the less she submerges herself in family living.
She was the daughter,  the maiden. Never having known the lights and music of marriage, never having known the joy and care of being a mother, she was yet the wife and  mother of her household. She was to this home as the good bread upon the table, as the steadfast light upon the stair.
This  poetic tribute  to Rachel  suggests that  there are other ways of fulfilment for a woman  than  marriage,  other  forms of love satisfying under  certain  conditions.
Rachel  is a far cry from Victoria  May Tritt  in The  Equations  of Love,  whose solitary  state  is an  expression  of  unutterable   loneliness, sheltered  only  by  the protective  framework  of routine.  Victoria  May is a nonentity,  conveniently anonymous, afraid of life and of herself. The  contrast between these two spinsters reveals that  it is not  the fact  of being married  or not  married  that  counts,  but what  a  woman  brings  to  life  and  what  she  does  with  it.  Rachel  may  have sacrificed a part  of herself for her mother but she remains intact  as a personality, contributing  to and  planning  for others, a source of quiet strength.  Victoria  May was always on the fringe of human  relations, bound  up in her fear of both men and women.
Yet  it  is  Victoria   May  Tritt   who  nudges  the  elbow  of  harsh  reality  and succeeds in  transforming the image  of Mort,  the drunken  betrayer,  into  that  of a  hero.  In  the  two stories that  compose The   Equations  of Love  the  theme  is everywhere interwoven  with  the  interplay  of illusion and  reality. As is the  case with Hetty  Dorval seen full-face  and in profile, the revelation of truth  continu­ ally falters and  wavers in response to fluctuating  visions of events and people.
Myrt's  love for  Mort  lends itself to a series of kaleidoscopic patterns because of the kind of person she is and  because it is essentially self-love. "Of  all people,


I I

THE PERQUISITES OF  LOVE



Myrt  loved  herself in  whatever  guise she saw herself." She  loved  Mort  in  her own  way  which  would  always  be a  limited  way. After  the  news of  his death "when  the policemen  had gone, and  Myrtle was alone, she laid her head on her arms  upon  the  table,  and  wept-not  for  Marty  her  husband,  but  for  herself who  would  now  be exposed  to  the  pity of Irma  Flask ... " Similarly,  later  on "she  became  proud  of  Marty,  but  prouder  of herself for being  the  widow of a hero."
"Tuesday and  Wednesday" adds another  interesting portrait  to the gallery of women in Ethel Wilson's books, that of Mrs. Emblem whose label might easily be "Two sad  cases and  one  divorce".  "Mrs.  Emblem  is not  lonely-exactly.  But she has enjoyed long and  varied  male companionship;  that is what she is formed for, and  that  is what she -less ardently now-craves. And yet something holds her back."  She  is highly feminine  but it is an immature,  sensuous ferninity and in her pink and blue bedroom she is "like a beautiful old baby".
In  "Lilly's  Story"  the  problem  of the approach  to truth  becomes a game  of
hide-and-seek.  We  are  confronted  with  the  invention  of  a  person  who  never existed,  Mr.  Hughes,  to  justify the  disappearance   of  one  whose  existence  has become  undesirable.  Lilly is exposed  to two  passions based  on  strong  physical attraction, that  of the sinister Yow and  her own desire for  Paddy  Wilkes. Lilly almost yields to Yow because he satisfies her craving for possessions. She is saved from Paddy  Wilkes by the warning thought  of Eleanor and by the strength  of her ambitions  for  this  child  who, since birth,  "had  guarded  her  mother  and  made her  the  blameless  and  silent  woman  she  had  become."  We  not  only  catch  a glimpse of what  Lilly might have become without  Eleanor;  we see the limitations of Lilly's ability  to love anyone except her  child. Lilly herself is shaken  by this perception  years later when she becomes aware of the feeling that  binds Eleanor and  Paul:  "She  had lived for fifty years, and she had never seen this thing before. So this was love, each  for each,  and she had  never know it. And  this secret life of love went on in this house and she had never seen it before. She was outside it." Swamp Angel  shows that  being alone is preferable to certain types of marriage. Left with  no one to care for after  the death  of her father,  her husband  and  her daughter,    Maggie   married    Edward   Thompson   Vardoe   out   of  compassion. Alberto makes a fitting comment  on this motivation:  "Compassion! Compassion is to sympathize  and  carry  the suitcase and  give a drink  of brandy  but  not  to
marry." The relationship becomes intolerable and Maggie runs away.
The  personality  of Eddie  Vardoe  is expressed in terms of his spaniel  eyes, at least  as  far  as  his  relationships  with  women  are  concerned.  The  spaniel  eyes

12

THE PERQUISITES OF LOVE



suggest submission but  in actual  fact Eddie's stupidity  and  narrowness  dominate Maggie  and  make her feel degraded.  It is not until she leaves him and  he takes up with  lreen  that  he meets his match  and for his "eyes like a dog"  he gets "a dog's  wages".  A personality  as limited  as that  of Eddie  Vardoe  is incapable  of love. After  Maggie's  flight,  Mrs.  Severance observes wisely:  "It's self-pity, not love, that hurts him."
Swamp  Angel  introduces  one aspect of love that  does not  appear  anywhere else in  the works of Ethel  Wilson,  jealousy. Vera  Gnnnarsen is a complex  mix­ ture  of love and  hate,  both  directed  at  Maggie. Vera  feels threatened  by  two rivals:  the lake and  with  it the lodge, and  Maggie. They  are closely  connected for the role of Maggie is integrated  with the functioning  of the lodge on the lake.



JEALOUSY is based on insecurity and  this is plainly visible in Vera:  "Vera  in  her  frequent   moods of self-pity said  to  herself  I  never  had  a break,  did  I,  my mother  never loved me ... and  now ... look! no, I never had a break. She carried  her  childhood  on her back, and  could not -or would  not
-set it down." Vera  develops an image of herself as poor Vera  and  reinforces it by living up to it.
Jealousy is an emotion  that  feeds on itself and the individual  who harbours  it. Vera  fills Haldar  with  a sense of guilt and  robs him of his confidence  and  this leads  to  a  deterioration   of  the  marriage   relationship  and  love. That  Haldar himself is not entirely blameless only contributes to the tension that  has grown between them.
Vera's  shortcomings  may  be assessed as purely individual  weakness but  Mrs. Wilson  extends  them  into  the  broader  framework  of human   relationships.  As Mrs. Severance puts it: "Poor  Vera.  Poor people." This links up with an earlier thought  of Maggie's:  "Human relations ... how they defeat us." Mrs. Severance speaks of "the  miraculous interweaving  of creation . . . the everlasting  web" and adds  "'No man  is an  lland, I  am  involved in  Mankinde', and  we  have  no immunity and we may as well realize it."
Love emerges as an  important part  of this basic fabric  of life and  those who love are not exempt from hardship  and suffering. Love demands  the full commit­ ment of the self in order  to exist. Hilda yielded only slowly to love "because she was self-protecting,  mistrustful  of herself and others"  and  therefore reluctant  to become involved. Egoism, whether  it is the obtuse  Vardoe  type or the tortured  Vera variety, destroys the foundations  of love. True love is its own tie that  binds,

THE PERQUISITES OF  LOVE



witness Philip  who did  not approve  of the bonds of matrimony  but was faithful to his wife all their "married" life together.
In  Love and Salt Water  the  problems and  joys of  love are  once  again  seen
within  the  larger  perspective  of human  relationships. The  complexity  of  under­ standing  and  evaluating  is expressed in terms of an image. As Ellen  lies in bed, trying  to reach  a decision regarding  Huw, she watches the shifting play of light and shadow on the ceiling:
She did not at that moment think that there was somewhere some parallel of light and  darkness, of illumination and blotting-out, and  perhaps our whole existence, one  with  another,  is a  trick  of light. That  may be somewhere near  the truth, which is often hard to determine because of the presence of the lights and shadows of look, word, thought which touch, glide, pass or remain.

Ellen's   joyous  response  to  the  knowledge  of  her  love  for  George  Gordon, slowly arrived  at, shows how love permeates and colours her whole existence with its magic:  " ... the radiance of the fact that she loved George and  was not afraid any more to marry  him, spread  around  and forward and  backward, illuminating areas of her life which  had  nothing  whatever  to do with the matter; and this is one of the perquisites of love."
Morgan   is  one  of  the  most  interesting  and  sympathetic  of  Ethel  Wilson's
characters   and  surprisingly  so,  for  at  first sight  our  impression  is likely to  be negative.  He  is nineteen  years older  than  his wife Nora,  a  ponderous,  heavily­ built   M.P.  who  typically  calls  his  wife  "dolling".  This  conventional  exterior hides,  or  rather  does  not  reveal  the  true  sensitivity that  lies  underneath. The peak of this revelation  is in the visits with his idiot son, both  in  his behaviour  at the  time  and  his  realization  of  his wife's absence:  "Because  he  loved  her,  he spared  her, and  thought  he had  reason enough;  he excused her also on account of her youth, not noticing that she was no longer young."
In  the  marriage   relationship   it  is  Morgan  who  loves and  Nora  who  gives what  she  is capable  of  giving  in  return.  She  responds to  his devotion  with  a reasonable  fondness,  devoid  of  passion, which  is beyond  her  range  of feeling. The  essential coldness of Nora  is picked up in the description of her with curlers in  her   hair:    "she  looked  like  a  modified  goddess of  Liberty -meet  to  be admired  but not to be fondled."
Spoiled  and   protected   by  Morgan,  Nora's  deficiencies are  in no  danger  of
threatening  their   marriage.  Her   immaturity   and   the  incompleteness  of  her personality emerge when she must assert herself and take some  responsibility as, for example, with Johnny.

THE PERQUISITES OF  LOVE



0UR ANALYSIS of Ethel Wilson's work points to a continuity in  her  thinking  throughout. In  her first novel, Hetty  Dorval, her  basic attitudes
towards  love and  life are already  revealed in terms of a particular story and characters. The  novels that follow add new dimensions to these ideas, amplify and extend  them  with fresh illustrations  of events and  personages, but do not modify them fundamentally.
Love  is part  of  the  "everlasting  web"  of human  relationships  and,  as such, partakes  of its complexity and  variety. "No  man  is an  Iland,  intire  of it selfe"; his contacts  with  others depend  on the depth  and sensitivity of his own  nature, but contact  there must always be. The highest achievement of human  interaction is perfect love, reserved for those who possess "that  third dimension  that  includes perception  and  awareness of other  people". There  are other  degrees of love, as well, that  make for happiness  and  the joy of sharing, that  illuminate  and  trans­ form all areas of existence.
Love implies responsibility and  commitment,  the giving of oneself. Individuals who are solely preoccupied with their own wishes and desires, lack the capacity  to love fully. If they marry,  the  relationship  becomes a reflection of their  own self­ love.  This   can  have  disastrous  effects,  as  in  the  case  of  Eddie  Vardoe,  or moderately   amusing  ones,  as  with   Myrt  and   Mort.  Pushed  to  the  extreme, egoism can  be dangerous  and  verges on immorality  because it is contrary  to the laws of nature.
Love is a manifestation  of the interweaving  of human  relationships;  it is also
linked  with  the  illusive nature  of truth.  "But  what  are doormen  like? What  is anybody  like?" asks Ethel  Wilson in her short story "The  Comer  of X  and  Y Streets".  "One never  knows."  In  a sense Wilson's literary  production may  be summed  up as a constantly  renewed quest to find out  what anybody  is like. As the  image  of flickering light  and  dark  in  Love  and  Salt  Water  intimates,  our whole  existence is perhaps  a  succession of "illumination and  blotting-out", "a trick of light".
These three  inter-relating themes:  love, the complexity of human  relationships and  the subtlety of truth,  are the pegs on which Ethel Wilson hangs her fictional world. Some of her  characters  are completely oblivious to the existence of these forces  that  impinge  on  them;  others  are  supremely  conscious of  their  impact and  importance. All move in  the  aura  of a  world  in  flux, where  actions  and reactions are continually  modified by "the  presence of the lights and shadows of look, word, thought which touch, glide, pass or remain."


A PROBLEM OF MEANING




Louis Dudek








BEFORE EVEN LOOKING  AT   the  plays  of  James Reaney;, might be good to remind  ourselves that there is something drastically wrong with modern  drama  in general,  and  that  this "something  wrong"  goes very deep into history.
I  have a personal  theory  about  this, a sort of ingrown  idea  that  I have lived with for many  years, and  which  I  have never discussed with  anyone, so that  I don't  know whether  it would  be taken  as a quirky over-simplification or a  rea­ sonable  description  of the facts. It runs something  like this:  drama,  philosophy and  literature  are intimately  related in their  historical development;  drama  and philosophy  have  their  great  moment  following  a  historical  decline  in  religion; the major  period  of drama  then  comes in the first century  of this  development, while a great  age of philosophy accompanies  and  follows it for  a  century  or so after  the drama  itself has declined.  Philosophy is an analysis,  essentially, of the religious  problems,  an  attempt   to  retrench  and  to  bolster  up  the  declining  re­ ligious order,  to form  a reconciliation  between the old and  the  new-an  effort in  which  the  new inevitably  triumphs.  Drama  is a  demonstration   of this same conflict  in  terms  of  human   action,  an  attempt  to  define  action  successfully in terms  of the  historic  tension-and this also fails.  It follows from  this  theory that  modern  drama  comes long after the great  period  of drama  and  philosophy; but  then,  this is something  everyone knows.
At any rate,  the  pattern  can  be easily observed in the  development  of Greek
philosophy  and  drama, and  in  the  development  in  the  Renaissance  and  the modern  period.  Greek  philosophy from  Parmenides  to  Epicurus  covers roughly two centuries  ( soo-soo B.C.),  and  it is related  to a  decline  and  a  re-thinking in  religious  belief;  Greek  drama   covers the  first of  these  two  centuries,  from Aeschylus to Aristophanes.  The  great period of modern  philosophy stretches from

A PROBLEM OF  MEANING



Descartes to Hegel, also a period of about  200 years; and  it follows the Reform­ ation,  the wars of religion, and  the general disturbance  of belief  beginning  with the Renaissance. The  great  period of drama  falls in the first half  of this period, at the tum  of the seventeenth  century in England  and  Spain, and  in the middle part  of that  century  in France.
It's  as though  the  imagination, and  then  the  mind,  were stirred  following  a
great shake-up in the deeper levels of belief. Greek drama  was involved with the religious ritual  manifestations  of the divine in the actual,  as all Greek  art  is the manifestation  of the divine  in human  form;  the stage  was "a  theatron, a show place  for  divine  onlookers".  The  tragedies  were  "sacred   plays,  in  which  man raises himself to the level of the gods, plays too which bring the gods down  from their  heights."  The  progress of drama-if  it  can  be  called  a  progress,  where the gods leak out -is  toward  secularization  and  a  descent  to  naturalism  from Aeschylus to Euripides.  Greek philosophy, meanwhile,  makes the divine,  at  first bios  and  then  nous,  less and  less attainable; makes  it  eventually  unknowable. And  cerebration  about  how this transcendent  "reality" can  still be validated  is the great problem. "In  place of the world touched by the radiance  of the divine," writes  C.  Kerenyi,  "there   remained  for  the  philosophers  of  the  post-classical period, of whom  Socrates  was the first, a world  merely visible. A world  which was known and  radiant, the Homeric  and early classical world,  had  turned  into one  which  was merely  seen.  It  may have  been full  of beauty,  but  it  was  also full of impermanence."
The  culmination  of all this is found in "the  sceptical tum  finally taken  by the
Platonic  school. The  deity  now  could be formless, without  contours,  and  with­ out the intensity of a special event in which to show itself." Thus  we foresee the end  of major  drama  and  the end  of tragic "awe"  as dramatic  experience. 1
I believe that  modem  drama  has gone through  a very similar  development.  It began  with  all the  presuppositions  and  beliefs of  ritual  Christianity   behind  it; it began as sacred  re-enactment; and it has culminated  in the secularism  and naturalism  of contemporary  drama, with  the  moral  and  intellectual  chaos  that this involves. Counter-efforts  to revive the drama,  when they are radical enough, try to bring in the noumenal  and  the magical through  vague backdoor strategies of so-called symbolism;  but  unfortunately  the  body of ideas  and  beliefs simply does not exist, as shared social experience, to make such theatre  work. It  has an air of absurdity. And this is where we come to James Reaney, our Canadian playwright,  born in an evil time and  in an ill country  for dramatic productions or for the creation  of a genuine  dramatic  literature.

A PROBLEM OF  MEANING




CANADA HAS BEEN poverty-stricken in regard to dramatic productivity,  much  more so than  in the novel and in poetry, because our religion, in the  nineteenth  century  and  since, has been a  hand-me-down  watered  Protes­ tantism,  weaker  even  in  its kind  than  the  watered-down  poetry  and  fiction  of the colonial period  have been  (see, for example,  the picture  of  old-time  religion in Reaney's  play The Sun  and  The Moon). And the philosophy or thought  that might  accompany   any  religion-in-transition   has  been   almost  entirely  lacking. Even in this century,  when the  religious and  philosophical questions are  central to literature,  whether  in the plays of T. S. Eliot or Sartre, or Beckett, the typical Canadian farm  boys of the  literary  community  recoil from  any  direct  contact with  ideas and  are  resentful  of any  attempt  to bring such  questions into  poetry or drama.
And  yet, such vitality  as there  has been in the drama  has come on a  solidly­
prepared  ground  of ideas. The  plays of James Reaney and  of Robertson  Davies
-as we can  now see after  Fifth  Business and  The Manticore- have  a  back­ ground  of religious and  philosophical  concern behind  them. The  survey  of phil­ osophy in Reaney's  "September Eclogue," in A Suit  of Nettles, ends significantly with  Heidegger  and  with games of magic taken  from The Golden  Bough; and Reaney's  plays in general  are shot through  with a kind of  religious-philosophical excitement  that  tells us there is much going on privately in  that  area.  But he is a solitary exile in an empty land,  almost unique in being troubled  deeply and seri­ ously with  such  questions;  therefore  his plays have  a  peculiar  dislocation  and feeling of unreality  in  the  context  of Canadian  society, whether  staged  on  the CBC  or in the  theatre.
Late as we are, the revival of drama  which came in Europe  at the end of the
nineteenth   century,  with  Ibsen  and  Shaw,  then  Maeterlinck  and  Yeats,  pro­ vides the  background  for  the  intellectual  content  of Reaney's  plays.  Romantic­  ism was a kind of doubtful  religious reconstruction,  and  the  Victorian  order  at the core was a sentimental,  willed effort to hold on to old  pieties and  beliefs. The collapse  of that  order,  as  recorded  in  the  fin-de-siecle  and  the  modem   move­ ment,  is like a miniature re-enactment  of the  great  movements  of religion and art  described above-even  when sand castles fall there is some dramatic impact
-so that  a minor  resurrection  of theatre  accompanies the fall of the Romantic­
Victorian  world. The  Canadian counterpart of this "happy  fall",  as a  renewal of drama, has come  way outside  the  time-frame,  because we really had  no  re­ ligion or morality  to speak of, in the first place, and if a few hearts  and  minds

18

A PROBLEM OF  MEANING



have been stirred  to feeling and  thought,  at long last, by the seismic movements of the  twentieth  century,  it has  taken  nearly a century  of time  for  the  colonial Giant  of the North  to be so stirred.
This  proposition  that  James  Reaney's  charming  theatre  is somehow  a distant relation  to, first, Bernard  Shaw and, second, W. B. Yeats, may sound far-fetched, but  I think  it can  help us to understand  what is going on in the  plays. In  m<Y.?t of these plays of Reaney,  as in  the early plays and  novels of Robertson  Davies, Canada has at last come in for sharp social satire. It  was naturally  made  for it, from  the  beginning,  we suspect,  but  no playwright would  have  dared  to  under­ take  a full-scale satirical  view of Canadian life before World  War  II.  The  soul has  to  be moved to satire  by revulsion, and  there  must  be a solid  stone  some­ where, on which the foot can lean  while shaking off the  muck.  Reaney  may be said to possess both these requirements: a major  "criticism  of  life", and  a strong intellectual  conviction  personally achieved. The  satirical  strain,   however,  is the lesser part  of his purpose -I was going to say "lesser half",  but  it isn't  anything like half -and the other part branches out rather discordantly from the first. This
satirical  part,  however, is dramatically  most reliable, and  has  the  most depend­
able  precedents, so that  it tends  to be theatrically  more successful. The  first act of several of his plays, as in The  Killdeer, The  Sun  and  the  Moon, and  Three Desks-the part  of the  play  which is closest to social satire-comes  off very well; both audience and critics are well pleased, and we seem to have the promise of a successful play. So R. B. Parker  of the University of Toronto can  write,  a
bit oddly,  that  Act  I of The  Killdeer-merely Act I-is  "still  Reaney's  most successful drama".
But the second and third acts of a Reaney play take a radical  tum  into strange territory.  As Alvin A. Lee notes in  his analysis of The  Killdeer,  "With Act  II the  tone  changes abruptly ... the  play moves into something  close to dark  con­ ceit  or  allegory."  In  short,  the  play  turns  to  the  great  romantic  tradition, of transcendence,  of magic, or religious implication, and  here we are in the country
of W. B. Yeats, Maurice  Maeterlinck,  J. M. Barrie and  other  visionaries of the
"eternal  return".
The  satire itself springs from  a very close personal response to provincial  life: one  has the impression of a very superior-minded  young man  cast  by fate  into a  pathetic  small-town  environment and  undergoing  all the  irritations  of  being forever  trapped  in  a  hen-house  or  a  parsonage.  "Oh   Millbank,   my  poor  silly little  village-silly  goosebrained  ladies in white  aprons.  Millbank.  Millbank." 2
All life is ultimately  conceived in terms of this uncomfortable  sense of misplace-

A PROBLEM OF  MEANING



ment.  One  can  trace  this from  the  poem "The  Upper-Canadian" in  The  Red Heart,  to phrases like "the  abyss we live in"  in the production  notes for  Listen to  the  Wind   and  "I curse  this street  where  it's  increasingly  difficult  to  find  a green leaf," in Colours in the  Dark.
The  strange  infantilism  of  Reaney's  poetry and  plays is somehow  related  to this sense of the absurdity  of life. The  unkindest  interpretation of this aspect of Reaney  is that  the  painful  prison of provincialism pressing on  the  mind  of the gifted  poet  has produced  a  kind  of "arrested  development", in  which  the  lan­ guage and the fantasy-world  of childhood remains the only imaginative  and vital reality for him and  the one to which he perpetually  returns. A more sympathetic  literary  account  would  relate  this infantile strain  to Blake's theory  of innocence and  the general  romantic  idyllic myth of childhood.
William  Blake was perhaps  the  first poet  in history to offer infantile  inanity and  childish  doggerel  as  serious  poetry,  and  this  to  the  eternal  confusion  of literature,  since in his work abominable  poetry is bound  up  with the  most  pro­ found  and  far-reaching ideas. To  some extent  I  hold it  against  Northrop  Frye that  he has never  pointed  out  the absurd  rhetoric  and  horribly  clotted  verbiage in Blake's poetry, and  he has  praised this poetry as though  it could  be  read  on the same level of art  as Milton,  Spenser, or John  Donne. It simply  cannot,  and never has been read  with admiration as poetry.

He kissed the child & by the hand led
And to his mother brought,
Who in sorrow pale, thro' the lonely dale, Her little boy weeping sought....

Little lamb Here  I am; Come and lick My white neck; Let me pull Your soft wool; Let me kiss
Your soft face....

The  delusion that  this sort of thing is high poetry because it suggests an apocalyp­ tic vision of the lost Eden  has led James  Reaney  to write  pages of  similar  non­ sense:  it has provoked  Michael  Tait's  remark that  "No  one else has  [Reaney's]  capacity  to write for the stage at once so badly and so well." Thus  Reaney:

20

A PROBLEM OF  MEANING



I must go away to abroad: When  I returned  uptown
I met  you and  you knew me not, Your  hair  like flax tow ...
(One-man  Masque)

I wish that  I could change my name, The  surname  is so very lame.
I would change  my name  to George
And work all day at a forge ...
(Night-blooming Cereus)

Who  knows,  some  of  this  bathos  in  Reaney  may  derive  from  hymn-book  quat­ rains,  the  bane  of so much   English  poetry,  even  as  Blake's  namby-pamby style derived  from  the  same  source; I understand that  Reaney's family  belonged  to a minor  fundamentalist sect of evangelical  Protestantism.
Our  Lord has prepared for us llouses  in lleaven.
llow  many rooms have they?
They  number  seven ..."

"In the woodshed you'll notice
Trees chopped  up ready And fine dry split kindling For  fires all so steady.
(Night-blooming Cereus)

This  seems  to echo such  church   hymns as Charles  Wesley's  "Gentle Jesus,  meek and  mild/Look upon  a  little  child ..." and  the  mediocre   rhyming and  metrics
of his hymns:

llow wretched  are the boys at school
Who  wickedly delight
To  mock, and call each other fool, And with each other fight.

If so, it is to take  the  Gospel  teaching "Except ye become  as little  children ..." much  too literally.  Also, it is one thing  to write  for children, as Edward  Lear and Lewis Carroll have  done -and as Reaney  has in his specifically children's books
-but quite another to  be childish  or stylistically  insipid  in  a  work  written for
adults. Such  a  performance can  become  quite  embarrassing. To  account for  it,
I would  say  that  faced  with  an  audience of mindless  biddies  and  croquet intel­
lects, such  as we may  have in Canada in the  outlands, the  poet  has taken drastic


21

A PROBLEM OF  MEANING



means to simplify. His philosophical  outlook and  his audience-relationship have combined  to create  a childish  theatre.  In  this strange  mixture  lies the  dilemma and the paradox  of Reaney's career as a dramatist.
After  all, one  cannot  put  Reaney  down  as an  idiot  boy. The  naive  childlike style and childlike attitudes  which are so recurrent  in his plays are an affectation, perhaps  with a secret self-indulgence,  but nevertheless a conscious design aiming to  simplify  and  to  reach  an  indiscriminate  audience.  The   plays could  hardly occur  on  the  stage  in  Paris  or  New York,  though  they  might  conceivably  get there. They could only originate  in a country like Canada,  a hinterland  as far as drama  is concerned,  where  an  audience  in  church  basements and  high  schools must be gently prodded  to participate  in dramatics.  The  plays are conceived for a small  parochial  community-there is an  aura  of amateur theatre  about  the whole  thing-and  the  audience,  one imagines,  is composed  of  children,  nice pleasant  provincial  ladies, and  placid  hen-pecked  husbands.  The  author  natur­ ally tries to involve such an audience and  acting group in his enterprise with the greatest  possible economy  of means. He  himself is a complete  anomaly  in  that society -an  abnormally  gifted swan among  the geese -and  yet he is possessed of a democratic  impulse  (or  is it an evangelical  call?)  to  make  his plays work for everyone, and  to involve everyone who comes along in  the creative  perform­ ance. There  is little or no theatrical  machinery;  having no theatre,  and no props, we will do it  with  toothpicks  and  playing cards,  and  we  will use amateurs  and children  as actors.



l:E ULTIMATE AIM   of this simplified kind of play, a collage of children's  games  (Colours in  the  Dark), or  a  fairy  tale  for  adults  (Night­ blooming Cereus), or a pastime for a sick boy (Listen to the  Wind), is anything but  trivial and  simple. By means of would-be  unpretentious  play,  purporting to gratify the very simplest audience,  Reaney intends  to achieve the widest possible scope of meaning,  interpreting all life from  birth  to death,  all  human   history, and  touching  on  the  major  questions  of  religion  and  philosophy.  His  aim,  in other  words, is epic, and  his intentions  are  those of a  major  poet, although  this is concealed  in  the  trappings  of the  nursery  and  of  childhood  imagination. At one point the stage directions read, characteristically:  "The centre panel changes to Durer's  Adam  & Eve. Dimly we realize that  not  only are  we going  through the hero's life and stories he heard as a child, but we are going through  Canada's story-glacier and forest, also the world's story." (Colours  in the Dark.)

A PROBLEM OF  MEANING



At times one is reminded  of James Joyce, as in the symbolism relating  to trans­ migration  of souls in Colours in the Dark; or again of T. S. Eliot, as in  the con­ junction of Jesus and  Buddha  in the same play-

Who was the Tiger? Christ. Who was the Balloon? Buddha.

Much of the One-man  Masque and Colours in the Dark reads like all the gists of Finnegans  Wake, Ulysses  and  The  Waste   Land  rolled  into  a  ball.  The   vast ambition  of this philosophical  conception, as it stares through  the child's  play of the surface, seems at odds with the quirky simplicity of the means adopted.
A little  higher  on  the  scale  than  the  nursery  or  child's  play  I  would  place
Reaney's  regressive attachment to melodrama  and  the  plot-patterns of the  Vic­ torian  romance.  Here  at  least, we might say, we have  a  breakthrough-from infancy  to adolescence!  Listen  to  the  Wind, for  example,  makes  use of  Rider Haggard, an early enthusiasm  of Reaney's,  as a  counterpoint to  the  "contemp­ orary"  setting of the play. So that  we can have our cake and  eat it, so to speak, as we enjoy a  parodistic  re-enactment  of a  Victorian  melodrama while  at  the same  time  we  remain   realistically  in  touch  with  contemporary  truth.   Oddly enough,  the contrast  of worlds does give a  heightened  dimension  to present-day reality, even though  the Lucia-di-Lammermoor-like story is really a shoddy  piece of soap-opera  fantasy.  Reaney  in  actual  fact  believes that  the  Rider  Haggard  story  is "very  powerful  because  of  the  patterns  in  it";   and  Alvin  Lee  would probably say  more specifically that  it is "archetypal". "It guides  you out  of the abyss we live in," says Reaney-or at least it is supposed  to.
The  question,  however,  remains  whether  the  melodrama   is  really  worth  its salt,  whether  it's good enough  as a "pattern" of any  deep  meaning.  It  is, after all, a wild romance  about  perfidy,  ideal love, greed,  and  the  victory  of  purity and  goodness over evil. A Victorian  nightmare.  Owen's  "real  life" situation  in the play, in which he tries to reconcile his separated  parents,  represents an appeal for love to overcome the evil of his imminent death. The  ambiguity  of the altern­ ative endings, sad and  happy, is to leave open the possibility of either, as  human choice-to  refuse  love  and  to  cause  death,  or  to  love,  forgive,  and  live  in eternity.  I feel that  the  parent-son  relationship in the  play is charged  with deep feeling, but there is a comic-parodistic effect in the counterpoint of the Victorian novel and  actual  life-unless  Reaney is more sentimental  and  melodramatic in earnest than  we are able to be, and  unless he believes that  Ryder  Haggard as a

23

A PROBLEM OF  MEANING



counterpoint is equivalent  to the Odyssey in James  Joyce or Tristan  und  Isolde
in T.  S. Eliot.
In other  words, the counterpoint of the epic and  the trivial  (Joyce and  Eliot) is one thing;  the counterpoint of the melodramatic or sentimental  and  the real is another.  (So too, the combination  of the high-philosophical  and  the infantile, in Colours in the  Dark, presents a special problem.)  Rider  Haggard is a third-rate popular  writer  whose only real raison d'etre here is that  Reaney  once read  him as a boy. Since Reaney is interested in Yeats, Blake and Jacob  Boehme, it is prob­ ably the false "psychic"  and  "supernaturalistic" aura  of Rider  Haggard's  books that  has fascinated  him. There  is no doubt  some kind  of elective affinity  here, since Robert  Louis Stevenson  once  described  Rider  Haggard as "a  fine  weird imagination," and  no  phrase  could  be more apt  for Reaney  himself.
Rider  Haggard,  however,  is  a  spurious  mystic  or  visionary  of  the  psychic depths. In his lifetime he had nothing  to do with mysticism, except for two occa­ sions:  he experienced  some  kind  of hallucination  during  a  mediumistic  seance in his youth, and  decided  to have nothing  more to do with these mysteries; and later  in  life, in  a  dream,  he  had  a  parapsychological  communication from  his dog. Apart  from  this, Haggard had  no real interest in  the supernatural; his re­ ligion  was of a  conventional  kind.  And  the voodoo  in  his novels is merely the standard stuff of popular  romance,  as he himself  described this kind  of fiction:

The  love interest, at  least among English-speaking peoples, must be limited and restrained in tone, must follow the accepted lines of thought and what is defined as  morality.  Indeed  it  may  even  be omitted, sometimes with  advantage.  The really needful things are adventure-how  impossible it matters  not at  all,  pro­ vided it  is made  to appear  possible-and imagination, together with  a  clever use of coincidence and  an  ordered  development of the  plot,  which  should, if possible, have a happy ending, since few folk like to be saddened by  what  they read.3

This  is no better  than  some  of our  own  Canadian Anglo-phonies  of the  nine­ teenth  century,  and  as a good nationalist  Reaney  might  just as well have  taken one of those-The Golden  Dog, or Wacousta.  That  Reaney  should  have  been enthralled   by Haggard, and  should  have  made  him  the  source  of  one  of   his most ambitious  plays, must  be  attributed to a  youthful  literary  fixation -like his love for the  Bronte circle;  in studying  Reaney  we must  therefore  be  aware that  we are pursuing  private  imaginative  locales, of his childhood  and  youth, as poetic  touchstones,  rather  than  objective  dramatic  contexts. This  fact  accounts for a great  deal of the eccentricity  of his plays.

A PROBLEM OF  MEANING



In  other  words,  I  see James  Reaney's  plays  as  essentially  poetic  or  lyrical drama. The  form  of One-man   Masque,  which  amounts  to  little  more  than  a stage  setting  for  a  reading  of  Reaney  poems -as  does  also  a  good  deal  of Colours  in  the  Dark- reveals the strong lyrical bent  of this drama. The  inter­ pretation   of  the  plays  should   be  directed  to  the  poetic  subjectivity  of   their method,  and  they  should  be studied  in  conjunction   with  Reaney's  poetry,  as Alvin  Lee  does in  his somewhat  too-mythopoeic  study,4   although  the  ultimate goal will be a body of ideas, or a "vision",  that  will be objective and  significant for itself.


W.'vE SEEN that  the first stage of a Reaney  play is likely to be in the satiric mode, with a good deal of Canadian attic-furniture and  nos­ talgia for old Mariposa  thrown  into the plot. A sort of rural  Betjeman. The odd thing in Canada  is that  the small town is likely to be remembered  with a mixture  of affection and  withering scorn, or neurotic spite. And yet, in the end, it comes to  represent  life in  general,  for  a  poet like Reaney,  and  therefore  the  mode  of satire and  wit finally reveals a deep divorce from these realities, a vision of triv­ iality and  mediocrity in horrible dissolution.
It  would  almost seem that  the inevitable  course of development  for  a  writer of a certain  kind of social satire, if he doesn't  get arrested  at  the stage of trivial discontent,  is to move toward  a deep concern with the "other  world",  the world beyond appearance. Mysticism, the supernatural, genuine religion or metaphysics begin to dominate  in their  later  years in the work of writers like Wilde,  Shaw, Aldous Huxley,  Evelyn Waugh,  Auden,  E. M. Forster, as well as our own  Rob­ ertson Davies, all of whom were light satirists at the beginning. I think  this pat­ tern of development  may be useful to interpret  the shift of a Reaney  play, usu­ ally in Act II,  from a fairly realistic satirical mode to a rocky fantastic irrational symbolism that  sets the audience  back on their  heels.
Reaney  himself describes this shift as hitting  the "rapids":

You go smoothly along in an apparent  realistic way, and  then  there  is this big leap-which director, actors and audience have got to take, or is it just bad dramaturgy?  and are they going to take it? Let me give an example. At the end of Easter Egg one night some one came up to me and said, "But no one ever feels he  has  to  get  married  just  because he  killed a  bat."  The  murder  in  Desks, the  circle dance in  Killdeer   (well, the  whole trial scene),  the  recovery of  the "idiot" boy in Egg have all at one time or another produced a feeling of "rapids" with audiences and the occasional muttering actor. I'm still working on this; one

25

A PROBLEM OF  MEANING



solution is to declare myself mad-I don't  think the way other  people do, and what  to you seems melodramatic,  surreal, arty,  etc., etc.,  to  me seems utterly verismo  and Zola.5

Significantly, he adds  that  "after  watching  the Peking Opera  at the  Royal Alex one evening I decided to trying writing a different kind of play altogether. That  is, a play where it's all rapids."  The  result of this decision was Listen to the Wind.
We see then  how  the  "magical" ultimately  takes over from  the  realistic and the satirical.  The  meaning  of this magic element in modem  theatre  is not far to seek. It is the  tradition of Symbolism. What  was "grey  truth" to W. B. Yeats, and  the distrust  of rationality  and  science, also the  justification for  mediumistic experiments and  theories of the supernatural, is set aside to make way for a kind of  vague  charlatanism  on  the  stage,  confusing  shifts,  mysterious  implications, gnomic expressions without  context  or connection.  Madame  Blavatsky is still in­ structing,   though   this  is a  church   basement,  a  high  school  auditorium,  or  a college stage.
"I curse the discovery of fire. I curse Prometheus," sings the improvised chorus in Colours in the Dark. And  in lieu of positive science, we have "angels  on the bridge in the golden  dray."
The  impact  of science on the imagination -and  the  whole  business of Two Cultures-may be recognized in Reaney's opening editorial in his magazine Alphabet, No.  1, September,   xg6o:
I can remember about twelve years ago at Toronto feeling the final clutch of the so-called scientific world. Metaphors seemed lies. Poetry seemed to have no use at all. The moon looked enchanting through the trees on Charles Street, but the enchantment  was really nothing but  an illusion of clouds and  fantasy covering up a hide-out pock-marked spherical desert." 6

It was Blake who pulled  him out of this sterile desert of scientific  (or so-called scientific)  reality:  Blake for whom "The  Atoms of DemocritusjAnd  Newton's Particles  of light/ Are  sands  upon  the  Red  sea shore,/Where Israel's  tents  do shine so bright."
That  the consequence of this recoil from science should be an extravagant  ab­ sorption  in symbols, myths, "the  iconography of the imagination", without  clear reference now as to the specific meanings conveyed by this language  of  icons and symbols,  is  characteristic  of  the  entire  Symbolist  school  from  the  nineteenth  century  on.  Its  theology is extremely vague, since the  ruined  theology  which  it attempts  to replace cannot  be sustained, at least not in the old way, and the new one  has  not  yet  been  formulated. It  would  take  a  certain  forthrightness   of

A PROBLEM OF  MEANING



thought,  and  a  boldness  with  ideas, which,  not  being  Greeks, we  utterly  lack. The  last ditch stand  is that  witches' brew, an all-inclusive mythology,  all-myth­ ology-at-once as a key to existence. Northrop  Frye's magnificent  system rests on the premise simply that Total  Mythology reveals something solid  and  permanent, the so-called "structures of the  imagination". Ultimately,  of  course,  Frye's  sys­ tematization-his Key to all  Mythologies 7  -leads to a  very definite  meaning and  application,  namely  a  revolutionary  Christianity,  a  radical  humanism,  and a reassertion of Christian  values. These are not things one would want to oppose, but  I  think  it is a  somewhat  dishonest argument  to  base such  beliefs on  "the  nature  of the mind",  or on the  presumed  permanent  "structures of the  imagin­ ation",  however they got there.  In  the past every kind of dogma  and  belief was at one time or another  supported  by that  argument, but  it  has never stood  the test of time.
Reaney's  plays, like  the  mother  lode itself, rather  shyly  gravitate   toward  a
Christian affirmation, despite the complex and contradictory  symbolism of his irrational  play and  fantasy:

A messenger of Hope, comes every night to me, And offers for short life, eternal liberty.
(Listen to  the  Wind)

Leave the burning city
Leave this burning town
Destruction cometh -a sucking cloud
Your towers will tumble down ...
(Colours  in  the  Dark)

"Tonight-I'll begin the New Testament.  I  have the strength at last to write of Jesus."	(Ibid.)

These  passages are  like the  fine declarative  final speech of  Mopsus  in  the  No­
vember Eclogue, central  no doubt  to Reaney's poetry:

A sun, a moon, a crowd of stars, A calendar nor clock is he
By whom I start my year. He is most like a sun for he Makes his beholders into suns,
Shadowless and  timeless.
At the winter sunstill some say
He dared be born; on darkest day
A babe of seven hours

A PROBLEM  OF  MEANING



He  crushed  the  four  proud  and  great  directions
Into  the four corners of his small cradle.
He  made  it what  time of year he pleased, changed
Snow into grass and gave to all such powers.8




W.LL, IT  SEEMS after  all that  this is not  really  "all myth­ ologies".  All  mythologies are  being  read  as one  mythology,  the  key  we  already had -a  neat  trick  if you  can  work  it.  Yet  this explicit  interpretation  read  into Reaney's plays  would  stiffen  into  a  hard  and  fast  creed  what   is still  fluid  and potential in  his free  imagination. He  rides  a  Blakean  horse  that is not  so easily stabled: it is the  horse named "Boehme" in A Suit of Nettles:

What  a pretty snow white horse tattooed  with
stars, mountains  meadows real sheep moving on them it seems & fiery comets & ships in a harbour  & little
horses dancing  in a barnyard.  This  horse's eyes-oh
the angelic aurora  wonder of its gold red mane. Every once in a while this horse's colour completely changes. People shy away then I can tell you! Storms break out in the tattoed  skies and  a fiery fire burns in the eyes However, it bubbles over-a light comes into  his eyes and  the world changes back again.

And so it is. The plays are a strange and  wonderful experience-though  often an  irritation -and  they  are  a  powerful  contribution to the  possibility  of theatre in  Canada. Much  as I may  disagree,  having  my own  way  of searching through the  creation, I  want  to  stand   up  to  applaud a  fine  achievement. For  my  own taste,  among the  plays,  I probably could  do without The  Killdeer, The  Sun  and the  Moon, the  Three  Desks, and  The  Easter Egg- much  as there  may  be  in­ teresting things  in all of them -and  I believe the  best of Reaney's theatre,  pure  Symbolism   in  the  romantic vein  of  Maeterlinck and  Yeats,  is  to  be  found  in Night-blooming Cereus, One-man  Masque,  and  the  moving  and  impressive  later  plays,  Colours in the  Dark and   Listen to the Wind. It is here  that   he  suggests vast meanings and  haunting other-worldly dimensions  through the simplest  verbal  and  theatrical techniques, namely  through the  symbolic  interplay of action  and  the  incantation of poetry.  The  experience he wants  to arouse  is given  in the seri­ ous-humorous description of the  flower in the stage directions  to Night-blooming Cereus:

A PROBLEM  OF  MEANING



Above the village appears  a vision of the Night-blooming  Cereus  opening  in slow beach crashing  swarming splendour  and  glory, a blossom larger  than  airplanes  or zeppelins, four times really the size of the village, three times the size of Toronto, twice the size of Bethlehem and once the size of Eden. Then  it fades as time comes back.

The difficulty  of the  plays remains. It is a difficulty  which  is both  intellectual and  sociological-hated words!-in  that  the  problem  of these  plays  is to  dis­ cover,  with  precision  and   in  detail   (not  always  possible  in  such   a  case)   what they  want  to say,  and  at  the  same  time  to  reach  an  audience which  is neither prepared for nor capable of any  mental  exertion.  And  it all goes back  to "vision"
-the Greek  theoria-in  which  the  divine  was revealed  in the  epiphany of the theatre: except  that  we today  are  not quite  sure of what  we mean  by the  divine. In  the  meantime, the  play-or  "play" -is  the  thing,   if  only  as  a  childlike way  to  keep  things  going.  Reaney's emphasis  is definitely  on  the  play.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
The  chief plays of James  Reaney are available in four books now in print:
The  Killdeer  and Other  Plays (Macmillan,  Toronto,  rg62).
Masks of Childhood  (New Press, Toronto,  1972). Colours in the Dark  (Macmillan, Toronto,  1971). Listen to the Wind  (Talonbooks,  Vancouver, 1972).
There  are  several  plays for children  also in  print,  and  a  collection  entitled  School Plays projected  by Talonbooks, but I have not yet seen this last. A chronology  of his work and  a full bibliography  is provided  in the book Masks  of Childhood  and  also in  the  detailed  study  by Alvin  A.  Lee,  James  Reaney   (Twayne   Publishers,  New York, 1968).

NOTES

1 Quotations in the above paragraphs are taken from C. Kerenyi,  The   Religion  of the Greeks and Romans  (London,  rg62),  pp. 153, 28, 158, 146, 159·
2    The  Sun  and the Moon,  Act II.
8  H. Rider  Haggard,  The  Days of My  Life  (London, 1926),  II, go.
4  Alvin A. Lee, James Reaney  (Twayne  Publishers, New York,  rg68).
5   James  Reaney, "Ten  Years at  Play," in Canadian  Literature,  No. 41   (Summer,
rg6g)' p. 59·
6   Editorial  reprinted in Louis Dudek  and Michael Gnarowski, The  Making  of Mod­
ern Poetry in Canada  (Ryerson Press, Toronto,  1967),  p. 197·
7    "Mr. Casaubon, as might be expected, spent a great deal of his time at the Grange in  these weeks, and  the hindrance which courtship  occasioned  to the  progress of his great work-the Key to all Mythologies-naturally made  him look forward the  more eagerly to the happy  termination  of his courtship."  George  Eliot,  Mid­ dlemarch,  Chapt.  VII.
8  James  Reaney, A Suit  of Nettles  (Macmillan,  Toronto,  1958),  p. 51.

29


THE FIRST EXILE



Pierre Cloutier




R.P. BLACKMUR  sAID that the  hcro of the  most  ambitious
art  of our  time  was the  artist  himself. And the novel of the  artist  is one of the
fundamental indices in an assessment of a given culture's maturity, self-conscious­ ness and  sophistication,  because it is a work of the imagination, whose subject is the  imagination. In  Canada, the  genre  has  come  into  its own  in  the  work of Hugh  Hood  and  Mordecai  Richler, much of which deals with artist protagonists like Alexander  MacDonald, Rose  Leclair,  Jake  Hersh,  or  Norman  Price. And it was inaugurated in  the  nineteenth  century  novel of  Sara  Jeannette Duncan,  A  Daughter  of Today, whose story  of the  development of  a  young, sensitive, artistic imagination  exiled abroad  began the tradition.
At  the  outset,  Elfrida  Bell, the  artist  heroine,  returns  to  Sparta,   her  small,
drab  Ontario hometown,  after  one year of art courses in Philadelphia. Her basic training  in the arts  has been  undergone  outside Canada. She  has exiled herself to the United  States  before continuing  the process in Europe  as most Canadian artist heroes will, and  there she sets a trend.
Her  intellectual  allegiances  are  instinctively  European.  As an  artist  and  an
intellect,  S. J. Duncan's heroine  has gained  access to the  universe lying beyond Sparta, a small entropic  semi-urban  microcosm like those which  are  the setting of Stephen  Leacock's and  Robertson  Davies' novels and stories; her dream  is the great  dream  of the  Canadian intelligentsia,  the  preservation  of vital lifelines to the  "mother" countries  of France  and  England  during  the  long-drawn  absence of an indigenous cultural life.
.When  she  quits  her  home  town,  the girl  undergoes a  change  not  of degree, but of kind. The  idiom of behaviour,  the system of values she adopts, is  unintel­ ligible to a  home environment which  really has neither  and  which  lives in  the inertia  of acquired  habit.  Exile for her is an initiation into a world  which has a sense of manners:

go

THE FIRST  EXILE



... manners in the slightly extended sense of the gestures and modes of behaviour established by a society for the expression of moral attitudes.1

The  declining  nineteenth  century  was the golden age of the artist  as magnifi­ cent egotist, entrenched in Bohemia  which, according  to Alphonse de Callonne, was bordered  on the north  by need, on the south by misery, on the east by illusion and  on  the west by the infirmary.  Elfrida  will become an  initiate  of  the  Deca­ dence, whose manners and conventions have become mantras, rituals for inducing  the creative state, like the rotten apples of Schiller's work desk.
But before she leaves her native society the provincial's egotism still bears the stamp  of the order  against  which it would rebel. It lacks scope, because it never defies institutions  or  the corporate  egos of social class or native  country,  and  it lacks the radical articulateness  which is the earmark  of the true  rebel. At home, Elfrida  Bell is a  domesticated  rebel in  a domestic environment which  lives on mood rather  than  principle  and seldom deals with anything  but  the petty  quar­ rels of petty minds. She keeps a relatively low profile, since language,  in Sparta,  has  not  evolved  beyond  the  bare  immediacy  of  daily  fact.  The  artist's  native environment  is only the background  against which her self-conscious coquettish­  ness stands out, a mirror  in which she can fawn on  her own image.

Her actual and her ideal self, her most mysterious and interesting self, had  origi­ nated in the  air and  the  opportunities of Sparta. Sparta  had even done  her the service of showing her that  she was unusual by contrast, and Elfrida felt  that she ought to be thankful to somebody or something for being unusual as she  was.

When she adopts the code of the Bohemian, Elfrida does so with a complacent exaltation  which  may  or may not be shared  by the writer,  whose use of tone is surprisingly uncertain.

She entered the new world [of the  Quartier Latin]  with proud recognition of its unwritten  laws, its  unsanctified morale, its rictious overflowing ideals; and  she was instant in gathering that to see, to comprehend these was to be thrice blessed, as not to see, not to comprehend them  was to dwell in outer darkness with the bourgeois and the 'sandpaper' artists and others who are without hope.

Of course the passage is absurd  overstatement.
As Gerald  Jay  Goldberg  noted  in his unpublished  study  of the artist  hero in
English fiction :

.Jf one were to evaluate degrees of estrangement, residence in Bohemia, in spite of
>its  extravagance, ... is often but a  phase in the artist's development, and  in the

THE FIRST EXILE



instances in which success is achieved, the Bohemian is reabsorbed into the social structure.2

For  Elfrida,  success is not  achieved  and  she leads a  resolutely marginal  and half  delinquent   existence,  perhaps  because,  as James  said,  the  artist  hero  can only be the failed artist whose misfortunes lend themselves to dramatization more readily than  the largely intractable process of outstanding  artistic  creation. Pro­ vincial bondage still governs her existence through  the Dickensian menace of  ruin at  home and  the cutting  off of allowances to those who would leave  their  little outpost  of empire.  When  S. J.  Duncan  shows Elfrida's  parents  living  on a  re­ duced  income so that  Elfrida  must drop  her painting  and  go  job hunting  as an inexperienced   journalist,  she  is being very Canadian.  Robertson  Davies  builds his macabre  comedy of the expatriate on the dialectics of money and  the artist. In  Hugh  Hood's  White Figure, White  Ground  the  hero's father  undergoes  near ruin.  In  Morley  Callaghan's A  Passion in  Rome, Sam  Raymond  may  or  may not be paid  while on an assignment in Rome as a  journalist. The  economic for­ tunes of home and  family always affect the life  of  the vagrant  artist.  Money,  a stable  medium  of exchange,  seems to strike  his  imagination.  He  feels scruples over having too much of it in Robertson  Davies'  A Mixture  of Frailties, he hates the  tentacular presence of  usury in Scott  Symons'  Place d'Armes. He  is never deeply indifferent  to it as Joyce Cary's vintage  hobo Gulley Jimson  is, although he pays lip service to the economics of  irreverence and  the conventions of garret life. Extrinsic criteria, the necessities of survival, influence his choice of a medium more directly than  his particular brand of aesthetic sensibility which is more often than  not undefined  and  purely potential.
Elfrida  evolves into more of a radical libertarian, though less of an artist, than most of her successors. Her career as a writer is initiated by her parents' economic difficulties, and although  she has been an indifferent painter, she makes it a point to  pause in  awkward  reverence  on  the  threshold  of a  new life. A daughter   of the age, she would no doubt  agree with Wilde speaking to Andre Gide in Blidah and  confiding  that  "il  faut  toujours  vouloir  ce qui  est le  plus  tragique." She insists on  being  risque  and  very  much  the  aesthete  while  writing  unprintable articles  on  "the   nemesis of  romanticism", which  are  universally  rejected.  She prefers theory to craftsmanship.  When the artist  Kendal  draws a satirical sketch of her paying  her respects to George Jasper,  novelist, and  kissing Jasper's  hand, he puts the  mirror  up to nature,  thanks  to the  techniques  which Elfrida  didn't care to master. The  irony is in the subject of the sketch, but also in the medium

THE  FIRST EXILE



used  by the  painter. The  artist's capacity to satirize,  to  act  upon  a  value  judge­ ment  by producing an image,  helps him settle his accounts with  the outside world and  resume  his relationship with  the  men  and  things  about him.

• . . Kendal  felt free  to make  the  most of his opportunities  of seeing Elfrida-his irritation with  her subsided,  her  blunder  had  been settled  to his satisfaction.  He had an obscure idea of giving the incident form and colour upon  canvas,  in  arrest­ ing its true motif  with a pictorial tongue.

Yet through it he remains self-critical:

It  was his conception  of the girl that  he punished  and he let his fascinated  specu­
lation go out to her afterward  at a redoubled rate.

Kendal's affinities  to  the  artistic   thought and   practice   of  the  I 8go's  are  not very well defined.  He  is a competent young  trained technician over  whom acade­ micians are  atwitter in  corporate distress.  He  produces  intelligible  formal signs, especially  portraits, and   gives shape   to  the  continuous flow  of  the  real.  Proper  handling of his medium requires at  least the  altruism of the craftsman who  must achieve  control.
On   the  other  hand   the  dandyism which  is Elfrida's private morality  distorts her  relationship with  those  surrounding her  since  she  considers herself  her  own artistic  medium and  tends  to indulge in gesture  for gesture's  sake. Her  scrupulous concern  over  her  own  sensibility  makes  her  blind  to those  of  others. She  selects sensations as a painter would select pigments

She  was so freshly impressed  with  the new lifelights, curious,  tawdry,  fascinating, revolting,  above all sharp  and  undisguised, of the world she had felt, that  she saw them  already  projected  with  a  verisimilitude  which, if she  had  possessed the art of it, would have made  her indeed  famous. Her  own power of realisation  assured her on this point-nobody could see, not divine but see, as she did, without  being able  to  reproduce;   the  one  implied  the  other ... and  up  from  the  bag  came  a scent  that  made  her shut  her  eyes and  laugh  with its power to bring  her  experi­ ences back to her.

From  such  a  point  of view,  the  artistic  temperament is endowed with  a more lively sensibility  than  is supposed  to be common  among  mankind. The artist  also grants himself the  right  to use the  beings who serve as models for his own  private purposes,  robbing  them  of their  identity by making  them  into  the  public images which  are  the  product of his art.  Callaghan in A Passion in Rome  suggests  that Michelangelo sees  his  contemporaries not  as individuals but  "as  something for form  and  colour". Hypersensitivity and  egotism  are  very commonplace generali-

33

THE FIRST EXILE



inescapable.  Murger,  who had few illusions on things Bohemian and saw starving in garrets  as a silly thing  to do, thought  the names of Gilbert,  Malfilatre, Chat­ terton  and  Moreau  had  been  bandied  about  too often,  to  the  point  where the cult  addressed  to  them  had  simply become what  he called  "the  martyrology  of the  mediocre".4    A  reader  who  shares  this  opinion  will  wonder  whether  S. J. Duncan's  novel is merely derivative or whether it should be dealt with on its own terms.
The  aesthetic  of the dandy  gives the artist  himself the purposeful purposeless­ ness of the artifact  because his life is his art, which is quite a sophisticated propo­ sition for an author  like S. J. Duncan  who still belonged to a semi-pioneer society
to use in building  a novel. The  character  who operates on this premise performs more than  he exists, he abstracts  himself from nature  and  society and stages his existence like a  Gidian  Lafcadio  whose acts  have  no cause,  no usefulness, are done out of pure  pleasure. The  book in which he is portrayed  inevitably acquires a cerebral argumentative quality since it must provide an apology for its hero's motive. It becomes discontinuous  because it portrays the spontaneity  of gratuitous impulse, the methodical  and  immediate  satisfaction of unreasoned  whim. Like its hero, it must carefully and overtly remain untainted with the vulgarity of mere existence. The  likes and  dislikes of such a hero, his affirmations  of belief or his acts, including  suicide, also lose the transparency  which motivation  must have in order to remain intelligible to all. Ultimately, the oracular ambiguity of his words, the complacent  grace of his gestures contradict  the literary  medium  of the novel, language.  Like the perfect  crime, such a being must remain  unknown by defini­ tion, and  therefore  cannot  exist, or can only exist for himself, a barren divinity.
One  could  say that  Sara  Jeanette Duncan's  novel of the  artist  attempted  to bring  the  Canadian  literary  sensibility from  barbarism   into  decadence  single­ handedly,   somehow   bypassing  civilization.  It   was  inevitable   that  subsequent works should  push  back  the  clock and  not  travel  through  such  strange  seas of thought  en  masse. Canada is a country  young enough  to  gamble  on  that  next century which will be, perennially,  its very own. It is also a country young enough to share the pre-Romantic faith that

... art, however great, must be subordinate to the greater art of living. It was the faith  that  persuaded Milton  to drop his epic ambitions for politics and Congreve to abandon authorship when he felt it to compromise his integrity as a gentleman; and it is allied to the faith in the social obligation of the artist, whose duty was to serve his public.5

THE FIRST EXILE



NOTES

1 Dick  Harrison, "The American Adam  and  the Canadian Christ", Twentieth Cen­
tury  Literature,  Vol.  I6,  No.3 (Los Angeles, Calif.: July  I970), p.  I6r.
2   Gerald   Jay  Goldberg, "The  Artist  Hero   in  British   Fiction", unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Minnesota, I958, p. 221.
3  Robertson Davies, A Mixture  of Frailties, p. I37·
4  Joanna Richardson, "Romantic Bohemia", in History Today, July  rg6g. E.
Books Inc., 1958), p. 7I.
















37

POEMS FOR KLEIN



Irving Layton







REQUIEM  FOR Jl. M. KLEIN


I remember  your cigaret-stained fingers
The rimless glasses that glinted with your wit
And the bowtie protruding
Under  your chin like a spotted tongue


Your scholar's mind neat as your hair
And the jaunty self-loving complacencies
That made me think of plump pumpkin seeds
Falling from your mouth, the epigrams


I finally gave up counting
Scattering like the pigeons on St. Mark's square
When a piston ring suddenly explodes.
I still wonder at your psychological obtuseness

And the sentimentality each clever Jew
Misconstrues for sensitivity:
Fool's gold which you, 0 alchemist, Changed  into precious metal, solid and true

Warm-hearted egotist, my dear unforgettable Abe, You were a medieval troubadour
Who somehow wandered into a lawyer's office
And could not find your way back again

POEMS FOR  A. M. KLEIN



Though the reverent adolescent
Like the Virgil which fee-less you taught him Would have taken your hand and led you out Muttering the learned hexameters like a charm

Now grey-haired I diet, quarrel with my son, Watch a young girl make love to herself, Occasionally speak to God and for your sake Resolve to listen without irony to young poets

But still muse on your bronzed tits of Justice.
Yes, here where every island has its immortal bard I think of you with grateful tears and affection And give them your fresh imperishable name

Molibos, Greece









EPIGR]IM  FOR ]1. M. KLEIN


They say you keep the devils laughing by your wit
And all the furnaces stilled that they may hear it.
















39

FOR Jl. M. KLEIN



Seymour Mayne




So you made the N.Y. Times with your death -a column, mimic of your poetic mine,
the richness of your vision -
And rising behind Montreal's  gothic french and english, Yerushalayim with her gates, with her orifices
and one destined for the catatonic
master of madness.
Your city rose to the north, and green
like Safed the hills lay at your feet
to be sung into the carpets
upon which your Adam first tripped.


Unlike the first Patriarch
you did not return to your Canaan flowing with the gilt honey
and gleaming canvas milk that  poured and mixed
for your ad-libs
and libations.
And in the blankness of our north you finally stared
as if blind -the motes were cold
and flakey, and suddenly symmetrical brittle hands, five-fingered prongs, mercurial, piercing and dipping
into every outraged sense, and silencing

FOR  A. M.  KLEIN



you with the deepest suffering­
the gagged tongue limp and mute
unable to call itself back.


What due had you then you thought­
a knot of poems, a scheherazade
of a thousand witless dervish rockings, stale-linen turbans  davening
under the aureate arcs?
And near where you tried to live again,
beneath the bridge of Outremont Park
where I came with cutting skates in my youth, a second troll haunted
his princely self and stopped up his dusky mouth with fear
in the mathematical snowy nights.


Now we know why all your equations were equivocal-a pundit's  brilliance,
yet disguising the grand with the puny - of double voices speaking, gasping, apostrophizing from the round zero of the mouth rings to the empty ear's circle
and woven labyrinthine  laurels
over the vacuous glycerine of the sunken eye.


BEAUTIFUL  LOSERS

All the Polarities



Linda Hutcheon








BEAUTIFUL LOSERS has been called everything from  obscene and  revolting to gorgeous and  brave. For a Canadian work it has received  con­ siderable   international  attention,  yet  few  literary  critics  have  dared   take  it seriously. Along with The Energy  of Slaves, which shares its themes and imagery, this novel stands  as a culminating point in Cohen's development. It may also be the  most  challenging  and  perceptive  novel about  Canada and  her  people  yet written.
Cohen  plays with  the  novel structure  but  the essential unity  of the  work lies outside  the temporal  and  spatial  confines of plot and  character, in the integrity of the  images. The  first book, "The  History of Them  All," is the tortured  con­ fession of a nameless historian-narrator whose prose is as diarrhetic as his body is constipated.  "A  Long Letter  from F.," written from an asylum for the criminally insane by the brilliant,  erratic  revolutionary-tyrant, presents us with the narrator's teacher  and  his "system,"  seen from the perspective of failure.  The final fantasy of F.'s escape leads into  "Beautiful  Losers: an epilogue in the third  person".  In formal  novelistic terms this is the most traditional  part, yet even  here characters  and   temporal  sequences  merge  and  we  are  finally  addressed  by  yet  another  narrative voice.
Whatever  plot there is here, its interest is minimal. If the characters  enlist our
attention at all it is due  to their articulate  natures. There  is little doubt  that, if not  obscene -whatever that  word  might mean-the language  of this novel is sexual  and  sensual.  Michael  Ondaatje claims:  "To  write  Beautiful Losers in  a safe formal style would have been to castrate its powerful ideas and its vulgar sanctity.''1   "There are  no  dirty  words-ever," 2    adds  Cohen.  Yet  there  does

BEAUTIFUL LOSERS



seem  to  be  a  specific  thematic   reason  for  using  the  language  of  often  vulgar sexuality in the way in which Cohen does. As in his entire  ceuvre, it is as if he is trying to force the reader  to face his sexuality:  "Undress,  undress, I want  to cry out, let's look at each other.  Let's have education." The  language  may well be a deliberately  constructed  obstacle  to  be dealt  with  before  the  seriousness of the novel can  be perceived.  At  the  separatist  rally, for instance,  the  narrator rivets our  attention  on  the female hand  caressing his genitals, while the crucial  theme of  the  English  domination   of  French  Canada   is being  presented  in  the  back­ ground in the words of the speaker.
This  theory  does not,  however,  account  for  the  pop  music  and  comic  book talk:  "Smack! Wham! Pow!" Nor does it explain the disintegration  of language that  takes  place  in  Book One.  No  doubt  part  of  this is deliberate  "con," for Cohen admits  he is never totally devoid of that. Yet, as a novel dealing ironically with  identity  in  its  private  and  public dimensions, it also presents the  modem vision of alienation  in  the  nameless narrator,  the  character  who most painfully suffers from  disintegrating  verbal  structures.  Neither  his ideas nor  his language ever takes shape firmly, despite his academic roots in the past.
As a folklorist he can draw his imagery from many mythologies-Amerindian,
Egyptian,  Greek. Mostly he tends to systematize a modem  mythos gleaned  from comics, radio  and  movies. His  temple  is the  System Theatre and  Gavin  Gate rules:  "You  are the king of some slum block and you have handed  down Laws." Despite  its  being  steeped  in  "Canadiana", the  novel, like the  rest  of  Cohen's work, is also biblical in its imagery and structure.  Like the Bible, Beautiful Losers is  both  social  and   individual   in  scope.  However,  as  in  most  modem   ironic literature,  the  poles are  no longer  moral  ones of good  and  evil, but  existential ones of identity  and alienation.  Both works are epics of a people and a man, and despite their  historical skeletons, the essential unity of each is organic rather  than linear.
Indeed  the novel often seems an ironic or demonic parody  of the Bible. Faith is replaced  by magic. The  continuous  creation-the "begats" -loses out to an entire  cast  of  orphans.  The  Bride  and  Bridegroom,  presented  traditionally in Kateri  and  Christ, are  parodied  in Edith and  the Danish Vibrator   (the  D.V.!). The  temporal  dimension  of the  Bible is essentially a present -it  happens  as it is being read;  F. insists that  he will show the narrator "how  it is happening" in his letter. In the novel the apocalyptic imagery of the Eucharist becomes real cannibalism,  among  other  things,  in a  demonic  tale  of torture  and  mutilation. The  redemptive sacrifice of the body and blood, the bread and wine, is presented

43

BEAUTIFUL LOSERS



in  Catherine, the  "lily  out  of the  soil watered  by the Gardener   with  blood  of martyrs."  This  white/red imagery  is picked up ironically in the basic conflict of the novel-between White  Man  and  Red  Man.  Catherine  even converts to the white  race  after  her  death.  The  Indian  Edith  wants to be someone else too, so plans an  unappreciated surprise for her husband,  who tells us:  "she was waiting for me all covered in red grease and  I was thinking of my white shirt."  Not long after this she is a bloody corpse at the bottom of an elevator shaft.
Perhaps  the  most important use of this imagery comes at  the  French  dinner party  at  which  Catherine spills her wine. The  red stain spreads  over the white table  cloth,  the  guests, and  even "drifts  of spring snow darkened  into shades of spilled  wine,  and   the  moon  itself  absorbed  the  imperial  hue."  The   narrator begins the next section with:  "It is my impression that the above is apocalyptic," perhaps  referring  to  Revelation  6: 12   where the  full moon  becomes like blood. He  then  explains  the Greek origins of "apocalyptic." A hundred  pages later  this is picked up in the final word of Edith's  Isis speech:  'a7J£KaA.v..Y£v -apekalypsen. These  two  passages and  women  are  again  linked  by the  narrator's definition  of the  apocalyptic:  it  "describes  that  which  is revealed  when  a  woman's  veil  is lifted."3   "What  have  I  dvne,"  moans  the  narrator, "what have  I  not  done,  to lift your veil, to get under your blanket, Kateri Tekakwitha?"
The  final scenes of the  novel seem to  be a deliberately  literal  parody  of the
biblical  apocalyptic  vision. In  Revelation  22: I 4:  "Blessed are  those who  wash their  robes that  they  may  have  the  right  to the  tree of life and  that  they  may enter  the city by the gates." The filthy old man descends from the treehouse and, between  the  naked  legs of a  woman,  enters  Montreal.  Echoing  Revelation   1 :7 ("Behold,  he is coming  with  the clouds, and  every eye will see him"), the man transforms  into a movie in the sky, a movie of a blind negro singer in sunglasses: "his  head  and  his hair  were white  as white  wool, white as snow;  his eyes were like a flame of fire" (Revelation I : 4) .
This  process of ironic  reversal of images is constant throughout the novel. Just as the tongues of fire drive the disciples out of their room to teach Christ's mes­ sage, so the firecrackers drive the narrator out of his apartment to the treehouse to become F.'s  teachings  incarnate. In  the Bible the sea leviathan  is the enemy of the  Messiah, destined to be destroyed by Him.  Fallen man  is born, lives and dies within his belly. The  Danish  Vibrator  is also a source of  social sterility, but in the pansexuality  of the novel it satisfies the frustrated Edith, working over the entire  surface  of  her  body,  before  crashing  through  the  window  and  crawling back to the sea.


44

BEAUTIFUL LOSERS




hriS NOVEL  OF   IDENTITY  also presents a frightening  picture of the  possible tragedies  of alienation  facing Canada  and  the isolated  hero. Like the Bible, it associates the fate of the individual  with that  of the nation.  "You've turned  Canada  into a vast analyst's couch from which we dream and redream nightmares  of identity,"  the narrator accuses F. As he delves into his own consciousness, the  nameless  man  stumbles  upon  the  truth  about   Canada. This truth  is closely linked with his taste for victims, for, like the novel, Canada's past is coloured by the blood of her defeated peoples.
The  epigraph  of the novel begins: "Somebody said lift that  bale," introducing the victim/victimizer theme  which is then underlined  by the continuation which identifies the  lines as Ray  Charles  singing "01'   Man  River".  Although  there  is no logical sense in mentioning  who is singing these written  words, the link with the  final vision of the  novel would suggest that  to become a Ray Charles  movie is not liberation for the narrator, but perhaps a symbolic capitulation to the victimizing forces.
In  "The Genius,"  Cohen  writes:

For you
I will be a Dachau  jew and lie down in lime
with twisted limbs and bloated pain
no mind can understand.

This  vision of Nazi torture  also pervades Beautiful Losers: meat-eating humans are  "dietary   Nazis"  with  their   Dachau   farmyards.  The   novel  is  laced  with incidental  but constant references to the Jews, often concerning their role as a victimized  race. F. says that  each generation  must thank its Jews and  its Indians for making  progress possible -by  their victimization. Canadian literature  is full of images of a lonely, desolate wilderness, indifferent  to human  values. Here  we are in an increasingly urban  society where man is progressively brutalized  by the city, becoming, himself, indifferent  to human  values. The  identity  of the nation is thus inextricably bound  to that  of the man. The  narrator unwillingly is forced to  speak  for  Canada: "0  Tongue of  the  Nation!  Why  don't   you  speak  for yourself?"
In  the broader social scope of the novel, Canadian history is patterned  on the process of victimizer turned victim :

45

BEAUTIFUL LOSERS




explorers   i
 martyrs 	FLQ bombs
economy   i

VICTIM
 Jesuits
 INDIAN	FRENCH	ENGLISH
rally   j

VICTIMIZER  FRENCH
 culture
ENGLISH 	AMERICAN


The  Indian world here is not  just the pastoral one of Pauline  Johnson; it is also the  massacre  and  agony  of  "Brebeuf  and  his Brethren." What  remains  of the former  is destroyed  by  the  French  explorers  and  the  Jesuits:   "the  old  people gathered  at the  priest's  hem shivered  with a new kind of loneliness. They  could not hear the raspberries  breaking  into domes." To destroy the link with nature  is to deny the source of mythology. After his defeat in the shadow wrestling with the priest, Catherine's uncle laments: "Our  heaven is dying. From every hill, a spirit cries out  in pain,  for  it is being forgotten." The  French  even give the Iroquois their  name.  The  Hodenosaunee  (the  People of the  Long  House)   are  redefined in terms of a phatic  expression  ( hiro -like I said)  plus a cry of joy or distress (koue), befitting  their  new  victim  role (hiro-koue- Iroquois). This same pat­ tern is repeated:

INDIAN 	Hodenosaunee 	Uncle's shadow	Kateri in camp 	Edith
t 	t 	t 	t
FRENCH 	Iroquois 	Lamberville	Catherine in fort 	French rape

Catherine's uncle loses his fight for her, but wisely refuses "life-giving" baptism for  himself.  Indeed,   one  week  after   Edith   injects  water   from   Lourdes  and Tekakwitha's Spring  into  her veins, she is found  under the elevator,  a "suicide." As a  child  she  is  raped   by  the  French  townsmen  who  ironically  call  her  an Indian  "heathen" as she prays to Mary and  Kateri. The  narrator feels he should rescue Catherine at  least from  the  French  Jesuits, from  the  "Sinister  Church." When, at her death,  Catherine's skin turns white, the Jesuit interpretation is that "Dieu  favorisait les sauvages pour leur faire gouter Ia foi." This racist chauvinism disgusts F.:  "Let  the  mundane Church  serve the  White  race  with a change of colour."
However,  it is nat long before the victimizing French fall prey to the English. F. realizes that the modern  French  must not make the mistake the Indians  made. The  separatist   rally  speaker  says:  "The   English  have  stolen  our  History! ... History  decreed  that  in the  battle  for a continent  the Indian should  lose to the Frenchman. In  I 760  History  decreed  that  the  Frenchman should  lose to  the

BEAUTIFUL LOSERS



Englishman! ... In  1g64 History decrees, no, History commands  that  the English surrender   this  land  which  they  have  loved so imperfectly,  surrender it  to  us!" Yet, can the direction  of the cycle be so easily reversed? F. is the main  Quebecois voice;  echoing  the  speaker's  rhetoric,  he  longs for  thick  national   boundaries because "without independence we will be nothing  but a Louisiana  of the north, a few good restaurants and a Latin  Quarter the only relics of our blood."
The  conquering  English, however, are in tum  being made the victims of their American   neighbours:  it  is  1776  revisited.  As a  Frenchman, F.  claims  "the English  did  to  us what  we did  to the  Indians,  and  the  Americans  did  to  the English what the English did to us." Today's attack is far more insidious, though: it is economic4   and cultural.  In the novel the 1V ads are from  Madison  Avenue, the comics are  American,  as is Charles Axis. Hollywood provides modem  saints. When the narrator unpacked  the firecrackers from Sioux Falls, South  Dakota,  he said:   "I wept  for  the  American  boyhood  I  never  had,  for  my  invisible  New England  parents,  for  a long green  lawn and  an  iron  deer, for college romance with  Zelda."  The  modem  American  dream  is to be an  immigrant sailing  into New  York  armed   with  obsolete  machine  guns  to  astound   and  conquer   the Indians;  it is to be "Jesuit  in the cities of the Iroquois".
This  same  victimization  theme  is present  in  the  histories of  the  individual characters  in  the  novel. The  story of Catherine  is full of  personal  torture  and Sault  St.  Louis looks like a "Nazi  medical experiment". In  his own  agony  the narrator   perceives their  common  bond  of pain:   "F.  Suffered  Horribly  In  His Last Days. Catherine  Was Mangled  Every Hour  In Mysterious Machinery.  Edith Cried  Out  In  Pain."  He  has a taste for victims, be they fictional or  real, likely because he is the chief victim figure of the novel. F. envies him this status, yet it is he who  tortures  the  narrator as a  boy, slicing off his wart  amid  screams  of sadistic approval  from  the other orphans.  Later  the narrator's hands  are burned by F.'s firecrackers. No doubt  we are meant  to recall F.'s lost thumb  and Jogue's thumb-torture by the Iroquois.


0F THE THREE MAIN  CHARACTERS in the present (or recent past)  of the  novel, one is an  A-, one a  French  Canadian, Roman  Catholic,
M.P. and revolutionary,  and one is a nameless English Canadian, raised in a Montreal  Jesuit  orphanage. Although  these three,  plus Catherine, are the  main foci of attention  as individuals,  we are never allowed to forget their  background

47

BEAUTIFUL LOSERS



and  the symbolic weight  they bear.  Desmond  Pacey sees the  novel as the testi­ mony of a "voluntary loss of self for some higher cause."5   But  just what  is this higher  cause? The  loss of self in the novel is indeed voluntary -although in an ironic way -but it certainly  gives way to nothing positive on a private or public level. Pacey seems to miss the ironic tone of the novel and  neglects the message of failure  in  F.'s  letter.  Each  character  lives an  isolated existence that  ends in some form  of destruction.  Sex is not even a meeting of bodies:  F. excludes the eager  narrator, only to be, in tum,  excluded  by Edith  in Argentina. The  major sex scenes in the novel are either oral or masturbatory.
The  narrator loses his "self" through  attempting to avoid acknowledging  that
his salvation  can  only be found  in solitude and from within.  Instead  he looks to F.,  Edith,  and  finally  Catherine. In  his constipation  he prays to  his bowels to make  him  empty  so  he can  receive, without  realizing that  one's  identity  is not received. "I am the sealed, dead, impervious museum of my appetite," he whines. This  imprisonment   imagery  is connected  to  his physical environment, a  totally "introverted", windowless basement apartment. It resembles, however, the "dark tunnel"  where  Catherine watches  the sexual  embraces  of others  and  finds  her virginal  identity.  At one point  in his cellar torment,  the narrator seems to reach some epiphanic   realization  of his identity:  "I care more  about  my red watery throbbing  thumb  than  your whole foul universe of orphans.  I salute my monster­ hood.''  Yet he stops short of total self-acceptance and escapes the place of descent into  the  self,  entering   the  "cold  ordinary   world"  to  call  the  Early  Morning  Record  Gal.  It is F.'s  final trick to prevent  the narrator's full  realization  of his separate  identity:  the teacher still needs him for his own second chance.
In the person of F., Cohen also presents an ironic version of the isolated tragic hero. He is the vulgar,  mad  revolutionary, the saint of perversity, the Moses who leads his friend  to the Promised Land,  but cannot enter himself. He is a John  the Baptist,   yearning   to  be   Christ-teaching  in  parables   and   enigmatic   saws, reversing  conventional   meanings  in  a  parody  of  Christ's  own  reversals  (Love thine enemies). The  narrator is his faithful  disciple who will carry on his essence in a rather  startling  literal manner.  However, we must keep in mind that  F. does sing "The Great  Pretender.''
He  is  constantly   conscious  of  being  the  narrator's teacher.  Sometimes  the
student  deliberately  wishes to emulate  the master,  but at other  times he has no choice. "His  style is colonizing me," he cries, "do  I have to be your monument?" He senses that  he has been trained  for something,  but  is not sure  just what.  A born  teacher,  F. manages  to extend  his instruction  over the wide gulf of death,

BEAUTIFUL LOSERS



planning  the firecracker ordeal.  At his death  he passes the  torch  to his student, demanding a  further  effort:  "interpret me, go beyond  me.... Go  forth,  teach the world what  I meant  to be." He freely admits his ultimate  failure  with both Edith and her husband.
He  perceives  the  cause  of  this  breakdown  as lying in  his "system,"  in  the limitations  of his created,  ordered  vision of unity. "New  systems are  forced  on the  world  by men  who  simply  cannot  bear  the  pain  of living  with  what  is," realizes the narrator. "Creators care nothing for their systems except that  they be unique.... Jesus probably  designed his system so that  it would fail in the hands of other men." It is F. who creates Edith's beauty with his system. Like Breavman in The  Favourite Game, he wants to be a magician. However,  he admits: "I did not suspect the pettiness of my dream. I believed that I had conceived the vastest dream  of my generation.  I wanted  to be a magician. That  was my idea of glory. Here is a plea based on my whole experience:  do not be a magician,  be magic." He would like to renounce the power for the essence of creation.
Yet  the  narrator  has  not  learned  from  F.'s errors:  he too seeks a system, an ordered  vision. His mind  is a needle that sews the world together  into "a beauti­ ful  knowledge  of  unity".  F.  tries  to  warn  him  to "connect   nothing,"  but  the student  follows his practice  rather  than  his words. The  narrator sees everything as "part  of a necklace of incomparable beauty and unmeaning". The same bond­ ing image  reappears  in the Telephone  Dance,  in which Edith's long red finger­ nails connect her to F., who then  tunes in to "ordinary  eternal  machinery". The Jesuit forces the old Indians  to unplug their ears by painting  a picture of a demon twisting corkscrews of fire into one woman's ears. In  the first  use of the image, the  metaphor  allows a connection  with  the mechanical  universe;  in  the second, the link with  nature  is severed forever. Ultimately  destruction  results from both connections.




IN THE  NOVEL two opposite systems are  presented: the  reli­ gions of the spirit and of the flesh. In their extreme forms both demand  a denial of individual  identity,  in favour  of some vaster, more inhuman, but  not  higher purpose.  F. wants to free the  body from genital  tyranny.  His star  pupil,  Edith, agrees that all body parts are erotogenic -until none of hers co-operates, forcing her  to resort to mechanical  means of satisfaction. The  final  undercutting of the religion of the flesh is the post-Vibrator  entry of Hitler and his sadistic victimiza-

49

BEAUTIFUL LOSERS



tion  of  F.  and  Edith.  On  the  other  hand  we have Catherine Tekakwitha, the Iroquois  virgin.  As a  child she instinctively rejects her marriage  and  her  asexu­ ality is sanctified after  her conversion. When confronted  by her second intended, she  realizes that  she  has a  woman's  body, but  declaims ownership  of  her flesh, giving it to Christ.  Five times in this scene a symbolic fish hovers "in a halo of blond  mist, a fish that  longed  for nets and capture  and many eaters at  the feast, a smiling luminous fish."
This  religion  is also  undercut   in  the  novel, for  it  too represents  an  extreme system:  "Even  The  World  Has A Body." Catherine's  mangled  body manages to satisfy the sadistic voyeurism of the two Jesuits. Refusing marriage  a third  time, she  looks at  the  beauty  of  nature  and  laments: "0 Master  of Life, must  our bodies  depend  on  these  things?"  Her  new religion has destroyed  her link  with nature  and  with  her  heritage -she has already  broken  her  vow to  her  uncle. The  first step towards  her colour change  has been taken, paving the way to her reduction  to a technicolour  postcard  and  a plastic dashboard  ornament. At the end of the novel (rented  to the Jesuits)  she even falls victim to the political power plays of Church  and State.
However,  just as he was once caught between two loves, the narrator is caught between  these two systems. He  is nameless because he is the  archetypal  Cana­ dian,  the  beautiful  loser:  "0 Reader,  do you know that  a man  is  writing this? A man  like you who longed  for a hero's heart."  He tries to deny  the spirit, his Jesuit  orphanage heritage.  He  would like to deny the  flesh too  and  be Plastic Man.  The  result?  F.  tells him:  "what  a  hunchback  History  and  the  Past have made  of your body."  Instead  of sexual fulfilment, he gets voyeuristic thrills from history and  Edith's  drawers.  Instead  of spiritual  assistance, he gets F.'s  cryptic letter  and  the  fireworks ordeal.  The  low point of  his life (which,  paradoxically, is a  potentially  positive height)   is his descent  into the basement  apartment and into  his consciousness. Here  he is baptized by  "fire, shit, history, love, and loss," but  evades the threatening freedom  that the descent offers, escaping to the alien­ ating  heights  of the solitary  treehouse. At  the end  of the  novel he is empty, no longer  obsessed by time  and  his body. An orphan,  he comes from  nowhere and returns to nowhere, dissolving into a movie image.
He  is aware,  as is F.,  that  "there  is something  arrogant  and  warlike in  the notion  of a man  setting  the universe in order. It  is a kind of balance  that is his glory.'' He had seen Catherine victimized by a totally spiritual system, mechanized by the Jesuits into  their  political  and  plastic pawn.  Edith  has fallen prey to the totality  of the flesh and  she too can only be satisfied by mechanical  means. The

BEAUTIFUL LOSERS



narrator transfers  his lust to Catherine  after  his wife's death.  He sees, thanks  to F., that  the key to balance  is "to  fuck a saint."  In  order  to imaginatively  bring about   his  "fuck  cure,"  the  narrator begins to  merge  the  identities  of  his two women:  they are both  Indian  orphans  who die at twenty-four;  both refuse food; both  once had  bad  complexions until a system magically transformed  them; and both  are  uncanonized  saints of their respective religions. F. played the narrator's connecting game once too, sucking Edith's toes just as the priest had sucked Catherine's,  and  ultimately ruining  her just as the Jesuits destroyed Kateri.
This  metamorphosis  is completed  by the addition  of a beautiful  blond  girl in a car in Book Three.  Like Catherine she refuses the concept of marriage. Earlier when  the  dead  Kateri  appeared   in  a  vision, the  lower  half  of  her  body  was invisible in a dazzling glow, and  F. had asked the narrator: "Had she lent  her other  parts  to you?" Here such would indeed seem to be the case, since the girl is naked below the armrest. Yet she is also a sexual Edith figure:  she too claims: lut-> eyw. She  wears  moccasins, although she  is white. It is as if the  trans­ figured  saint  and  Edith  had  merged  the  two  extreme  systems so that  the  old man-narrator could  achieve some sort of balance.  When  one of the  priests was not granted  any visions of the dead saint, F. asked:  "Where were his movies? ... It is he whom I most resemble." Indeed  it is the narrator, not F., who enters the realm of movies, the Promised Land.
F. is the tyrant  controller and  magician. He knows his power and  writes to his student:  "Somewhere   you  are  dressed  in  hideous  rags and  wondering   who  I was."  His  fantasy  escape  is to  the  forests beyond  Montreal,  to  the  treehouse hermitage  of the  narrator. The  student  has  learned  his lessons well. When  he warns  the  little boy to keep his thigh  muscles always engaged,  there  is a direct verbal echo of F.'s earlier advice to him. However, as a result, the narrator has become "a  thing  without  a  name  which  changed  and  changed  itself over  and over."  When  he appears  at  the  Main Shooting  and  Game  Alley, there  is some confusion as to his identity. Everyone looks at his hand:

-It's all burnt!
-He's got no thumb.
-Isn't he the Terrorist Leader that escaped tonight?
-Looks more like the pervert they showed on T.V. they're combing the country for.
-Get him out!
-He stays! He's a Patriot.

The   confused  temporal   sequence  further   accentuates   the  merging  identities.

BEAUTIFUL LOSERS



When  the  boy  calls  the  old  man  "Uncle," yet  another  triad  of  characters   is formed.  Catherine's uncle dies defeated but  unbaptized,  loyal to his race. F. dies imprisoned  by the  English,  but  still wanting  to be President of the Republic  of French Canada. The  narrator's fate is similarly equivocal.
This  ambivalence seems central  to Cohen's  concept of the saint. His poetry is full of imagery of "the  twisted life of saints." In the novel it is F. who has "saintly pretensions",  seeing  himself as  Brebeuf's  successor, a  martyr  whose blood  will water  a mighty  revolution.  Ironically  he only loses a thumb  while blowing up a statue  of Queen  Victoria.  After his body-building success he takes over the Christ role, previously assigned  to Charles  Axis who is "all  compassion, he's our sacri­ fice." F. always believes in systems, his own or others':  "God  is Alive,  Magic is Moot."
The  female  characters  in the novel emulate  Catherine's  sainthood.  Edith  and
the blond  girl claim  to be Isis. Edith,  like Mary  Voolnd,  is the "perfect  nurse," healing  men  as did  Catherine. According  to Frazer,  Isis is "the  many-named," and  here she  does indeed  have  many  identities  which  all merge into  an  ironic parody  of the  Universal  Mother.  Catherine  is a virgin, Mary  and  the girl have no  normal  sexual  intercourse  with  the  two men,  and  Edith  dies with  no issue. Irony  seems to  be  the  essence of Cohen's  concept  of the  modem  saint:  "Alex­ ander  Trocchi,  Public Junkie,  Priez pour nous." For the narrator, it is Hollywood that is the new haven for holiness.
But even this sainthood  is not the glory, the ideal presented in the novel. A real
saint is someone who achieves a "remote  human  possibility," who is paradoxically not  systematized,  but  a  "balancing monster  of love."  He  does not  control  or order  or conform  to any rigid system, as Catherine,  Edith,  and  F. do. As Cohen says in  "The priest  says goodbye": "Abelard   proved  how bright  could  bejthe bed between the hermitage  and  nunnery."  Because of the systems of society, such a balance  is precarious,  and  Abelard  becomes a beautiful  loser. The  true saint is the  magic of balance  itself:  "mind itself is Magic  coursing  through  flesh." For this reason the narrator must "fuck a saint" and "be magic."



Tars LOVE   of "coin faces of problem" is the source of much of Cohen's irony. His characters  live in the modem  world of Huxley's Tomorrow
and Tomorrow and  Tomorrow where "Applied  Science is a conjuror,  whose bottomless  hat  yields  impartially   the  softest  of  Angora  rabbits  and   the  most

52

BEAUTIFUL LOSERS



petrifying  of  Medusas."  F. sees that  science, like a conquering  race,  chooses to disregard   the   particular,  beginning   with  "coarse   naming".  The   Spenglerian decline of art into technology creates its own mythology. The  telephone  becomes the agent of some "benign  electronic deity" and the Telephone Dance  is born.
F. is at home in this world of machinery and systems. His mind plays naturally
with  mechanical  imagery,  and  he  passes on  this  ability,  although   his student associates machines  primarily  with pain:  "Catherine Was Mangled  Every Hour In  Mysterious  Machinery." Their  world has become  tainted,  willing to accept plastic birchbark,  broken  Photomats,  and "out  of order" signs:  "our  little planet embraces its fragile destiny, tuned  in the secular mind like a dying engine."  Even the body is seen as a machine,  "Is  my body going to work?" asks the constipated narrator. "Has  the  machine  turned  the  food brown?"  He  learns  that  he must "abandon all systems" in order  to humanize his body. The saints, though,  remain mechanized  like F.  Edith  has  "leathery  electrodes" for  nipples,  and  Catherine sees sex as "the assault of human machinery".
The  mechanized  city of the novel victimizes the natural world. The  narrator and  F. masturbate  as they did  when they were boys "in  what  is now downtown but was once the woods." The culmination of the usurping vision of the machine is the  Danish  Vibrator.  It transforms  F. from a solicitous mentor  into a lustful glutton,  leaping  past  Edith  for  "those  delicious electric  oscillations."  It  finally learns  to  feed  itself, assaulting  Edith  and  dehumanizing her  into  a  "buffet  of juice, flesh, excrement,  muscle to serve its appetite." Most of the other forms of "entertainment" in  the  novel are  similarly mechanized.  While  in  his basement inferno  the narrator's only contact  with the world outside is his radio. Ironically this is only a one-way communication  medium,  despite his abortive  attempts  to call the  Early  Morning  Record  Gal. At the end of F.'s letter,  the radio assumes the  form  of  print  and  takes  over,  as the  D.V.  had.  The  "Revenge  of Radio" prefigures the final revenge of movie in Book Three.
In both The  Favourite  Game  and Beautiful  Losers the movie is seen as a means
of expansion  by vicarious  experience:  the  narrator knows pain  because  he has been "inside newsreel Belsen.'' Yet the wary reader becomes suspicious, since Hollywood has its saints and  movies are shown in the "severe limits" and "black confinement"  of the System Theatre. There  is also a suggestion of superficiality, as F.'s scant  knowledge of Indians  comes from a thousand  Hollywood  westerns.
Given this background,  it is hard to see the final transformation of the narrator into  a movie as the triumph  that  the critics would  have it. The  essence of this scene lies in its ambivalence -another word, perhaps, for balance. The  narrator

53

BEAUTIFUL LOSERS



initiates the revolution of all second chancers: "professional actors, all performing artists, including  magicians." He enters the System Theatre but finds there is no need  to enter  the system now:  he is it. He could not see the movie, for "it  was automatic and  so was he!" At  this, he totally  relaxes, giving up  all remaining claim  to his own identity,  and  disappears.  He merges identities with  F. and  the mechanical world of system that he represents.
The   narrator's  performance on  the  street  echoes and  reverses  F.'s  fears  of what  would  happen  if the newsreel escaped into the feature. F. invites the news­ reel into  the  plot;  the  narrator invites the feature  into the street,  becoming the newsreel, and the same feared "miasmal  mixture" begins to "imperialize  existence by means of its sole quality of total corrosion." We are told that "he enlarged the screen, degree by degree, like a documentary  on the Industry. The moon occupied one lens of his sunglasses, and  he laid out his piano keys across a shelf of the sky, and  he leaned  over him as though  they were truly the row of giant  fishes to feed a  hungry  multitude.  A fleet  of  jet  planes  dragged  his voice over  us who were holding   hands."   This  ironic  transfiguration  image  does  not  come  as  a  total surprise. In  the early comic strip  ad of Joe and Charles Axis: "Four  thick black words  appear  in  the  sky  and they radiate  spears of light ... HERO OF  THE  BEACH." In F.'s Invocation  to History in the Old Style, we find:

I see an Orphan, lawless and serene, standing in a corner of the sky,
body something like bodies that have been, but not the flaw of naming in his eye.

We  recall  that  when  F. died,  his face turned  black. He  always did feel that  to think oneself a negro was "the  best feeling a man can have in this century."
Has  the student  quite  literally become what  the teacher desired to be? Has he
entered  the  Promised  Land?   Is  the  Ray  Charles  movie an  image  of the  final conqueror,  the American  mechanical  cultural  victimizer of Canada, or is it-as the  epigraph   would  suggest -a  symbol of the  ultimate  victim,  the  black and blind American,  used for entertainment value? We cannot trust the admiring judgment  of the  New  Jew  who, labouring  happily on  the  lever of the broken Strength   Test,  "loses  his  mind  gracefully.... The   New Jew  is the  founder  of Magic  Canada,  Magic  French   Quebec,  and  Magic  America.... He  dissolves history and  ritual  by accepting  unconditionally  the complete heritage.... Some­ times  he is Jewish  but  always  he is American,  and  now and  then  Quebecois."

54

BEAUTIFUL LOSERS



The  response of the  New Jew  to the transfiguration  is contrasted  to that  of the crowd:  "Just  sit back and enjoy it, I guess. Thank  God it's only a movie."  Both reactions  are  ironic in the context  of the movie imagery and  the gradual aliena­ tion and  brutalization of society. The  reader is left to decide if the second chance does succeed, in  the light  of F.'s  remark  that  "unless it is wrenched  from  fate, the  second  chance  loses its vitality,  and  it  creates not  criminals  but  nuisances, amateur  pickpockets rather than Prometheans."
The  very end of the novel does not resolve this problem. It is "rented" to the Jesuits  for  use as  a  document   requesting  Catherine's  formal  recognition  as a saint.  Is the  "noble  heap"  transformed  into a black saint,  yet another  victim of yet  another  system? Has  he  become  magic, or is he merely another  magician­ performer?  The  final printed  paragraph is separated  from the  rest  of  the  novel and  the  narrative  voice is hard  to distinguish.  Is it another,  perhaps  authorial voice  that  says:   "Welcome  to  you who  read  me today?"  F.  becomes  a  deity, referred to by a capitalized  pronoun.  Like the narrator, this persona is alone with his radio,  pleading  from "electrical  tower".  Yet the last line echoes F.'s tone and language: "Welcome  to  you, darling  and  friend,  who miss  me forever  in  your trip  to the  end."  Is this final ambiguity  the  ultimate  balancing  that  is glory in Cohen's  vision? It  is as if he is deliberately  trying  to  prevent  the  reader  from creating   a  system  of  interpretation,  leaving  him   caught   between   unresolved
dualities:

the serious	 the con poetry	 obscenity balance 	 system identity 	 alienation spirit	flesh
nature 	the machine revolutionary	tyrant
saint 	sinner victim	victimizer
magic	magician

The  reader  at  times  feels strangled  by this "necklace  of incomparable  beauty and   unmeaning," and  like the  New  Jew,  "loses his mind  gracefully.'' Is  the reader the ultimate beautiful loser?






55

BEAUTIFUL LOSERS



NOTES

1 Leonard Cohen  (Toronto:  McClelland and Stewart, I 970), p. 49·
2  N.F.B. film "Ladies and  Gentlemen, Mr. Leonard Cohen."
3  Edith's speech  translated reads: "I  am  Isis, who  gives birth  to all,  and  no mortal has lifted  my veil."
4  Edith was  raped   in  a  stone  quarry, or  "someplace very  mineral and  hard, owned indirectly by U.S. interests." The narrator also remarks that  "the Forests of Quebec are  mutilated and  sold  to America." In  the  Main  Shooting and  Game  Alley, there is a  DeLuxe Polar  Hunt with  "two  bearded, quilted American explorers. The  flag of their  nationality is planted in a drift."
5  "The  Phenomenon of Leonard Cohen," Canadian  Literature, 34  (Autumn, I967), p. I8.














LAKEHEAD  UNIVERSITY REVIEW
VOL.  6, NO.2

CANADA  INTO  THE  SEVENTIES
Clara Thomas on the seventies literary scene articles on economics,  education, energy,  foreign  policy new poetry  by Dorothy Livesay, Robert Kroetsch

Subscriptions $3.50 annually ( 2 issues) ; $10- three  years
(Institutions: $4.50;  $I2.5o)

Address: Editor, LAKEHEAD UNIVERSITY REVIEW Department of English,  Lakehead University Thunder  Bay, Ontario


GROVE'S SEARCH
FOR AMERICA



W.J.Keith





"IWANT  TO  STATE with all due emphasis that  this is the Story
of an  individual,  and  that  I  do  not  mean  to  put  it down  as typical  except  in certain  attitudes towards  phenomena  of American life."1 Although  this statement of intention  is set down clearly and  prominently at the end of the first chapter  of A  Search   for  America, Grove's  book has generally  been discussed as if it were primarily  a  "sociological"  exploration  of the  American  consciousness. While  it has been recognized as fiction  (rather  surprisingly, in view of the tendency  until a  few  years ago  to  accept  Grove's  apparently  biographical  statements  at  face­ value),  the  narrative  structure  has too often  been seen  merely as a  convenient framework   for  the  all-important  presentation  of  his  vision  of   America.  The second half of my initial quotation has therefore  been stressed at  the expense of the  first. Thematically,  of course, this is understandable; Grove's  chief concern in the  book is, unquestionably,  to test the American  ideal against  the American experience, to accentuate  the  vision by a demonstration  of its  vulnerability  and the ease with which it can be betrayed. But we shall not appreciate  the full extent of Grove's achievement  until  we recognize the subtlety of his artistry  as well as the importance  of his theme. If we wish to focus upon the literary quality of the book, we cannot  do better  than  to take up Grove's hint  and examine  this "story of an individual" more closely.
The   two  opening  chapters   provide  not  only  a  biographical   digest  of  Phil Branden's  pre-American  experience  but a  number  of useful clues for our  inter­ pretation  of his story. Branden,  we soon learn,  is a highly complex  spokesman. Most  obviously, he  represents  the  opposite  pole to  the  American  norm.  As  a smart,  aristocratic,  well-spoken, socially-conceited European,  he is in  archetypal  contrast  to  the  modestly-dressed, colloquial, democratic  American  worker  per­ sonified by Bennett, the Simpson's foreman whom  Branden  meets on the train  to

57

GROVE'S SEARCH FOR  AMERICA



Toronto. This confrontation is, in fact, so perfect in its appropriateness (within a  few  moments,   the  social  distinctions  have  been  reversed,  Bennett   calling Branden   "me  boy"  in  answer  to  his own  unprecedented   "sir,"  and  Branden realistically  accepting  Bennett's  "superior  status")  that  only  a  careless reading could  mistake  it  for  accurate   reporting  of experience  and  fail  to  recognize its carefully-planned artistry in which every remark, every gesture, every thought contribute  to the literary effect.
In   fact,   Branden's   self-presentation   is  extraordinarily   complex.  When,  for example,  he  tells us  at  the  end  of the  first paragraph that  he  had  sometimes "connived  at being taken for an Englishman,"  and goes on to remark, "if I could meet  myself as then  I  was, I should  consider my former self as an  insufferable snob and  coxcomb",  we are not only invited to observe the young man with detachment, but  are  warned  that  discrimination  of fact and fiction, of truth  and falsehood,  is likely to  prove  a  delicate  exercise. The  whole situation  is framed with uncertainty. The  "Author's Note to the Fourth  Edition" further  complicates the issue by raising the "truth or falsehood" controversy only to blur the distinc­ tion.  "Every  work of  so-called imaginative  literature," Grove tells us,  "good  or bad,  is necessarily at  once both  fact  and  fiction." A later  conversation  between Phil  and  Frank  raises the  question  of the  legality of  "assuming  a false name".  The  present-day  reader,  aware  of the  mystery of  Grove's own  identity,  is in  a good  position  to  appreciate  the  complex  web in  which  he  has  enmeshed  us. Frederick  Philip  Grove  (a  name  that  can  now  be  confidently  described  as an alias)  has created  the  character  of Philip Branden  (the  common  given-name  is not, of course, coincidental)  who admits to a past involving significant  if harm­ less impersonation  and  openly acknowledges a training that  taught  him "to  keep his  mask  intact". The   layers  of  intricacy  are  unending;   we  become  acutely conscious that  we are  confronted  with something  much  more  elaborate  than  a philosophical  inquiry  into  the  condition  of  America.  We  have  encountered   a work in which art and artifice are central and predominant.
Once alerted  to the elaborate  effects that Grove creates in these early chapters,
we shall find numerous  phrases and allusions that  take on additional significance. When, in describing his life in Europe, Branden observes that "the  exact localities are  irrelevant", we may  recognize an  indirect  hint concerning  the  reliability of Grove's own autobiographical details;  more important,  however, we may extrap­ olate the remark  and treat  the later scenes in the book as symbolic reconstructions rather  than  literal  transcripts  of reality or  representative incidents to be judged by the usual criteria  of "realism". Again, the emphasis on literature in the open-

GROVE'S SEARCH FOR  AMERICA



ing pages prevents us from forgetting  that  A Search  for America is itself a work of imaginative  creation. Branden  specifies his literary tastes:  "I was all taken  up with  that  particular  brand  of literature  which  was then  becoming  fashionable, filled  with  contempt  for  the  practical  man,  and  deeply  ensconced  in artificial poses." Not only does this exacerbate  his shock in encountering  practical  men in America,  but  it  encourages   us  to  recognize  the  "artificial   poses"  and  so,  by extension, Grove's inventive genius. Thus  Professor Spettigue's  recent discoveries, suggesting that  Grove did not emigrate  to this continent  until I gog and therefore that  A Search  for America has even less of a factual basis than  has generally been assumed,2    need not seriously qualify our literary response to his work. Grove had given us due warning in the text itself.
It is clear that  viewpoint is all-important in this book, and  that  Grove is care­ ful to exploit the possibilities of variation.  At the opening of the second chapter,  Branden  has  just landed  in Montreal.  "I felt incongruous and  out of  place,"  he tells us, and  by a  curious  process of temporal  and  spatial  extension,  the  view­ point shifts to an outside position:

I cannot but smile, I cannot but pity the slim youth in his immaculate clothes, the mere boy I was.
I shall try to describe how I must have looked.

The  first sentence offers the  judgment of an older and wiser Phil Branden  on the "mere  boy" of his past in much the same way that  Dickens makes David Copper­ field and  Pip tell the stories of their earlier years at a time when  they are estab­ lished, middle-aged  men.  (Again,  welcome though  they are, we should not have needed  Professor Spettigue's  investigations to doubt  Grove's statements concern­ ing the composition of the book; even if early drafts existed, the book as we have it could only date from a period  many years after the events which it ostensibly chronicles.)   In   the  second  sentence,  Branden  deliberately  renounces  his own viewpoint  to attempt  an  external  description, and  in the succeeding  paragraphs we  encounter  a  curious  "double-view" effect  in  which  first- and  third-person  intermix,  and  Branden  can  present  himself  as  both  the  personal  "I" and  the objective "young man."
This is a stylistic mannerism  widespread in Grove's work and  peculiarly appropriate to his creative purpose. An interesting parallel is to be found in Over Prairie Trails,  where Grove  describes "the  feeling of estrangement ... -as if I were not myself, but looking as from the outside at the adventures of somebody who  yet  was 1."3   And  here  is a  revealing, if syntactically  confusing,  example

59

GROVE'S SEARCH FOR  AMERICA



from  the older  Grove:  "It may  interest some of my young critics to hear  that, after  years on  this  continent,   during  which  he wrote  and  published  the  dozen books or so which  have  earned  him what  reputation  he enjoys as a  Canadian writer,  he  had ... " etc.4     This  effect  is obviously  related  to  Grove's  habitual process of  creating  spokesmen  and  personae  who  are  partly  self-portraits  and partly  fictional inventions-half  "I" and  half "he". In  the "Author's Preface" here  (where  the  blending  of first and  third  person appears  yet again), he para­ doxically  explains  his  choice  of a  pseudonym  in  "Phil  Branden"  by  observing that  "it  gives him ... an opportunity to be even more personal than ... it would be  either  safe  or  comfortable   to  be  were  he speaking  in  the  first  person,  un­ masked."  As it is, the  relations  between Grove and  Branden,  and  those between the younger and older Branden,  become so intricate by the end of the two opening chapters,  that  Grove is henceforth  in a position to present his "hero" from what­ ever angle or viewpoint seems most appropriate in any given situation.




l:E FOREGOING ANALYSIS  will have shown,  I  hope, that  A Search   for  America   is a  literary  work that  eludes the  normal  genre-categories. The  terms "novel"  and  "epic" have both been applied  to it, but these are no less inaccurate than  "autobiography." Indeed,  the  difficulty of assessing the book critically  lies primarily  in  its unclassifiable status.  I  have  been  able  to discover only one work that  closely resembles it-George Borrow's Lavengro (I 85 I) - and  this  too is a  book that  has been misunderstood  and  critically  undervalued for the same reason. A brief comparison  between the two books will prove useful at this point, though  I wish to stress that  I am not arguing in terms of influence. There  is, so far as I am aware,  no evidence that Grove had read Borrow (though the probability seems to me strong) ; all I wish to do here is to consider the books as mutually-revealing analogues  in an attempt  to throw light on the kind of book
I believe A Search   for America to be, and to indicate  a rewarding  way in which to approach  it.
In  Lavengro, Borrow  presents  us with  an  exploration  of  the  highways and
byways of early nineteenth-century England,  a picaresque account  of adventures with gypsies, tinkers and  road-girls, told in the first person by a speaker  (Laven­ gro)   who resembles the  author  but  is none the less distinct from  him. We find, therefore,  the same  relation  between the  philosophical exploration  of  a  country and   the  deliberate  creation   of  a  persona  that  marks  A  Search   for   America.

6o

GROVE'S SEARCH FOR  AMERICA



Indeed,  Borrow  offers a  definition  of autobiography-"a picture  of the  man himself-his character, his soul" as opposed to "the  mere record of the incidents of a man's  life"5 -which sounds startlingly relevant to In  Search  of Myself  and the  book under  present  discussion. Like Grove, Borrow carefully provides in the opening  chapters  a subtle  but elusive portrait  of Lavengro  which gives the alert reader  the  necessary means  by which  to interpret  the  rest of the  narrative. In particular,  he prepares  us to see the ensuing adventures  not merely as a succes­ sion of disconnected  experiences,  but  as carefully selected and  juxtaposed  inci­ dents  that  make  up  a  coherent  portrait  both  of the  country  in  question   (the genuine England  for Borrow, an authentic  America for Grove)  and of the many­ faceted observer whose qualities have led him to attain to insight.
One  of the characteristic  features of Borrow's work throws interesting light on
the literary  technique  of A  Search  for America. In the course of his adventures, Lavengro is continually  meeting people who in certain  respects bear a noticeable resemblance  to  himself,  and  such  meetings often  develop  into  curious,  almost surrealistic conversations  between  Lavengro and  an alter ego. The  process is less conspicuous in Grove, but it helps to explain the function of two figures frequently praised  by Grove's  commentators  but  not, I  think,  generally  understood.  These are  the old  worker  in  the  Yonge Street  restaurant  and  the silent hermit  whom Branden  saves from  the  river. The  scenes in which  these two appear  are  com­ monly praised  for their vividness and "realism,"  but such appreciation is insuffi­ cient and  on one level misleading. It should be noted,  first, that  both  are  name­ less; the  one  is invariably  referred  to as "Whiskers;" the  other  is  merely  "the  man."  In  the  second  case, of course, there  is no way in which  a  name  could credibly  be conveyed,  but  there  is, I believe, a more compelling  reason for  the anonymity;  in terms of the overall structure  of the book, the two are significant not  as individuals  but  as  possible projections  of what  Branden  might  become. "Whiskers"  is a living reminder  of the futility of life as bus-boy  in a restaurant. His  hopes  of  rising to  the  position of waiter  are  never  realized, and  Branden himself  is  promoted   above  him  within  a  few  days.  He  represents,  in  almost medieval fashion, a helpless old age, a monitory figure of  whom  Branden  might well say, "There but by my own exertions go I." While "Whiskers"  suffers lone­ liness in the midst of a city, the hermit has lost all connection  with  mankind  so that  he  has nothing  to say to Branden  and  is presumed  to be deaf-and-dumb. Branden  has already  noted  how, after  days of  silence, his own voice "sounded  husky to  [him], unfamiliar  like that of a stranger", and  the hermit, carrying  this to  an  extreme,  has  virtually  lost  the  capacity  for  speech -which implies  the

6r

GROVE'S SEARCH FOR  AMERICA



possibility of human  contact.  Again, Branden  can see what  he might  become if he remained in "the  Depths."
A  Search   for America needs to be read,  then,  not in terms of fiction or  non­ fiction, but  as deliberately-moulded carefully-patterned experience. Grove selects the adventures  of his spokesman  so that  he is aware at  first-hand  of a complete cross-section of American  life. Even Branden's  occupations have a symbolic func­ tion. As waiter  in the  restaurant, he is serving his fellow-men in the most literal way possible; as book-agent  he is selling either knowledge (to the poor)  or art  (to the  rich),   and  his situation  offers a  richly ambiguous  paradigm  of commercial education  (its designation as "missionary-work" suggesting an additional subtlety) that  contrasts increasingly with the genuine role of teacher which, having served a practical  apprenticeship, he takes up on the last page of the book. Similarly, after his interlude   "in  the  wilderness",  he  works as  factory-hand   (significantly  in  a veneer-factory -and  Grove  must  surely  have  known  Dickens'  embodiment  of the  image  in  Our  Mutual Friend) and  as itinerant-labourer on the farm.  This is no simplistic  distinction  between  agricultural  and  industrial,  since the factory is located  in a small rural  town and  the farm is mechanized  and  organized  as a full-scale industry.  None the less, Branden's  search is progressive, and  his experi­ ence  as  a  farm-worker,  an  occupation  which  Grove's  urbanized  readers  might consider  humble  and  undignified,  is clearly  offered, despite  its drawbacks  and imperfections, as his closest encounter with the true America.
The  whole of the section on the Mackenzie farm, indeed, contains a symbolic dimension  that  does not seem to have been noted. Superficially, it is a setting for Grove's presentation  of the life, working-conditions and general philosophy of the hobo or  itinerant  labourer,  but  a fuller reading  reveals a much  broader  level of meaning.   On   a   farm   whose   enormous   extent   is  emphasized,   the   owner, Mackenzie,  lives in what  is known as "the  White  House", and  this combination of the  Presidential  residence with a famous Canadian political name can hardly be fortuitous. It is worth  noting that  Mackenzie King was Prime Minister at the time  of the  book's first publication,  and  that  Mackenzie is specifically described as "an  incipient  king" during  a discussion of royalty and rule. This contrived but none  the  less effective episode is the intellectual  climax of the book. In  a scene that  could  only  be  condemned  as incredible  if the  book were  judged  solely in terms of realistic convention, Branden  discusses the broad  political questions with his millionaire  employer. If, however, we read the book in the way I have been suggesting,  this  discussion  between  the  sometime  European   aristocrat   turned hobo and  the American  agricultural capitalist is rich in irony, and its "meaning"

GROVE'S SEARCH FOR  AMERICA



extends far  beyond the inevitably inconclusive debate. At this point  Branden  has become  self-appointed  spokesman  of the  real  America  for  which  he  has  been searching  throughout the  book, and  he is able to lecture Mackenzie,  the man in power,  on  the  discrepancy  between  what  America  is and  what  she  might  be. Needless to say, this does not lead to any immediate  practical  reforms, but  these final  chapters  provide  a fitting  resolution within  the logic of the  book itself. In articulating his position, Branden  has achieved his quest;  he has discovered not only America but his true self.




IF IT  SEEMS  STRANGE that  this important (and  hardly recon­ dite)  aspect of A Search  for America has remained unnoticed,  I can only suggest that   Grove's  own  curiously  ambivalent   reaction  to  the  book  has  discouraged
deeper  scrutiny.  Whereas  he was always ready to sing the  praises of his other works, his response to A  Search   for America  was unusually guarded. Indeed,  in In  Search   of Myself  he  indulges  in some rare  self-criticism while discussing it. "I still believed-and I  believe today-that, artistically, this was my weakest book.... It seemed very juvenile to me, full of garrulity and even presumption."6
Unless my demonstration  of the artistry involved is hopelessly void, some explana­
tion for Grove's undervaluing of the book seems required.
There  are, I believe, two explanations. The first is clearly presented  in Grove's own discussion. After describing it as his "weakest book" he goes on, with typical sarcasm,  to  forecast  that  "it  would,  therefore,  have  the  best  chance  with  the public.m  This  is all part  of Grove's  persona of the unrecognized,  unappreciated artist.  While  it  would  be  both  inaccurate   and  improper   to  question  the  un­ doubted  neglect that Grove suffered through most of his life, it is none the less fair to observe  that  he moulded  and  adapted  this circumstance  for  his own  artistic purpose  in his habitual  manner.  His account, for example, of the contemporary response to Settlers  of the  Marsh is highly exaggerated,  as even a brief examina­  tion of the  reviews recently reprinted  by Professor Pacey will show.8  To state, as Grove does, that  "reviewers called it 'filthy' "9 is a gross misrepresentation of the facts,  but  it fits conveniently into the artistic creation of  the "I" of In  Search  of Myself, who is no more to be equated  with Grove himself  than  is Phil Branden. (Interestingly  enough,  George  Borrow  described  a  hostile  critical  response  to Lavengro in terms that  bear no resemblance to the reality -for similar reasons.)

GROVE'S SEARCH FOR  AMERICA



All this throws light on what might otherwise seem, for a book about  America, a singularly  inappropriate dedication  to  Meredith,  Swinburne  and  Hardy.  The importance  that   Grove  attached   to  these  three  is explained   in  an  essay, "A Neglected Function  of a Certain  Literary  Association," printed  in It  Needs  to be Said. Grove lists the same three names as examples of "English  writers of the first importance who,  regardless  of immediate  recognition,  laboured  on in  compara­ tive obscurity  and  poverty,  ceaselessly and  strictly endeavouring  to  express just what  they had to say-a thing the public, so it seemed, would not  hear and yet at  last  has heard."10  However  inaccurate  this may be as literary  history, it is a succinct  expression  of  Grove's  myth  of  the  great  writer.  To  this  company  he wished   to  belong,   and   the   comparative   success  of  A   Search    for  America  threatened  to spoil the pattern.
The   second  explanation  is  more  complicated.  In  embarking   on  his  quest,
Branden  "made up  [his]  mind  to  leave Europe  and  all  [his]  old  associations behind", and  although  he soon learns "that there  were social strata  in America as well as in Europe", he none the less pursues the ideal. By the last chapter,  he claims  to  be  convinced  and  converted:   "I was  reconciled  to  America.  I  was convinced that  the American  ideal was right, that it meant a tremendous  advance over  anything   which  before  the  war  could  reasonably  be  called  the  ideal  of Europe". Branden  is at  first disillusioned by the  materialist  skulduggery  that  he finds rampant in  America,  but,  as I  have indicated,  finds at  least a glimpse of the  true  America  in the agricultural West. None the less, the main  evidence for the  survival  of  the  ideal  personified by Lincoln  is essentially negative:  "What nonsense to search ! The  Lincolns were living all about me, of course; there were thousands  of them,  hundreds  of thousands, millions! If there were not, what with graft,  'con,'  politics and  bossdom the country would long since have collasped !" Although  we  can  say  that   Branden   has  completed  his  quest,  it  would  be unwise  to  conclude  that   the  search  was  altogether  successful. An  illusion  of success is precariously  maintained within  the book itself, but  this depends  upon two  arguments  that  are  in fact  contradictory: first, that  the search  "might  not be  a  geographical  search  at  all";  second, expressed in  a  well-known and  over­ quoted  footnote,  that  the ideal "has  been abandoned  by the U.S.A."  and is only to  be looked for  in  Canada. It  is obvious that,  despite these somewhat  frantic  gestures, Grove  has considerably  qualified his position. It  Needs  to  be  Said  was published only two years after  A Search  for America, yet there Grove continually insists on  the  importance of  Canada's maintaining   her  ties with  the  spiritual tradition  of  Europe  rather  than  succumbing  to the  materialistic  tyranny  of the

GROVE'S SEARCH FOR  AMERICA



United  States,  which  he  openly  condemns  as  "the   most  intolerant  nation  on earth."11   Grove's  disillusionment  must have been traumatic; it is hardly surpris­ ing, under  the  circumstances,  that  he should make only guarded  references to a book  whose thesis  (whatever  its artistic  merits)   he was no  longer  prepared   to uphold.
But if the search for America is "not  a geographical search at all," where is it to  be  located?  If anywhere,  in  the  individual-in the  kindly  and   unselfish Doctor  Goodwin,  in  Ivan  ("the  personification of all that  is fine and  noble  in bodily labour"), in the  Phil Branden  who, tempered  by experience,  emerges at the close of the book. The  ideal embodied  in Lincoln can only manifest itself in individuals.  I  suggest  that  Grove  had  come to  this  conclusion  by  the  time  he wrote A  Search   for America as we now have it, and that  he deliberately empha­ sized "the  story of an individual" to counter-balance the implications of  the title. The  sub-title,  we should  remember,  is "The   Odyssey of an  Immigrant," and this accentuates the individual nature of the quest.
Throughout the  narrative,  the  emphasis is upon  Branden's  development;  in
particular,  we are never allowed to forget the significance of education.  He must cast  off  the  unpractical  training   he  had  received in  Europe,  and  complete  a required  period  of apprenticeship  before he can find his proper role in America. The  training   he  receives is almost  brutally  practical  but  it  is also, in  Grove's view, ultimately humane.  In a passage carefully positioned just before his meeting with  Ivan,  Branden   observes:   "I was merely  rounding  off  what  I  called  my education  in  the  'true  humanities' ". In  the last hundred  pages of the  book, he becomes conscious of this development,  and  recognizes, moreover,  "the  curious plan  that  seemed  to  underlie  [his]  wanderings".  Established  on the  Mackenzie farm,  he remarks:  "I marvelled  at  the plan of my life." This  plan  is, of course, identical  with what  I hope to have demonstrated  to be the closely-knit structure of  the  whole  book. Grove  lays out  for  us the  example  of  one  man's  progress towards  mature  understanding. It is, as he insists, "the  story of an  individual," but the meaning  of "individual" is refined in the course of the book. It is purged of all selfish associations. Branden is no less an individual  at the end of his search than  he  was at  the  beginning,  but  his individuality  is no longer  directed  into purely personal channels. Branden  himself makes the necessary distinction  in the final  chapter: "When   I  came from  Europe,  I  came  as an  individual; when  I settled  down  in  America,  at  the  end  of my wanderings,  I  was a social man." These are the terms in which his quest is achieved.

GROVE'S SEARCH FOR  AMERICA



NOTES

1 Frederick  Philip Grove, A Search  for America  [I 927]  (Toronto: McClelland  and Stewart,   New  Canadian  Library,   I 97 I ) , pp.  I 3- I 4· All  subsequent  references, incorporated into the text, will be to this edition.
2    See   Douglas   0. Spettigue,    "Frederick    Philip   Grove,"    Queen's   Quarterly, LXXVIII (Winter  I97I), 6I4-6I5; and "The Grove Enigma Resolved," Queen's Quarterly, LXXIX (Spring  I 972),  I -2.
3   Over  Prairie Trails  [ I922]   (Toronto: McClelland  and  Stewart,  New Canadian
Library,  I 957) , p. 86.
4    "Postscript   to   A  Search   for  America,"   Queen's   Quarterly,   XLIX   (Autumn I 942) , I 98. In  this article  the distinction  between Branden and  Grove is virtually ignored.
5    George Borrow  to Theodore Watts-Dunton, quoted  in Herbert  Jenkins, The  Life of George Borrow (London: Murray,  I9I2), p. 396.
6   In Search of Myself (Toronto: Macmillan,  I946), pp. 378,391.
7   Ibid., pp. 378-379.
8    See  Desmond   Pacey,  ed.,  Frederick  Philip  Grove   (Toronto: Ryerson,  Critical
Views on Canadian Writers,  I97o),  pp. 105-II7.
9    In Search of Myself, p. 38I.
10   It Needs to be Said  (Toronto: Macmillan,  I929), p. I2.
11 Ibid., p. I45n.



























66


GROVE'S  LETTERS FROM THE MENNONITE RESERVE



Introduced by Margaret Stobie






TE FIVE LETTERS that follow, written by F. P. Gmve in the first months after  he had  become principal  of the four-room  intermediate school at  Winkler,  Manitoba,  are  the  earliest writing  of his in Canada that  has so far come to light. It is therefore  worth  noting that  the prose of the  letters that  are written  in English is much  more obviously that of a foreigner  than  is the prose of any of Grove's later writing. Even a year later, he had a much firmer grasp of vocabulary,  idiom, and  indeed grammar  in English. In  these letters the tentative quality  is sometimes in the misuse of a word-"I stand  aloft,"  or "your  figures tackle  with  my own  experience" -but more often  it appears  in  idioms  trans­ ferred  from German: "My  account  foots up to-," "they  are  pent  up in their own ideals," or "slide  them  along."  This quality of the prose raises the question of  how  long  Grove  had  been  on  this continent,  and  seems to  indicate  recent arrival.  However, Douglas Spettigue suggests in "The  Grove  Enigma  Resolved," (Queen's Quarterly,  April  I972,  I-2)  that  Grove may have  come over as early as I909.
At any rate, his first known  appearance in Manitoba  was at  the end  of  I 9 I 2
when  he presented  himself at  the office of Robert  Fletcher,  Deputy  Minister  of Education, to  ask  for  a  teaching   job. Fletcher  sent  him  to  Andrew  Weiden­ hammer  at Morden  (the A.W. of the letters)  who was the department's inspector for the  75 German-English  bilingual  public schools of the  Mennonite  reserve in southern  Manitoba.  Weidenhammer sent him to fill the vacancy in the one-room school in the village of Haskett, where Grove taught  grades  I to 6 from January to June,  I9I3.
Weidenhammer, who changed  his name to Willows during  the war, had  been
brought   out  not  long  before  from  the  Mennonite   district  around   Waterloo, Ontario, to  deal  with  the  very touchy educational  situation  within  the  reserve

FROM THE  MENNONITE RESERVE



where the church, strongly opposed to the government schools, supported  and ran a  considerable  number  of "private" schools. The  kind of tension that  existed is well illustrated  by an  item from the Morden  Times, January 9, 1913, about  one man  who "has  been summoned  before the ministers of his church  to answer for his conduct  in sending  his children  to a public school. The  ministers are  trying hard  to force him to send his children  to their private school and  [he]  is sensible enough  to  refuse. He  is in  a  hard  position and  needs supporters.  Let's  all help him and  encourage  him for the stand  he is taking."  Such a state of affairs helps to explain  Grove's anger  when the "poor  Farmer" who had brought  his children to the Winkler school was turned  away.
Staffing the bilingual schools was a constant  problem, and  to ensure at least a modicum   of  training   in   his  people,  Weidenhammer   conducted   a  ten-week summer  Normal  course in the  Morden  High  School (fee $10), which  all those teaching  in his schools were required  to take. Grove and twenty others made up the  class  of  I9I3.   Their   valedictorian   was  John   Enns,  one  of  the  Winkler teachers,  who,  having  also passed his grade I o examinations  that  summer,  now held  a  third  class teaching  certificate.  At  the  closing exercises, as the  Morden Times  reported,  Weidenhammer made the usual official announcement of appointments within  his inspectorate,  and  among them was Grove's as principal at Winkler. The salary was $I ooo.
The  Winkler staff afforded  a good example of the range of teachers' qualifica­ tions  in  the  bilingual  schools. Both John  Enns and  the  primary  teacher,  Miss Wiens, were in their  early twenties and  had  been born on the  reserve, but  Miss Wiens, not having grade I o standing,  was still teaching on a permit. The second in command,  P. H.  Neufeld,  was about  Grove's own age, he had  been born and had  had  part  of his schooling in the Mennonite  area of  southern  Russia, and  he had been teaching for a number  of years, but most of them in church-run schools. He  had  fairly  recently  achieved  his second class  standing   (grade   I I). On  the other  hand,  the vacancy  at  Winkler  had  come about  because of the resignation of  Grove's  correspondent,   I. J.  Warkentin,  a  young  Mennonite   of twenty-six who had a B.A. from the University of  Manitoba and who had left for Germany at the end of the summer to do post-graduate  work at Leipzig.
As for Grove, his mention  of Bonn in the last letter is his only reference to that
university  where,  as  Spettigue   records,  he  enrolled  in I 898,  though  he  never graduated from  it.  What  the  letters do indicate  very strongly  is that,  whatever else he may have been before he arrived  in Manitoba,  Grove had been a teacher
-a  trained,   experienced   teacher-and of  course  particularly  in  maths  and

68

FROM THE  MENNONITE RESERVE



science. The  evidence is in  his comparison  of Weidenhammer's course with  the rigour  of  "a   really  good  normal   class", in  his  displays  of  "Books  that   every teacher  ought  to  have"  and  "a  model outfit for teaching  plant  biology",  in the way he goes about  re-organizing  the school and  establishing his authority  among the other  teachers, and  in specific remarks:  "I come with many things that  have been tried out;" "I promised to run this school, and so I do it: do it to the best of my knowledge and  ability;" "they  trust  me and  believe that  I  know  what  I am  doing."  The  evidence  is in  Grove's  enthusiasm  for  the  new  emphasis  on practical  education  and  in his opposition to forcing a child. It is also in his send­ ing to Germany  for books on teaching  methods-books that  he must  have been familiar with.
Another  very  strong  impression  that  comes from  these  letters  is a  sense  of urgency. No doubt  part  of the reason for the urgency lay in the fact that  in mid­ November   Winkler  was  to  be  host  to  the  thirteenth   Annual  Conference   of German-English Bilingual  Teachers  of Southern  Manitoba,  and  Grove  wanted to  make  a  good  showing.  He  had  obviously been  put  in  charge  of  the  book exhibit,   and   from   that   experience  came  his  naive  report   that   "All   the  big American  publishers  came  to the front  with exhibits of  educational literature," as  though  the  text  book  publishers  were  doing  something  unusual.  His  other contribution  to the  meetings was a talk, in  German,  on elementary  education in Germany.  Preparations for the conference probably account  also for the haste in collecting  plant  and  insect specimens, in  ordering  physics and  chemistry  equip­ ment,  and  in  re-allocating  classes so  that,  according  to  the  school  attendance record,  by  November  Grove  had  only  high school grades in  his room.  But  his efforts went  beyond  the  mid-November  event. At the beginning  of the  term  he advertised   in  the   Morden Times  "a  special  teachers'  course  in  the  evening, comprising  the  work for full third  and  second classes (Grades  X  and  XI)" in order,  as he says in one of the letters, "to  give the reserve a chance  to raise the standard of  their  teachers,"  and  also, of course, to further  his drive  to get  high school status for Winkler. Again, in an attempt  to involve the community  and to give  evidence  of the  practical  value of education,  Grove published  a notice that the  school  would  test  farm  and  garden  seeds at  no  charge,  "under the  strict supervision  and   responsibility  of  the  principal."   All  of  this  activity,  with  its exacting  pace that  he details in the letters, gives a new glimpse of depth  behind Grove's  reflection  when  he was writing  Over  Prairie Trails  in  1919:  "We  live for  something-do  not  merely  live. The   wage-slave  lives  for  the  evening's

69

FROM THE  MENNONITE RESERVE



liberty, the business man for his wealth, the preacher for his church.  I used to live for my school."
Yet there was some special urgency behind the activity in 1913, as Grove hints when  he writes in December,  "I have  got to win out." This  underlying  necessity undoubtedly   affected  the  degree  of  his chagrin  when  his efforts did  not  meet with  the  gratitude that  he expected.  There  were  complaints  in  the  town  that Grove  was arrogant, presumptuous,  officious, that  he had  offended  the school board,  and  that  high school status would mean  higher taxes. Within  the school, the inevitable  clash occurred  between Grove and P.H. who was a deeply religious man -and  Grove  made  no secret of the fact  that  he was not-and  who had strong   support   from   the  more  conservative  elements  in  the  community.   As Grove's sense of injury  grows, the tone of the letters changes. His world is now a small  one, depending  on small  things that  have suddenly  ballooned  to blot out distance,  perspective,  judgment,  proportion. The  detailing of the bottles of seeds, the mounting  of insects, the cost of postage sounds like the cry of a man  who sees a last chance slipping  away. He is an outsider and  unwanted.  To ease his morti­ fication,  Grove escapes into  the legendary  world that  he had  already  devised of the Swedish father  and  Scotch  mother  and  of himself as a sophisticated  man  of the world, a scholar, a far-traveller.
In  the last, long,  whirling,  incoherent  letter, everything  can "go smash." The
Byronic note is strong: he will renounce  the world;  he will become a recluse at Etaples;  he will be a spectator  of life. He will trust only animals for "their  life is the  only sincere, the  only untainted  life." Two  sentences after  that  declaration, the reason for it becomes clear:  the young woman  to whom  he went so eagerly at  Christmas,  whom  he thought  he was about  to marry,  had  turned  him  away. "I did not know my world any longer! It was so changed." The  intense, driven, emotional,  young  person that  these letters reveal has a very different aspect from the stern face in a high collar that Grove even then publicly assumed.
And   then   the  letters  stopped.  There   were  no  more.  Perhaps   Grove  had already  found  a  new  confidant  in  the  Miss Wiens who  was so good  with  the swing,  and  whom  he  married  the following summer.  Certainly  he found  com­ panionship  with  the  two  teacher-students  whom  he tutored  in their  high school subjects  at  night.  As one of them  recently said, "John  and  I loved him. I  think it was love." And  he was asked back for a second year. By the time that school year began,  Grove's  correspondent,  like many other Canadians in Germany,  had been interned  in a prisoner-of-war camp, the one that included Ernest Macmillan.

* 	* 	*

FROM THE MENNONITE RESERVE







Lieber Herr Warkentin,
 Winkler, Man
7/IX/I3

Ich bin so frob, jemanden  in Dtschld zu haben der mir vielleicht behilflich sein kann, dass ich Ihnen  moglicherweise lastig fallen werde. Vielleicht wird es Ihnen zur Genugtuung gereichen dass Sieja schliesslich lhrer  Heimat helfen.
lch babe 3 weitere Btichertitel tiber die ich gem Auskrmft hli.tte:
Fitzga,  Die  Leitenden  Grundsatze  fiir  den  Elementarunterricht in  Rechnen und Geometrie  ( WienI 897)
Knilling,  Die Naturgemasse  Methode des Rechenunterrichts (Mtinchen 18gg)
Rein Pickel, Volksschulunterricht (Leipzig 188g)
Petersen, Methoden   und  Theorien   fiir  die  LOsung geometrischer  Konstruk­
tionsprobleme  (Kopenhagen 1879)
Wenn Sie noch nicht  bankrott  ("broke") sind, kaufen Sie mir doch, bitte, den Rein  Pickel; ich werde  Ihnen,  sowie ich  Nachricht  tiber den  Preis erhalte,  den Betrag schicken.
Vielen Dank im voraus
lhr
F. Grove
NB.  Wir  erregen  Aufsehen  bier  durch  die  Neuerungen,   die  ich  in  Winkler eingefiihrt  babe. Sie werden  wohl davon hOren. A.W. ist starr  und sieht trauem­ den Auges zu.

[I am so happy to have someone in Germany  who may  perhaps help me, that  I may  possibly become  a nuisance to  you. Perhaps you will count it a satisfaction that, in the long run,  you will be helping your country. I  have three more titles of books about which I very much want information:
Fitzga, Governing  Principles  for the  Teaching   of  Elementary   Arithmetic   and
Geometry (Veinna 1897)
Knilling, Teaching  Arithmetic  by the Natural Method  (Munich 1899) Rein Pickel, Elementary School Syllabus (Leipzig  1889)
Petersen, Methods   and  Theories   for  the  Solving  of  Geometric   Construction
Problems (Copenhagen 1879)
If  you're not  yet broke,  please buy  the  Rein  Pickel  for me.  I'll  send  you  the money as soon as I know the price.
Many thanks in advance.Yours, F. Grove.
N.B. We  have had great excitement  here over the innovations  that  I have begun


71

FROM THE  MENNONITE RESERVE



in  Winkler; you  will  probably  hear about  it.  A.W. is stunned  and  looks  on with sorrowful  eyes.]



Dear  Mr. Warkentin,
 Winkler, 20/X/13

Thanks  for your letter. It sounds a little homesick? Now you, too, want money! You'll have to wait till next Saturday. Did I want the 8 vols of Rein Pickel? You bet I did. So slide them along, please, as soon as I send the money.
As far  as our  innovations  go,  there  is not much  to report.  The  swing works
fine. Miss Wiens is a very good teacher,  at that  and in her room, too. The  boys
-I had  to take  them  myself. I  have given both  P.H. and  Enns a chance at it. Enns  simply  cannot  manage  them.  And  P.H.  fooled away  his time:  never got started.  Enns is glad  that  I start  it now. P.H. is mad. He thinks I am  the most interfering fellow he has ever met with.
You see, one of the worst troubles here is undue and rash promoting.  When a
kid  does a  little  good  work  for  once-swish,  up  he or she goes into  the  next grade.  Nobody really masters  the course. P.H. has not the faintest idea of teach­ ing. "Er  salbadert," as we used to say in Germany-"er seift."  [He babbles; he blathers.]  If I  stay  here  next  year, 14 years will be the  age limit  for entrance. Why,  we have  kids of I 3 in the  3rd  class! Getting  permanently  hurt  by  cram­ ming. For what  else is it? So far I have the trustees on my side. I had to fight a little. But it seems they trust  me and  believe that  I know what  I  am  doing. - Bench work will be started  this week with a class of 6. The  rest of  the  boys do raffia and reed work -basketry, in short.
I  think  I told you that  2nd  class work has started.  My teaching  day is g hrs.
long -besides  3 times a  week 2 hrs in the  evening,  (Full  matriculation) . We need 3 more students  for 2nd class, in order to get high school standing.  I wrote a  letter  to your  sister-but it seems she does not think  it worth  her  while to answer.  Quite  apart  from  the  personal affront  it is a little  disheartening to see Winkler students  go to Gretna  instead  of helping their  home cause. Unless we get the high school grant  we shall not be able to put in the laboratory. Also your brother Peter does not tum  up! Nor your brother Cornelius!
As for  the  exhibition-the govt-as always-was prompt  to  promise and
is slow to act. I have a splendid  collection of books, though. All the big American publishers  came  to the front  with exhibits of educational  literature. Personally I make  an  exhibit  of "Books that  every teacher  ought  to have" -and "a  model outfit  for  teaching  plant  biology."-For the library I have bought  a flora that costs $15.  (Britton-Brown-you may know it.)  The  Museum grows slowly but

FROM THE MENNONITE RESERVE



steadily. -Moths  and  butterflies  that  do  not  fly any longer  are  being  hatched in   a   home   made   pupa   incubator. -The aquarium  is  transformed  into   a terrarium-full of caterpillars, beetles, frogs etc.
Now for you:  what are you hearing, whom? Let me know some details, please. If I cannot  have those things myself, give me a "farbiges  Abbild"  ( "Im farbigen Abbild  haben  wir  das  Leben,"  sagt  Goethe.) 2     [We   possess life  in  a  coloured image.]   You  will probably  say:  "there  speaks old age!" -yes,  or  experience! (I wish I  could get the  "Insel-Verlag Taschen-Ausgabe  von Goethe's  Werken" in soft leather!) I wish I could get a decent critical edition of Homer's Odysseus. The  older  a man  gets the more he wants to be left alone with the  2 or 3 com­ panions  that   he  has  found  worth  while-Goethe's Westostlicher  Diwan,  the Odyssey  and   Shakespeare's   2  Richards,   Lear,  Timon   and   Midsummernight's Dream! Give me those and  a life-sentence and  I  will rest  content.  I  tell you I get  mighty  tired  fighting stupidity-Mit der  Dummheit  kampfen  Cotter  selbst vergebens- [Against  stupidity the  gods themselves  contend  in  vain.]  Well, well
-catch me complaining!
Our  friend  A.W. is my stoutest  ally-I  knew it. You know he is not  a bad fellow.  I  doubt   whether   his  influence  is  all  to  the  bad.  Seeing  those  young students  of his  now  I sometimes  wonder  whether  a  really good  normal  class - theoretical-would not dislocate their  joints, disintegrate  their self-sufficiency to such an extent that there would be nothing left except shreds and rags. Of course, the right thing to do would be to drop all the theory completely and give nothing but  the  practical  part.  But  A.W. sees that  himself, and  he really likes me. You know  I have  avoided  knocking  him-and  he  appreciates   that. Fletcher  told me that  I could not have a better advocate  than  him, and that  his recommenda­ tion had  been such that  I could command  any position that  I might  wish to get next  year. I told  him if Winkler went along I Inight wish to stay right  there so as to carry through  what I had started.
But enough for today,

Cordially
 

Fred Grove

I have  been sick-4  da  in  bad;  now  I  am  crawling  about  with  very little
"vim."




Dear Mr. Warkentin,
 Winkler, Man.
xjXI/13

Enclosed please findI 7 M. which will cover what  you paid out so far. I hope


73

FROM THE MENNONITE RESERVE



to send you the balance  for the rest of the vols on Dec. Ist so I will then have the complete work  (Rein  Pickel, I mean). I have very little time at present. We have now  5  2nd  class students,  I full matric.  I  have  bought  chem. & phys. outfit  to the  tune  of $300  out  of my pocket and  we have not yet what we need. Manual outfit  also was insufficient, and  I had  to throw in another  $35.  (Total  cost now
$I 36.65). That sounds pretty, does it not? Well, somebody has got to start things, or they will never get started.  I will write more fully soon.
Very cordially yours
F.G.
und  dennoch  hab'  ich harter  man  die Liebe  [and  yet, hardened  as I  am,  I  too have  experienced love] 3




Dear Mr. Warkentin,
 Winkler, Man.
6jXII/I3

Your  letter  amused  me  immensely-chiefly because  I  had  expected  some­ thing  of the  kind.  You  American  people are funny:   preferring  the  destructive downpour   to  the  slow,  penetrating,   fruitful  drizzle.  And  when  things  are  not done  in a hurry  you think  they are not being done at all. Those boys who seem old  to you have  it  in  them  to go far.  You live faster,  but  do  you make  faster progress? Has not good, staid, old Germany gone to the front, slowly, but surely? Who is beating  out  the  English on the South American market. Whose trade  in Canada grows double  as fast as that  of old Engld?-I  was much  interested in the  report  about  your  curriculum. Only  regret:   I  do  not see any  of the  exact
sciences nor the classical languages  represented. I am teaching  J. R. Wolkof full
matric.  now. With  our friend  P.H. it is fight, I am afraid. It looks as if the issue will soon be-he or I. Well, I am ready. I believe, when the question comes up as it is bound  to do within  a month  or so, I can at least say:  look what  I  have done!  The  fight  has sometimes  exasperated  me, sometimes galled  me,  but  my dander  is up, and  as long as I  can get living wages here  I am going to stick it out  and  to refuse better  offers of which  I  had  four since Fletcher  gave out  his interview  about   our  school-of   which  you  probably  have  heard.  The  Dept. anyway  is sitting  up.  But  I  am  bleeding. The  things  said  about  me  here are sometimes funny, sometimes they hurt  because there is a kernel of truth  in them. I cannot  afford to pay any attention  to that. I have got to win out. I am remodel­
ing the whole arrangement:

Room I Room II
 Grades I & junior II
"	sen.II, III, IV


74

FROM THE MENNONITE RESERVE


Room III	 , V, VI, VIII Room IV 	"	IX, X, XI
This  was my  last  fight.  P.H.  opposed  me  again  although  I  did  it because  he proved  incapable  of handling  the  4 grades. -The  open  war  broke out  on this ground.  Some  people  had  come to the school to see if we could  take outsiders. P.H.   caught   them  and   told  them : impossible  (enrollment   r 6o) . For  several days I did  not hear  about  it, but  when I did I went straight  up and  asked him whether  he was the  principal?  I  made it  plain  to  him that  I was running  this school, not he. That if I assigned pupils to him he had to take them,  whether  he liked  it  or  not.  I  went  after  those  people  again -poor Farmers   whose  only chance is with us. And I told the trustees that if they did not think it worth their while  to  discuss the  school  affairs  with  their  principal  instead  of  one  of  the assistants, said  principal  would  not  think  it  worth  his  while to go on  with  his work beyond  next  pay  day.  Well,  I conquered  along  the  whole line. Old  man Wiebe  stood  by me  at  last. The  assistant teachers  are  my  assistants  now,  not hidden   bosses.-I have  put  in  a  physical & chemical  equipment out   o{ my pocket  (cost close to $goo)  -a botanical outfit  (cost close to $2oo)  -manual training   (cost $rgg.6s),4   and  we are  going to have  a flag or  banner  that  will cost $68 in materials  alone -and  all that  has not cost the district one red cent.
-I believe I deserve a little credit, if  it comes to that, instead of being run down as I am, don't  you think so? Besides we have a collection of insects, mounted  by yours truly, a large  collection of weed-seeds-a nice number  of dried  plants­
a  series  of  microscopical  slides  (mounted   by  myself) -a   pond  vivarium - culture  chamber  for  bacteria-200 or more glass jars filled with  all the  farm seeds of Canada -specimens of chief manufactures in all stages of  manufactur­ ing-and  a large  collection of minerals. It  is true  that  for some of  these things
I got the co-operation  of the govt., but who got  it? Nobody ever even offered to help me  write  the  hundreds  of letters. My  postage account  foots up  to  $59  at present.-My  expressage  account   shows an  expenditure   of  $6g. -If money counts, well, I think, then these figures tell. -
But enough, it goes against my grain to give vent to my indignation.
Will you do me a big  favour? I would like to get 2  piano selections:  the one: Das Preislied aus den  Meistersingem  von Niimberg.  The other one:  "Am  stillen Herd, zur Winterszeit ... " ( Stolzing's first song) aus der selben Oper.
If you possible [sic]  can slide them  along-or if the store  can ship  C.O.D. (I not knowing the price) -you would oblige me immensely. -

75

FROM THE  MENNONITE RESERVE




Did I tell you that  I am going to get married soon?
Cordially yours
F.G.



Dear Mr. Warkentin,
 



Winkler, Man.
I0/11/14

Thanks  for your letter  which I received yesterday. I am glad  you wrote me a little more fully because I see now where the hitch is. Of course, in many things you are  dead  right.  Also, of course, I  hate  Germany.  I  hate  America,  too, but probably  a trifle less, because I am here. Excuse me for saying what  I am going to  say, but  you know,  I  am  quite  a trifle older in yrs and  maybe  still a  little older in life. I was anxious for you to get your trouble's worth out of this under­ taking. I  did  not at  all want  you to like Germany-but I did want  you to like the experience  you are going through. To every question there are so many sides, and  very few people see more than  a fraction  of their own side. I  have very little patience with narrow  mindedness.  My father  was a Swede, my mother  a Scotch­ woman,  I was raised in Germany,  I have lived in pretty nearly every country  of Europe,  in N.A. & Canada, I have travelled in Africa, through  Asia, in Australia, I  know  India   and  China  a little,  the  Islands  south  of Asia fairly  well-so  I believe-speaking merely geographically-I  can  claim a certain  "Manysided­ ness." Also as far  as "education" goes (the " " means that  I think very little of what is commonly called education) -I speak English, French, German, Italian  and  Arabian-and I  have a fair  knowledge of  Latin,  Greek, Sanskrit,  Spanish and  Swedish  with  their  respective  literatures;  I  believe I  have  imbued  myself with  the  fundamental principles  of modem Science, and  I  do not know of any corner  of  Mathematics where,  f.i., I  meet  difficulties in  reading  the  latest  and most advanced  treatises. I  have travelled  a  good deal, mentally,  too. And  what have  I  got  out  of  it?  Nothing,  except  a  certain  broadmindedness-and  an extreme   fastidiousness  in  matters   of  art,   literature   and   women   (excuse  me again!). I have one longing:  to leave the world, to retire to the little comer  just west of Etaples, south  of Boulogne, on  the  French  coast that  seems to swing in resonance with  the vibrations  of my inner  tuning fork-to live there is absolute seclusion, write a poem now and then and finish a book that I have been working on between  times for  20 yrs.-But  there is one thing  that  I  hate:   patriotism, which  for  me is synonym  with  ignorance  and  "comerdom" ( "Winkeltum" we called  it  in  Bonn). I  never  can  be  a  "citizen" -which,  after  all is merely  a translation  of "behabiger  Burger." You see, there  are things in German:  Bier,

FROM  THE MENNONITE RESERVE



Behabigkeit,  "Gemutlichkeit" ( !!!!) , that  smell like a badly aerated  room:  but do they smell worse than  baseball, than divorce scandals of married  life, than  the abominable   religious  and   moral   hypocrisy  of  America?   Take   the   "sexuelle Frage." I  believe that  your figures are correct:  they tackle with  my own experi­ ence. But!  are  you aware  that  things are  just as bad in every densely  populated  district  in  the world? The  nauseating  percentages of sexually diseased  are to be found   in  N.Y.  City,  Chicago,  New  England,  Cape  Town,   Canton,  England above all,  just as well. Germany  has (as France, too)  at least the courage to take the  bull  by the horns. Now let me make an alarming statement:  I do not object to sexual intercourse without  marriage-but I object to just those consequences.
I  also  object  to  premature  development   of  sexual  instincts.  I  have  suffered immensely  myself from  that  very cause. I  think  I  was 15 yrs old  when  I  was "seduced" by a married  woman,  the young wife of one of my old professors. If in spite of that  I have managed  to keep free of sexual infection I owe that  to my mother's  broadminded  advice and  to luck, I think  (that  first experience  resulted in a public scandal,  as the lady in question went through  a divorce suit with me
- r 6 yrs old -as the witness -) . I also believe that, since German  civilization is  essentially  a  city  civilization,  these  things  partly  account   for  the  fact  that Germany  has no aristocracy  of the  mind or of achievement.  But: what  kind of aristocracy  has  America?  They  call  it  an  aristocracy  of  achievement.   It  is  an aristocracy  of grocerdom,  of mental  hollowness, of dollar wisdom.-In  America all fortunes are self-made; in Germany  all mental achievement  is "Parvenutum." There   is only  one  real  aristocracy  left in  the  world : that  of  lamadom   in  the Thibet.   I  do not  believe that  Germany  as a  power  is declining.  It  is  just the infantile  diseases of the country  that  I loathe. I prefer downright  decay. I prefer "the  golden  hues that  herald  and  beautify decay,"  as somebody,  I  don't  know who,  expressed it.-As  for  the  men  of science in  Germany-Nietzsche said: "Sie sind die Mehlsache:  klopft sie, und heraus fliegt der Staub  der Gelehrsam­ keit."  [They are like  flour sacks;  beat  them and  out  flies the  dust  of  academe.]
I love France.
But!:  Germany  is the  one  really instructive  country  where  Americans  ought to go:  just as much in order  to learn what  to avoid:  what  they  themselves are drifting into, as what to imitate.
Yes, I am afraid,  I am  an American, always was one, sorry to say so. I could no longer live in Germany.
Superiority! But do you know  that  this ridiculous feeling of superiority  to the rest of the  world is much  more  prevalent  among  Americans  than  Germans?  I

77

FROM THE  MENNONITE RESERVE



believe  I  have  been  through   every  representative   part   of  America  with  the exception  of  the  extreme  Northwest  of  Canada,   and  everywhere  I  found  the closed  mind:   "We   are  leading  the  world  in  everything:   we  have  nothing  to learn." As far as making the best of this poor job that we call life is concerned, I think  we ought  to  try  what  works out  best-not  hastily or  rashly but  observ­ antly;  in any case we must  give things a trial. Now take  Winkler-quite true, the  people are  slow to  move, but so am I. Only  I come with  many  things that have been tried out. I tell them you have a bunch of "bad boys" here that are not bad. They  are being treated  wrong. Why is it that  I can do anything  with Willy Neufeld,  with  Jake  Loewen?  Even  make  them  work?  But  the people here con­ demn  me-not because they know anything about my work -nobody has even been in school! But because they see me introducing a few innovations -slowly
-carefully-and  because they are pent up in their own ideals -because they listen  to the  talk  of a  disgruntled  man  who  belongs to them  and  whom I have shaken  up from  a  10 years' sleep. They do not see that  we have 20 pupils more than  ever  before;  they  do  not  see that  by working  night  and  day  I  give the reserve a  chance  to  raise the  standard  of their  teachers.  Counting  everything I shall send  more than  go candidates  into grd and  2nd class examinations.  And I should  not  even  mention  it  if  people would  only leave  me  alone.  In  a way I should like to stay here at least another  year. I am open for a proposition:  but it seems I am not even going to get the chance-judging from what a few adherents tell me. Of course, I do not care. I know I have done what a man could do-I have even waited  till the holidays before I lay down to get rid of the fever I had contracted. Even  now  I still keep working for the  High  School standing  which is practically  assured  to  Winkler  for  next year. -But that,  too, is American,  I mean the way I'm  treated  here. -
Now just a word about  Science and the slow German  mind. Yes, Germans are slow -yes,  as individuals  Germans  are thoroughly  despicable. But even if they do  work  slowly -they   keep  at  it.  The  instances  you  quote   have  made  me impatient  thousands  of times. But on the other hand, are they not trifles? Let me say this:  I  am  for  education for  education's  sake. I also am for  knowledge for knowledge's sake. In  the  whole of life I  do  not see any sense. If I  want  to be truthful  I  must say that  in our  individual effort I see only a struggle to get over it in the best possible way. I stand  apart,  aloft, if you want  to put it that  way. It is a horrible thought  to me that  I am acting, "doing," at all. Whenever you touch life you make a mess of it. When you are young you don't  notice it so much. My love for dogs, pups and  all kinds of animals rests in the firm conviction that their

FROM THE MENNONITE RESERVE



life is the  only sincere, the only untainted  life. On  the other  extreme  stands  the contemplative  life-the life of the spectator  who wants to know, not to do. That is my only salvation.  (As for my marriage,  that  has gone to smash:  something  I have been  working for for the last five years. I don't  blame the girl-I  merely don't   understand   her.  Difference  in  age  was  considerable:  she  was  my  pupil before she went  to college. At  Christmas  I  went  down  to Arkansas-into  the hospital!!  And when  I  came out,  after  a week of  raving fever, I did  not know my world any longer!  It  was so changed. Well, enough of that!)  So naturally I value even one tiny little bit of found knowledge immensely much  more than  all the  deeds  ever  done.  You say:   "If we had  waited  for  German   philosophy  to decide ... where would we be?" But where are we!?! Is life one trifling little bit less raw,  less cruel  to-day  than  it  was  IO,ooo yrs ago?  Only  the  robust  thick skinned  people ever could endure  active life:  the rest of them  went  to the wall or into  the  wilderness. I  am of the latter.  I do not see that  we have  come any nearer  to  the  solution  of  essential  problems.  Even  Science  never  explains:   it describes;  describes more  and  more  minutely-and I enjoy  the spectacle.  Let the slow, careful  German  laborers  of the mind  work for me, and  let the  whole city of Leipzig go  to smash,  let  traffic be stopped  and  the  fire department  lift trolley cars!!
By the way, you misunderstand  the Germans  there. Again the  dense popula­
tion accounts for it. Why should any body dirty his gloves to drag  a horse out of the way when there are people specially appointed  to do that?  It is none of their business!! Here, where men are scarce, everybody does everything. I should have bought a horse this fall if I could afford as in Germany  to hire a man  to keep it in tiptop  condition  and  appearance, but I do not care to curry it myself, or even to draw  a strap  tighter  when that  is needed. It would be different if I thought  it my business to teach  how to saddle  a horse. I promised to run this school, and so I  do  it: do  it to  the  best of my knowledge and  ability. But  do  I  like it?  I believe if  I  really wanted  to stay  I  could  pull  that  off, too-but  is it  worth while? I don't  think so, not for myself. Fletcher says: "you  must  stay there  and finish what  you have begun."  But why "must" I? I spent the greater  part  of my salary  on  this school -that  puts  me  back one  year. Instead  of  being  through
I 9I 8 I shall  have to work on tillI 9I 9 before I can  retire:  but  I  believe there ought  to  be a school somewhere  that  suits me. Selkirk has been offered  to me. One school in Sask., one in B.C. In each case they are willing to let me pick my assistants-so why  should  I  fight  for  this  position?  And  yet  I'd  stay  if  they wanted me to -because I like to be of help -but they don't.

79

FROM THE  MENNONITE RESERVE



Well, I believe I have wearied you enough!
Yours cordially
F.G.
NB. -The  Meistersinger  selections will be  heartily  welcomed. Thanks  ever so much. Give me a chance to "revenge" myself, will you?


NOTES

1 In the  summer of  1970,  the  late  Mr.  I. J. Warkentin showed  me  these letters  and gave  me  his permission to  publish  them.  He  then  generously  donated them  to  the Grove   Collection  at  the  University of  Manitoba.  Subsequently, the  Grove  estate also gave me permission to publish  them.
2   Grove  here misquotes Goethe's line:
"Am farbigen Abglanz haben wir das Leben."
3 Grove did not finish the line:
"und dennoch hab'  ich harter man die Liebe auch  gespiirt."
4  The discrepancy is Grove's, between  this sum and  the $rg6.65 of the previous  letter.

































8o


review articles





GEORGE JOHNSTON


D.C. Jones



GEORGE  JOHNSTON, Happy Enough:  Poems 1935-1972. Oxford  University  Press.


TRYING  TO GET  a  quick   line on  George  Johnston's poetry,  I once said it lies somewhere  between  John  Betjeman and  John  Berryman. One  could  also mention    Auden    and   Eliot   and   Edgar Lear.   The   title   poem   of  the   collected volume   Happy   Enough:   Poems   1935-
1972  sounds   a  bit  like  Robert  Greeley.
But this kind of bench  mark  is not very helpful.  It makes most sense to look at Johnston's work within  a Canadian  con­ text.
One   thing   that   Johnston shares   with
most  of the  poets mentioned is his ironic stance,  toward  the world  around him and toward  himself.
Once,  when  my  voice  gave  out  at  an
academic  conference,  George   Johnston was  kind  enough   to  read   my  paper   for me. The  paper  was partly  about Souster's pedestrian muse,  his deliberate adoption of a figure more like Snow's  Walking Woman   than   like  Milton's Urania,  and his chosen persona or role as an eiron. Johnston is an eiron too.
The  self-effacing  eiron   can  be  irritat­
ing,  indeed   insufferable. He   has  a  ten­
dency  never  to  stick  his  neck  out  so he
 can  be hit,  never  to climb  high enough to fall, to be forever superior because  he can say, we honest  worms  will be around long after  you blow-hards are  dead  and  gone. Like  Socrates,   he  only   knows  that   you know nothing. Like Souster,  he knows nothing, except  what  is normal, natural, good and  right.
This  strikes  me  as  a  typical  Canadian
posture,  all the more  irritating if you recognize  yourself  in  it.  And  it  occurs  to me   that    Canadians  typically   play   the eiron to  the  American alazon,  the  loud­ mouth   know-it-all  or  big  shot.  As  Frye suggests, they are  basic  roles in  the struc­ ture of much  comedy.
Irving  Layton  makes  a dramatic entry on the Canadian scene as an  alazon. (His friend  Neitzsche  had  no use for Christian meekness  or  for  Socratic irony.)   Layton is always sticking  out  his neck, and  other things,  and   daring you  to  do  something about   it.  He   adopts   heroic   and   melo­ dramatic postures.  Irving  Layton's  "The Bull Calf' and  George Johnston's "Happy Enough"  centre  on   roughly   the   same event,   the   killing   of   a   bull   or   heifer. Where    Layton    ends   melodramatically,

81

REVIEW ARTICLES



identifying with  the calf, weeping  and thinking of Richard II, Johnston ends identifying with  the  farmer and  his toothache, saying:

Get  it fixed Fred  it
hurts just  knowing how  it hurts.

Both Johnston and Souster  eschew the heroic  pose, adopt the  persona of the ordinary man,  modest,  domestic  and suburban, with memories  and  occasional glimpses  of the  rural  countryside. This  is especially  true  of Johnston for  whom  the great  events  of life, like  war,  are  said  to lie on the periphery.

Around the  battlements go by Soldier men  against the  sky, Violent lovers,  husbands, sons,
Guarding my peaceful life with  guns.

My  pleasures, how  discreet they  are! A little booze, a little car,
Two little children and  a wife
Living a small  suburban life.

The   people  in  Souster's world  also  lead small, ordinary lives, but  they are  by con­ trast  often  more  violent.
Johnston's sense  of  the  eiron's role  is quite  different from  Souster's, in style as well as in substance. A Souster  reading is less than  a performance, more  like a man deciphering an  item  in the newspaper for the benefit of his wife. There is something there  on  the  page  in  black  and  white,  a fact   that   is  presumably  not   to  be  dis­ turbed by  style. Johnston is a  man  who reads  poems through glasses with  no glass in  them   from  a  book  with  blank  pages. He insists that  it is a performance, poetry not  reporting, a  game  with  formal  con­ ventions.  Like  Sadie  McGonigle's daugh­ ter, a poem  is "in  a state  of art  from  head to foot."  Souster  likes to give the  illusion that   his  poems  are  in  a  state  of  nature. He  avoids  obviously  poetic  diction, syn-
 tactical   inversions,  certain  kinds  of  wit, and  rhyme. Johnston indulges them freely.

The grasshopper does  not  so free The silly summertime dispense As Mr.  Murple in a tree
Playing upon  wind  instruments.

Though  there   is  less fantasy in  these lines from  Johnston's "Pastorale" than  in Souster's  "Flight of  the  Roller  Coaster," Johnston is more obviously  literary. Beside Souster,   he   may   appear   academic  or simply   frivolous.   Certainly  he   is  often having   more  fun,   and   is  often   funnier. But this is deliberate and  serious. We may hear  echoes  of  the  seventeenth century, of Herrick  or  Cowley  or of a later  mode of  mock-heroic  poetry   that   adjusts   the epic  and   the  mythical  to  the  banal  and domestic.  But says Johnston, let us recog­ nize  the  fact  that   that   is  just  what hap­  pens in life, which  is no less conventional than  literature. So we have Mrs. Belaney, unfastened and  happy  and slightly drunk.

Queens, queens, they  smile and go, Their loves and  deaths are  sad;
Duchesses now and  again stoop low; Mrs.  Belaney  is bad.

Win  a little,  lose a little.  Mrs.  Belaney is  not  heroic;  neither is  her  fate  tragic. But  for  that   very  reason   she  is  caught and  defined  in  terms  of everyday  moral­ ity.  She   is  happy,  and   bad.   (The  dis­ crimination might  escape Layton.) Little­ ness diminishes  both  the  horror and  the glory, as Mrs. McGonigle suggests to the young  woman  who  might  find  marriage demeaning, frustrating, quite  disillusion­  ing:

Don't be nervous, Mary Anne!
Don't be nervous, dear! Carry a little  water can
To catch  the  quiet tear.

REVIEW ARTICLES


Johnston is something of a humorist for whom  the little  is his chosen field, but for whom   a  right   sense  of  decorum  allows you  to see the  big in  the  little  and, more striking, perhaps, the ironic shifts in value or  in  the  conventions  that   apply   when you shift  from  the relatively big to the relatively small, or vice versa -a kind of quantum theory  of morality.
In  his best poems, Johnston anchors his perspective firmly and  precisely in the quotidian, but  gradually makes  us aware of the whole  range  of the imagination, of life itself, shading off from  that  precise centre.  For example,  "Eating Fish"  begins neatly  in  the  home  or  in  the  Travellers' Hotel:

Here  is how I eat a fish
-Boiled, baked or fried­ Separate him in a dish,
Put  his bones aside.

But  the "ancient fishy smell permeating man"  leads   to   a   much    broader   per­ spective.

May he be a cannier  chap
Altered  into  me,
Eye the squirming hook, and  trap,
Choose the squirming  sea.

The ironic distancing is achieved through a nice play of ambiguity, the slightly  mannered use of everyday  words and  images,  the  sudden  shift  in  meaning of  the  language or  imagery   that   reveals at least  two perspectives  at work. "Elaine in   a   Bikini"   begins   very   close   to   the vulgar.

Mrs. McGonigle's boys enjoy the sun
By gogglesful, and stare  along the beach
Whose innocence is almost all Elaine,
Almost, but not quite, all.

Felicitously  she comes in every eye Bending  her knees and  tender  finger nails While the incalculable strings gather in
What's hers to gather in.

REVIEW ARTICLES



There is the  fun  of "gogglesful" with  its suggestion of "ogle" and  its echo of "McGonigle." There is the surprise bend­ ing of "tender fingernails" which suggests affectation,  a   calculated  grace,  or   art.  There  is  a   whole   series  of   ambiguous suggestions  in  "innocence",  the innocent natural  world,  the  not  so  innocent flesh, the   beach   innocent  of   all   but   Elaine,  innocent of all  but  her  bikini,  the  incal­  culable  strings.
Elaine's world  is  closer  to  Hollywood
than  Olympus. The narrator is no  Paris, any   more   than   Mrs.   McGonigle's  boys are  the elders on  the  wall of Troy; yet in her  effect  on  them,  and   more  especially on  the  old  sea  that   "fumbles about   the naked afternoon as though in paradise", Elaine may take  on  just the faintest trace of  Helen. And  the  larger   aura grows  in the last verse, as the incalculable strings multiply and  become  the  various  strings of  morality  and   desire,   youth   and   age, Eros and  Thanatos.

I am  felicitous too on  the  bright shore Waiting for darkness with  the  roving boys And  all  but  gathered in myself  with  strings,
What's mine  to gather in.

All  these  poems  except   the  first  come from  The  Cruising  Auk,  which  makes up the third and last section of the collected Happy  Enough:  Poems  1935-1972. Now The  Cruising Auk was published in I959, but   if  we  look  at   the   poems  from   the point   of  view  of  1935,  when   Canadian poetry was still dominated by Roberts, Carman, Lampman and  Scott,  we may be struck   by  one   thing:  they   are   poems about  the city and  the  people  who live in the city. More  particularly, we might suggest,  it  is Lampman's city  of Ottawa. With  the exception of the quite  different poet,  Klein,   no  one  has  cultivated  such a   particular  urban  world    to   such   an
 extent   as   have   Johnston  and   Souster. Unlike  Souster,  and  again  with  the  pos­ sible exception of Klein,  unlike  any other  poet of that  generation, to say nothing of Lampman, Johnston   cultivates   the  city with   affection.  In   this   perspective,  the very title of one of  the first poems in The  Cruising  Auk  is  startling, "Love   of  the City."  We read:

After  a week of wandering through the world
Eating wherever we could, sleeping, washing ourselves
Wherever we could, in bars  and  railway rooms,
We came  to this  great city.  Nothing
Will  persuade us ever  to leave  it again.

It is not,  as for  Lampman, a beautiful facade,  within  which  you find  frustration and  violence;  nor,  as for  Souster,  a  cage or  trap.  Johnston's city  appears humane, despite  the irony  that  it is regarded from the  point  of view  of death, and  perhaps because it is so viewed.

And  truly  when  death comes  where  will he find
A better room  than here,  better arrangements,
More  courtesy, more  eager  friendliness Than in this excellent street-scattered city, This home,  this  network, this great roof of
pity?

Johnston is almost  alone  in  providing us with  an image  of the city as a humane community. He  has managed to do so by virtue  of  his own  humane acceptance of the ordinary, in  himself and  in the world around him,  by virtue  of his ironic  view of  life  as  a  rather  poignant comedy,  his nice  sense of  the  working  of convention, and his capacity to invent  an almost Dickensian cast  of characters who reflect a  very  Canadian  middle   class  world,   a world of English, Irish, Scotch and very occasionally French origin:  Mr.  Murple, Mrs.    Belaney,    Mrs.    McGonigle,  Mrs.

REVIEW ARTICLES



McWhirter and   Mrs.  Beleek,  Miss  Des­ charmes, Sadie  and  Edward and Andrew  and  Elaine. As becomes especially evident  in the longer  "Love  in High Places" from Home    Free,   dealing  with    Sadie   Mc­ Gonigle's son  Stan,  his  career   in  public life  and   his  discovery  of  his  girl  friend Gert,  these  characters  reflect  particularly the  world  of  Ottawa -Lampman's Ot­  tawa.  They   do  for  Ottawa what   poems like  Klein's  "Monsieur  Gaston" do  for Montreal,   and  even   more   thoroughly. They  fill a  very  real  lacuna in  the  imag­ inative   landscape  of   Canadian   poetry. Johnston articulates  something that existed.   It was   not   a  big  world   nor  a strong   world.   And   when   we  move  into the  second   generation and   explore   that world  in detail  in "Love in High  Places", its confusion  and  drabness, its mediocrity and  sham-its lack of any  real  vision or necessity-makes it simply sad.
Yet it was not  just a sentimental world. While  small  and  stable,  it had  something of  the  edge  and  brilliance of  its  charac­ ters.

Mrs.  Beleek,  an  aunt of ours,
Lifts  her  behind among her  flowers
Putting ingenious stuff  around
To  baffie bugs  and  coax  the  ground.

Mrs.  Beleek, so simply  and  aptly  limned, spends  her  time  thinking of  how  nice it would  be  to  bump  off  the  local  children in  the  same  way  as  she  does  the  bugs. Poor   Edward,  who   owed   the   narrator twenty  dollars,   takes  his  troubles  to  the bottom  of  the  river.  The child  Cathleen rages  like  hell,  no   matter  how   helpful others   may  be.  And   then   there   are  the friends,  friends galore,  who smile and  will not leave  one alone,  who  "smile  to death the  prosperous air," and   who  leave  be­ hind   a  "sulphur  kind   of  smell."  That
 whole  little  world  is gathered up  like the speaker  in "In It":

The world  is a boat  and  I'm in  it Going like hell with  the  breeze; Important people  are  in its as well
Going with  me and  the  breeze  like hell-

The  larger  world is full of unweening confidence  as it sweeps  the  speaker (and his little  world)   into  the  future. But  the last  verse  shows  us  that   the  speaker has a different view of both.

The world  is a pond  and  I'm in it, In  it  up  to my neck;
Important people  are  in it too,
It's deeper than  this,  if we only  knew; Under we go any  minute-
A swirl, some  bubbles, a fleck.

The   world   of   Mrs.   McGonigle and Mrs.  Beleek suffers  the  same  fate.  It was not  strong   enough  to  sustain   itself,   to sustain   George  Johnston. Or  should   we say  that  Johnston simply  does  not  have the  heart   to  sustain   the  fine  irony   that held  it  together. As we move  into  Horne Free and  Happy  Enough, the ironic bril­ liance  fades,  the characters become  more marginal  or  fragmentary,  their  stylized world  begins  to disintegrate. It gives way before  direct   satirical  comments  on  Ot­ tawa  or a Royal Commission or Remem­ brance  Day; before  more  straightforward occasional,  descriptive and  elegiac  poems about  actual  friends  and   acquaintances. It  dissolves in  the  dark  that  was an  ever present  element   in  the  first  volume   but that  grows deeper  and,  perhaps, more intimate,  as  in   the   very   first   poem   of Happy   Enough. Here   this   is  no  sharp irony, but an attractive simplicity.

Everyone gone  away feasting but  Nora, Mark and  me. Neither do we
stay  put.  It is getting dark ...

There is an orange  moon  and  bits of fields

ss

REVIEW ARTICLES



somewhere in the  haze;  the children race ahead:

gleeful, inky leapers
in the warm gloom;  I strain
to glimpse their  dark  capers
by the dusk of the moon.

As the  urban world  fades  it  is  Lamp­ man's world  that  emerges  more and  more strongly,  that  of Fred's farm, Fred's apple  wine  or Farmer Elliott's bees, that  of the rocky  coast  or  islands  in  the  sea.  Once  again,  it  is in  the  natural world  that  the writer  finds some kind of enduring reality, the   "ongoing,"   the   elemental. It  is  in life's  commerce  with  the  earth, as in the case of Elliot's bees. The bee lives four  to six weeks;  the  honey  gathers; and  earth:

Earth gathers  in again  her sweet And wax from its decaying feet And  takes its poison from its sting, Its secret, sweetest offering
And her most intimate of powers, The  distillation of her flowers Which  it in death gives back to her
With  its dead  bones and  wings and fur.

It is the natural and  not the conventional world that Johnston is drawn to,  that increasingly claims  him, as in "The Crea­ ture's  Claim":

I brood over the creatureliness of Earth
This gibbous night, fifty years from my
birth,
And feel her claim, not on my yielded life
But on my heart,  cut out with a stone knife.

The   bird  in  The   Cruising  Auk  was  a rather far-fetched or  bizarre  symbol  of a freer,  larger,   more  imaginative life,  that both  mocks and  consoles the earth-bound Mr.   Murple  and   the   speaker.  In   the parallel poem from the second volume, "Music in the  Air,"  the  auk  gives way to the  more  familiar duck,  whose  quack  in the  night   is  more  direct   and   more  dis­ turbing in its impact.

86
 She makes the sky her pond and drowns the  street
And drowns me too, homing  on fishy feet
To  where my doorway sucks its scaly mouth:
Heaven  is north,  and my drowned  home is south,
And here my caverned  coal fire covets me
Of the duck's  night.

Finally,   Johnston  does   not   want   the city,  its  friendly  rooms,  its  great   roof  of pity,  its  modest  life  drowned in  conven­ tions.  Finally,  like Lampman or  Scott,  it is  wilderness   he  wants;  like   Layton  or Newlove  he  would  lie  down  with  earth.
Heaven   in  north. In  "Pied   a Terre" he
rejects  the  great   urban   hotel,   the  com­ pany    of   men,    the   fastidiousness   and  sweetness   of    women,   its   comfort,   its security,   its  delight   and   its  art.   He  has another address:

An island with a cave, burnt-out fires and bones;
No-one can get at me there, it is my own, No-one lets it to me, I just own it,
And I can be cruel as nature  there,  and alone.

Johnston's later  poems do  not,  I think, constitute as striking  or  as original an achievement  as  those   in  The   Cruising Auk.   But   their   direction  is  reassuring, both   to  the  reader   of  Canadian  poetry and,  I think,  to Johnston himself,  in that they bring  us back  to a kind of true  north in  Canadian  poetry   and   Canadian   ex­ perience,  to something that  doesn't  have  to   be  maintained  by  a  delicate   ironic  balancing  act,   to   something   elemental and  indeed  fierce.
In   their   diction,  rhythm  and   overall tone,  I find such  relatively  simple  poems as "Outdoors" and  "Happy  Enough" as satisfying as any George Johnston has produced. And  a  brief  poem  like "Octo­ ber"  may  not  be of any great  note,  but  it

REVIEW ARTICLES



connects  with   the   world   of  Lampman and   I suspect  with  something authentic and  ultimate in Canadian life.

Day  falters and  the fields lie reconciled. October. The old  man  goes and  sits

in  the  sun
under his maple
 and  feels the splendour on  him.

His way into  the dark of dirt and  stone:
through the  blazing season.

It is here,  in  this  season,  from  this  point of vision, that  George  Johnston may feel, not only happy  enough, but  happy.




COMMONWEALTH CRITICS
 


W.H.New


M.   c. BRADBROOK, Literature in  Action.  Chatto and   Windus.  £2.50. K. R.   s. IYENGAR, Two  Cheers  for the  Commonweatlh. Asia.   £2.75.
ANNA  RUTHERFORD,   ed.,   Commonwealth. Akademisk Boghandel   (Aarhus). 23.50
kroner.
ROWLAND SMITH,  Lyric  and  Polemic:  the  Literary  Personality  of  Roy  Campbell.
McGill-Queens. $9.50.
PATRICIA  MORLEY,  The   Mystery   of Unity: theme  and  technique  in  the  novels  of
Patrick  White. McGill-Queens. $9.50.
BARRY  ARGYLE,   An   Introduction  to   the   Australian   Novel    1830-1930.  Oxford.
£4.00.
WILLIAM WALSH,   Commonwealth Literature. Oxford.


CANADIAN LITERATURE has been  fortunate in its Commonwealth contacts. Writers   with   the  eye  and   the talent   of Birney,  Godfrey,  Laurence  and Page have all made  metaphor and  vital landscape out of experiences in Asia, Australia,  Africa,    and    the   Caribbean. From  the  Commonwealth, too,  come writers like Austin Clarke and Michael Ondaatje, and  more recently  Lawrence Bantleman and  Rienzi  Crusz,  whose  ex­ perience  of  Canada  in  the  contexts  of their  homeland throws  both  cultures into new   perspectives.   Comparative  critical  overviews  of  Commonwealth literatures, by contrast,  have  frequently served  liter­  ature less  well.  Muriel   Bradbrook's  Lit­ erature  in  Action, for  example, a  travel­ ogue  masquerading as criticism,  does real disservice  to the writer's established repu-
 
tation. A  series  of  essays  purporting,  in part, to isolate the ways in which various literatures express  the  character of active societies,   it   is  so  littered  with   factual errors  that  even  its  sweeping  generaliza­ tions  will not  tidy  it.  Some  indication of the  book's depth  of analysis and  the logic of its  argument can  be  gauged from  the following  (the  only)  paragraph on Sheila  Watson:
As  the  interior  journey  becomes of  greater significance, so  the   younger  generation  be­ gins   to   revolt   against  creeds and   narrow tradition.   In  The   Double    Hook    ( 1959) which   is  set   in   the   Rockies, the   tale   has become   more   complex and   symbolic. The evil,  dominating  mother  is  murdered at the  beginning  of  the   story.  The wild   spirit of the   hills  hovers   over  the  community-the Coyote, whose  presence  is evoked for  revolt. A  poet   has  said "It's  only   by  our   lack   of ghosts    we're    haunted"-but 	there   are ghosts   in  plenty   here.

REVIEW ARTICLES



So  too with  Margaret Laurence's A Jest  of God which satirizes small town life in the prairies.

Comparable observations in  the  chapters on   Australian  and   New   Zealand   liter­ atures  are  easy to find.
To   put   them  in  perspective, one  can
turn  back  to the cross-grained but  always provocative essays of an  earlier book like William  Walsh's  A   Manifold  Voice ( Chatto and   Wind us,  I970). Though it is limited   by its  narrow subject and  the consistency   of  its  approach-Canada's linguistic  dexterity is represented only  by Morley   Callaghan's  work,   for  example, and   Professor   Walsh's   analysis   shifts  all too  uncertainly from   praise   to  ambival­ ence -the  book  has  the  virtue  at  least of  a  point-of-view,  and  it  demonstrates wider    reading  among   Commonwealth literature than  does  Miss  Bradbrook's. If it  limits  its subject  in  order to  pursue  its thesis,  it  acknowledges   to  some   degree the  range  of  literature from   which   the specific  examples are  drawn. Miss  Brad­  brook's   book  purports  to  introduce  the literatures, to establish  contexts for Mac­ Lennan	and 	Lowry,	Mansfield	and Frame, Hope  and  White, and  for  all  its sense   of   personal   discovery,    it   simply fails  to do  so.
Much   more    useful    are    the    several
essays on  Indian, African, and  Common­ wealth   topics  in  K.  R.  Srinivasa  Iyen­  gar's    Two  Cheers   for    the    Common­ wealth; if they generalize, they also range widely,  refer  extensively  to  specific  texts, and  quote  soundly  to support the  points of  view  being  argued. Ideas  such  as  na­ tional   identity,  the   differences  between "old"  and   "new"  Commonwealth, and variations in  theme  across  the  Common­ wealth  all  receive  attention. The literary

88
 relations    between    French  and    English Canada are  seen in  the  context  of  multi­ lingual    problems    in    other    Common­ wealth   societies,   for   example;  the   ex­ ternal   perspective  ought   usefully   to  re­ mind   us,  without  altering the  local  sig­ nificance  of local experience, of the scale of  the   Canadian   problem    and   of   the world-intellectual, emotional, "univer­ sal" -to which  Canadian literature  in­ evitably  relates.
Symposia  provide  another route  to  ap­ preciating   those    relationships.    Earlier transcripts   of    conferences,   like    John Press's   Commonwealth   Literature    and  Kenneth   Goodwin's   National  Identity, continue to be useful,  that  is, and  recent  special  issues of  Novel  and  The Literary Half-Yearly indicate  the  developing in­ ternational interest  in  English   literature written   outside   the  U.S.  and   the  U.K. Anna    Rutherford's    Commonwealth,  a collection  of papers  delivered  at  a Com­  monwealth  literature conference in  Den­  mark  in I 97 I, testifies even  to an  increas­  ing  European interest   in  the  study.  Sev­ eral universities in Denmark, Norway, Sweden,  Belgium,  France, and  Germany now  offer  courses  in  Commonwealth  lit­ eratures,  and   the   high   quality  of   the critical    writings   of   V.   Dupont,   Rena Maes-Jelinek, Paul   Goetsch,   and   Miss Rutherford herself,  among  others,  prom­  ises  a  challenging  model   for   Canadian critics:   a  combination  of   warm  literary sensitivity   with  intelligent  objectivity,  a sense   of   the   comparative   that    makes studies  in  comparative literature, at  their best,   so  informatively   engaging. Cana­ dian  writers  to be  discussed  in  these sev­ eral   publications   (by  Canadian  as  well as  by  European   and   American  critics) include   Lowry,  Richler, Laurence, Avi­ son, and  Pratt.

REVIEW ARTICLES



To  provide brief introductory essays on most  major living  Commonwealth,  Eng­ lish, and  American writers  (together with brief    biographical  and    bibliographical notes   and,   on   occasion,   credos   by  the writers   themselves),   another  admirably useful   series   has   been    launched,  dis­ tributed  by  St.  James   Press  in  London  and   St.   Martin's   Press   in   New   York. Two   of   a   proposed   three   massive   vol­ umes are now available-Contemporary Poets  of the  English   Language   (already under  revision  to  expand  the  coverage)  and  Contemporary Novelists   (released  at the end  of 1972). Contemporary Drama­ tists  is promised  for  release  in  1974·
Canadian  critics   have   contributed  to
this  process  of  international literary  ex­ ploration. Three  recent   books,   ranging widely  in  approach and   subject,  are  all substantial  discussions   of   literary   texts and   problems.    Rowland   Smith's  Lyric and  Polemic,  the  first  extended account of  Roy  Campbell's  work  and  a  welcome attempt   to   gauge   its   quality,   pierces through  the  charges  of  "colonial  men­ tality"    and    "fascist"  that    have    hung around  Campbell's name  in  recent  years in  order  to  establish   the  genuine  merits and limitations of  his  verse.  Particularly good   on  Campbell's  early   work,  estab­ lishing  a  context   for  the  V oorslag  jour­ nalism and  the satires of Georgian poetry, Dr.  Smith   locates   the  manifestations of Campbell's defensive  attitudes, traces  the intellectual  relationships between  his  po­ litical  stands  and  his  religious  affiliation,  and  explores  the  ways in  which  his liter­ ary   imitations  succeed    and    fail.   The lyrics, empowered   by  the  dynamism  of his   own   personality,  acquire  a   life  of their  own,  full  of strong  images  and  im­ aginative  lines;   the   polemics,   no   more doctrinaire   than    those    of    Auden    or
 Spender (though opposed  in sentiment), more  frequently founder in  dogma.
The  moments of passionate intensity which  mark  him at  his best, and  the free­ wheeling    narrative   bursts    which    first earned   him   his  name,   used   to   inspire  Canadian critics  to liken  Campbell  to E.
J. Pratt, but  there  is little  in  Dr.  Smith's
book  to support such  a comparison. The greater likeness is perhaps with  Robert Service,  to whom  Campbell wrote  in  an early  unpublished poem:

I have   roved   the  hush   of  the  soundless snows
In  the  spell  of  thy  magic lines;
I have  heard the  rune of  the  lonely  loon
And   the  moan   of  the  arctic pines.... Oh! it's  there I would   have  you  cast  me
loose
And   give   me  my  ancient gun.... There in  the  silence   undefiled
Let  me  fight   to  the  bitter end,
Grip to  grip  with the  naked Wild,
'The Wild  that would  crush and  rend.'

Campbell's mature allegiance was soon transferred from  the  Arctic  to the  Medi­ terranean  sun,   but   Service's   poetry   at­  tracted   him  by its  energy  and  its  down­ to-earth  romance. In  such  a  guise  lyric sensitivity   became  "masculine" and   ac­ ceptable. That  it  was  apparently  neces­ sary  to  assume  stances  in  order   to  make it so describes  part  of the  personality Dr. Smith  attempts  to  elucidate. It  is not  a biography he writes,  however; in  unfash­ ionably   probing the  effects  upon  poetry  of   the   personality that   made    it,   Dr.  Smith  blends  a measured  response  to the poetic  texts  with  a  concern for  the  bio­ graphical  credibility  of  criticism. In  ac­ knowledging the distinction, he finds an openness  of approach that  take  us closer to the poetry of a puzzling literary phenomenon.
By   contrast, Patricia Morley's The
Mystery   of Unity: theme and  technique

8g

REVIEW ARTICLES



in the novels of Patrick White focusses almost   exclusively   on   recurrent   images and  fictional  motifs.  Her  aim  is to  dem­ onstrate the  Jungian unity  of life  (com­ edy  and   tragedy,   ridicule and   compas­ sion, inseparably bound)  which  the  Aus­ tralian novelist  Patrick White  tries  vali­ antly  to unfold. The result, if  not so satis­ fying  as  Dr.  Smith's  book,  is  a  tough­  minded   and  enthusiastic  study,  and  one of  the  first  attempts  to  see  in  any  ex­ tended    way   the   growth   and    singular character   of    Patrick   White's   literary world.  It  reads,  to begin  with,  altogether too much  like an  undigested dissertation; the  resumes of  European mysticism  and  the  elucidation of Northrop Frye's  critic­  al   terminology labour their  points,  for example, and   the  cross-comparisons to writers   like  Lowry,   Dostoyevsky,  Faulk­ ner,  Melville,  Dante, Joyce,  and  Schrein­ er,   which    ought  either    to   illuminate White  or be pursued  for  their own merits, are  left  instead   like  dropped  clues  to  a mystery   yet  unsolved. The  book  is  also hampered  by  the  feeling   of   repetitious­ ness  that   its  method   arouses.  Working  with  literary patterns, Dr.  Morley  moves us again  and  again  over  the  same  works of  fiction  instead   of  stepping vigorously from   to  another,   and   the   sense  of  lit­ erary   density   she   hopes   to  enlighten  is somewhat overshadowed by her own crit­  ical style. These  cavils aside,  many  of her observations  about    particular   passages, and her overall theory about White's affiliation  with  mystic  thought, show fine insights  into  White's ideas  and  a sensitive appreciation of the idiosyncrasies of his prose  style.  White himself,  moreover, comes off as a more compassionate and complex   writer   than   Campbell, and   no less intricate a  personality.
What  one  loses  a  little,   reading Dr.

go
 Morley's book, is sight  of  Patrick-White­ the-Australian-writer. There are compen­ sations,  of  course.  But  it  is  the  task  of isolating   certain   features of  Australian­ ness in fiction  that  Barry  Argyle  (himself the   author  of   a   sprightly  and    useful monograph  on   White)  has  set  himself in   An   Introduction    to   the   Australian Novel  r83o-1930.  The result   is  a  well­ written,  well-documented study   (despite an unsatisfactory bibliography) of ten representative early  Australian novels.  It is also one of the finest critical books on Australian  writing   to  appear  in  a  long time. In  lively, scholarly  fashion, Dr. Ar­ gyle argues  that   the  main  influences  on Australian fiction  were  Scott  and  Byron; that  the "pattern for  adventure", the  ro­ mantic   scenery,  and  the  "typical heroes, who  admitted  no  social  allegiance", de­ rived   directly   from   those   English   and  Scots   sources;  and   that   the   "Byronic" heroes  become contemporary "outsiders", epitomizing    Australia's   celebration   of joyless  exile,   when   in   confirming  their freedom   from  conventions  they  concur­ rently  establish  their  "heroism" and  un­ derline their  "despair". The  "habit of thinking like  a  free  man" which   besets the existentially bound  individual thus cages  him  even  more.  Such  a  transform­ ation,   Dr.   Argyle   writes,   occupied  the pages  of   nineteenth   century  Australian fiction,   and   in  it  one  can  find   the   ra­  tionale     which     informs     contemporary Australian writing. The  theory  is skilfully and  persuasively  argued.
Moreover,  the  glimpse   it  provides   of social  pressures  on  literature in  Australia also implicitly  informs  the  way  in  which other   literatures-New   Zealand and Canadian, for example-might be inter­ preted.  A  contrast   between   Australian outsiders   and  Canadian  "survivors" (to

REVIEW ARTICLES



use   Margaret   Atwood's  term)    might even turn up more likenesses than one expected. The  title of a recent  Thomas Keneally     novel    (The   Survivor)   and these   lines   from   A.   D.   Hope's   "Aus­ tralia" -

Her   rivers  of  water   drown   among   inland sands,
The  river  of her  immense  stupidity
Floods  her  monotonous   tribes  from  Cairns to Perth.
In  them  at  last  the  ultimate men  arrive
Whose  boast  is not:   'we  live'  but  'we  sur­
vive',
A type who will inhabit  the dying  earth.

-certainly establish   grounds  for   com­ parison.  The    common  weal,   in   other  words,  and   the  common  woes  of   Com­ monwealth literatures  remain  still  to  be explored.
A more  recent  book by Walsh  is Com­
monwealth   Literature,  a  more   accurate but   still  frustratingly  selective   chart  of much  Commonwealth poetry,  prose,  and drama. The   enterprise is limited   in  ad­ vance  by his deliberate omission  of  South  Africa  and  much  of South  Asia  (though his enthusiasm for Olive Schreiner's work lets her appear any way); more  debilitat­ ing is the failure to mention, in the chap­ ter  on  Canada  for  example,  the  major  modern  prose writers.  Miss Bradbrook at least  found  Watson  and  Laurence; Pro­ fessor  Walsh  does  not   note   their   exist­ ence.  Nor  does  he  mention Godfrey   and Atwood,   nor  the  recent   novels  of   Rob­ ertson  Davies,  nor  for  the  most  part any poems   that   have   not   been  collected   in anthologies. In  other  chapters, too,  such idiosyncrasies   arise.   Randolph  Stow   is claimed as  the "most  gifted  of all  young Australian  writers",  but   not  one  of  his
 titles  is  named.  The   distinguished   New Zealander Janet  Frame is the  author of over  twelve  books,  yet only  her  first  two are   mentioned,  and   they   are   dismissed in  two  sentences.  Selectivity is  not  itself a vice, of  course,  particularly in  a  book trying  to  assemble  an  approach to  such disparate literatures. But  that  selectivity, to  cite  Walsh's   preface, is being  used  to indicate  "who   counts .... who   has  sig­ nificantly  contributed to the  canon  of  lit­ erature   in    English".   By    implication, Heavysege,    Hunter-Duvar,    and    Stead  must  "count" more   than  Atwood   then.  Certainly,  among   those  writers specific­ ally named,  Anne  Wilkinson and  Robert Finch   are  claimed  as  Birney's  superiors. We  are  told  further  that  "from the  evi­ dence   of   his   poetry",  Leonard  Cohen has   "a   more   mature   sensibility" than  Irving Layton, and  that  "Klein is one of the   few   Canadian  writers    untroubled about  the  problem   of  identity and  with­ out  its attendant, modish  hysteria  about  alienation".  Various  writings    in   other  chapters  are   characterized   more   boldly as  "a  species  of  emotional  tuberculosis" and  "Hot Coca-Cola". The  reader   of  a book    thus    concerned    overwhelmingly with  scales of values  inevitably asks how valuable   such   judgments  are.   However discriminating    Professor    Walsh    is   in assessing  eighteenth and  nineteenth cen­ tury  writings,   his  largely  Arnoldian  cri­ teria  do  not  take  him  helpfully past  the
r gso's.   Taking  Smith  as  his   guide   in Canada,  Narasimhaiah  in   India,   Mc­ Cormick  in  New  Zealand, he  provides  a fluent   catalogue of  early  received   opin­  ion.  But  if  his  book   offers  no  new  de­ partures, it  does  prove easily  readable.





91

UNOFFICIAL VOICES
 


Barbara Opala


Volvox, edited  by J. Michael Yates. Sono Nis, $7·95·


VoLvox  is an anthology of poetry in English translation from Canada's "unofficial" languages. Some twenty-eight poets are represented in this handsomely bound  and  well  arranged volume   in  translation  from   the   Arabic and   Japanese  as   well   as   most   of   the European  languages including  Icelandic and  Yiddish. One  arresting feature of this collection is the  title itself. A volvox, I discovered, is a fresh-water organism consisting  of spherical colonies  of  chloro­ phyll-bearing cells which  are  all in proto­  plasmic  connection with  their  neighbors.  A  volvox  then,  is a  fitting  metaphor for this   amalgam  of  highly   distinct  voices and  visions because  it  too,  has  a  kind  of "protoplasmic" unity  of its own.  Not  un­ like   that   of  an   organism,   the   unity   I speak  of  in  Volvox seems  to  be  derived from  the  cumulative effect  produced by the   individual  poetic    selections.    It   is largely a matter of an overall  impact emanating from the  richly-textured variety  of this sensitively organized coiiec­ tion.
In  part,  the  connective tissue  between
one poet's work and that of another is thematic. In  many  places,  Volvox  reads like a Canadian Odyssey of sorts, for whatever the cadence, the voices speak of the  stranger  in  a  new  land.   Separation for  instance, the  wrench   and  anguish of it, often explodes in an outcry:
Oh, God, when shall I calm a heart  that  endlessly
is tight with grief?

(Pavel  Javor: "The Exile").
 
Or  it is imbedded in the sense of impend­
ing loss:

Soon your ink
fades into the yellowing page
of your letter  and all your feelings
have come to be words.

( Rinehard: "Winter's Fields").

Or   it   lies  implicit  in   the   essence   of memories:

I remember you in the butterfly  that  dances on the leaf of mist and dies in the child's heart.

I remember you in the mirrored  multitudes of two fingers pressed together, anxiously.

(Ramon  Mansoor: "Remember'') .

In  other  poems, the focus is directly  on the  emigrant experience. What is the dream  for some?:

Looking into their  eyes you could see tremendous  kinds of hope: Studebaker or Buick,
refrigerator, radio, a house,
and enough  to eat always.

And like a messianic pronouncement one word was heard  again and again: money.

(Walter Bauer: "Emigrants").

And   above  all,  what   is  it  that   is  most difficult to reconcile oneself to?:

... and as we lay her
in a foreign grave, we, who know no
Icelandic,
who know then almost nothing of what she
loved
and lived by, say our  prayers over her in
English.
(Einar Pall Jonsson: "The Laundress") .

REVIEW ARTICLES



My hands  tremble
As I sign my naturalization papers
Making  me a Canadian citizen
And Canada my final resting place.

(Takeo Nakano: "My  hands").

Other thematic strands also, are  inter­ woven  into  the  texture  of  this collection. There are  critiques of society's values, for instance,  and   commentaries   on   the  "nature  of   man"   in   general.  And,   as might   be  expected   in  a  fairly   extensive collection of individual groupings of poems  such  as this one is, the question of human values,  the broad  existential ques­ tion,  looms large in the  thematic pattern. Individual  poets'   apprehensions   of   the quality of  the  moral   world   they  live  in form    a   wide   spectrum  of    experiences which   is  thus   presented  to  the  reader; and   this   spectrum   reflects,   at   varying  angles,   the  intellectual and  artistic cur­  rents   of  our   age.  The   fragments  cited below   represent  the   way  in   which   the existentialist vision  for  example, is trans­  fused  into  and  effectively  concretized in poetry:

This  is this Now is now Here  is here I ami

Nothing  else is true
there  are no harps in heaven
there  are no turtles holding  up the world
the best investment  in a t-bone steak

(Robert Zend:  "Monday")

or

Death  doesn't end  life
death  just
interrupts it

guests tonight
a movie tomorrow  evening
six shirts at the laundry
a holiday in Mexico this winter
 
this is what  things are like when a period is placed
in the middle of a sentence

(Robert Zend: "When")

Elsewhere  however  the  darkly  oppres­ sive tonality  of poems  in  which  this sense of the  "condition humaine" is  conveyed, is  lightened   by  notes  of  the  positive,  as abiding human  values   in  new  formula­ tions emerge :

Son of man, where do you get the tenacity to shout into the storm?

A voice echoes
from lands beyond graves: "Die  and  be humble!"

But you die,
living curses on your lips.
you die making a fist:
your cooling fingers
trying  to protect
a withered  blossom.

(Arved  Viirlaid: "Wandering")

Also, even in the most negative of visions, there is a felt, if unstated, underlying assumption  that   the  creative act  per  se, is  a  value  in  itself.  And   in  not   a  few places,   art,    as   an   affirmation  of   the human spirit  is at  the  core  of  the  poem:

Configurations  are conspiracies. Maturing is a matter of betrayals and the recovery of innocence
and of the birds relentless longing for migration.

There is the law of the falling of ripe apples. The  law of reins.
Beyond self-betrayals
you must reach after flexibility.

But there is no consent  to death.

(Bogdan  Czaykowski:  "Ars  Poetica").

On  reading Volvox  one  gradually  be­
comes more  and  more  aware  of a certain


93

REVIEW ARTICLES



inter-connectedness, a  sense  of  fusion taking hold  of  the  mind. Something of this effect upon  a reader's responses is generated  by  the  thematic  substance, as the  foregoing quotations  may  illustrate. But  this  is not  all.  Another  quality also, is  felt  to  be  part   of  the  dynamics here and   I  hope   that   something of  this  too, will  be  conveyed   by  the  examples cited. It is  a   matter  of  a   unique  coloration permeating all component parts  of the collection, of a singular atmosphere in which  all  the  specific little  worlds of individual  poets'   creation  partake,  and by means of which  they are fused into a "protoplasmic" connection.
What  I  think   a  reader  will  come  to
realize  is that  his experience of this  par­ ticular  collection  of   poems   is  a   poetic experience of a special  flavour, a  certain  cast imparted to it by sensibilities formed  in other  cultures, by  consciousnesses  per­ ceptibly  non-Canadian  responding to various aspects of a new environment. For what  all  of these  poems  from  fifteen  lan­ guages share  in common is this discernible tonal   quality of  being  something "other than" Canadian or  North  American, of stemming  from   soils  to   be  found   else­ where,  however  much  they  may, and  in­ deed  do, differ  from  one another in style, substance and  poetic excellence.
Poetic  merit  in Volvox is more difficult
to assess. Just  how  much  has been  lost in the   almost   inevitable diminution  that poetry,    in   particular,   undergoes  in   a translation is hard  to gauge. Nevertheless, the  triteness  of  the  imagery   is some  few of  the  entries   would   suggest   that   these are  mediocre   even  in  the  original. Also, some   poems   are   in   conventional  verse translation, and  this strikes  me as a most




94
 insensitive  choice, for  the  jog-trot  rhythm of the sound  pattern in  these cases is not suited   to   the   sense,   grating  upon   the nerves, and destructive of intended effect. On  the  other  hand, in  other  poems, and such a one  is Bogdan Czaykowski's "Garden", the interpenetration of image, sound,  rhythm and  symbol  conveys  fully the intimate sense of things  with  the kind of  power  which  one  recognizes  immedi­ ately as that  of good poetry:

And a man's naked  torso emerges amid jasmine flowers.
Rustling  in layers of leaves and leaves leaves leaves,
Rustling which kindles into a tall shape of flame
Green sparks of buds.    The  greenness of grass burns.
Night springs at the moon.    A peacock slumbers beneath  a star.
The  wind gathers  rusty silver.    A palm whimpers  over the wastes.
From a coconut  shell a woman who certainly  is here
Drinks  milk.    Her  body is gilded
By the irreplaceable sun, then  twilight chill combs
Her  hair and heaps it, warm, over her shoulder.

Uneven as to poetic  quality in its con­ stituent parts,  Volvox as  a  whole  never­  theless forms a genuine poetic experience. For  if, as A E.  Housman  claimed, "the peculiar  function of poetry is to set up in the reader's sense a vibration correspond­ ing to what  was felt  by the writer," then  certainly the  vibrations can  be felt  here, and  they  are  present   with  enough   force and  frequency  for  the  responsive  reader to enjoy  the  process  and  gain  an  insight thereby into what to him are perhaps less familiar worlds of  the "Canadian mosaic."

AS WE SEE OURSELVES AND OTHERS


George Woodcock


JOEY SMALLWOOD, I Chose Canada. Macmillan, $13.95·
HUGH  GARNER, One  Damn  Thing after  Another. McGraw Hili-Ryerson, $6.95.
DOUG FETHERLING,  Hugh  Garner. Forum  House, $1.25.
ANN CHARNEY, Dobryd. New Press, $6.95.
RODERICK STEWART,  Bethune. New Press, $ro.oo.
GEOFFREY STEVENS, Stanfield. McClelland  & Stewart, $ro.oo.


JT MAY BE NO MORE than an impression  bred of a single publishing season,  but  I have  a  hunch that  Cana­ dians,   who  have   been   producing  occa­ sional  good  biographies  for  the  past  two decades,  may  at   last   have   reached   the stage of  confidence in their  own identities
-and also in  their  audiences-that en­
ables  them  to write  interesting and  occa­
sionally good autobiography as well.
I make  the  immediate distinction  be­ tween  interesting and   good  because  the first  book  I mention-I  Chose  Canada
-happens   to   be  good   in  some   parts,
interesting in  others,  and  downright  bad for  long stretches. It is Joey Smallwood's autobiography, whose best contents derive from   the  old   pre-Canadian   Newfound­ land.
The first  third of  I  Chose Canada,
indeed,  when  he is telling of his upbring­ ing   and   early   career,  forms   a   notable  document  on  growing   up  ambitious  in St.   John's,  and    even   the   bragging  is amusing enough  to  be  acceptable. It  is when  Joey  becomes  a  controversial poli­ tician,  wooing and winning the Canadian wolf, that  his book, which  should  now be
 at   its   best,   declines   into   flaccid   self­ justification   and  partisan  history.  In  the early  chapters one feels that  Joey is writ­  ing  of  his  youth  as  he  remembers it; in the  remainder  that   he  is  writing of  his political  career  for the sake of the record. And   there   is  a  world  of  difference  be­ tween  the two. I  Chose  Canada  begins as an   engaging   and   promising  autobiog­ raphy.  It ends as a rather boring  political
. apologia.
Hugh   Garner's autobiography,  appro­ priately   called   One   Damn  Thing  after Another,   resembles   Smallwood's  in   its vanity  and  also in  the fact  that  it  too is a narrative of  ascent  from  les bas  fonds­ of   Cabbagetown  in  Garner's case.  The title-One  Damn  Thing After   Another
-says  a  great   deal  about the  shape   of the   book,  for,  compared  with   Garner's novels and  stories, it is unexpectedly loose and  rambling. At first the apparent form­ lessness disconcerts one,  but  in one way it is a  very  natural way  to write  a  book  of memoirs,   the  thoughts and  recollections put  down  as they come  into  the  mind. It is,  indeed,   so  much   like  a  man   talking that,   as   one   reads,   Garner's   gravelly

95

REVIEW ARTICLES



voice seems to sound in the ear and his compact cocky figure  to take shape  before the mind's eye.
One   of   the   good   things   about    this
approach,  from   the   viewpoint  of   any writer  who will follow with a more formal biography of  Gamer, is the  fact  that  he gives abundant detail  on his publication record, even down to what happened to individual short  stories. Another is that when   he  has  written  a  good   magazine piece about an episode in his life, Gamer resurrects it instead of rewriting the inci­ dent  from  a later  and  vaguer perspective. One example is his account of experiences as  a  member  of  the  Abraham  Lincoln Battalion  in   the   International  Brigade during the  Spanish  Civil  War.  One  ex­ pects  this  to come  in  chronological order  between   his   experiences  as   a   workless wanderer  during the  Depression  (which  included direct  acquaintance with anum­ ber  of  American lockups)  and  his naval  service   during  World    War    II  (which included   a   stretch  in   a  military  glass­ house) . But the whole Spanish experience is missed out  at this point,  and one begins to  wonder   whether Gamer  had  found  a reason   for   forgetting.  But   no!   He   has merely  acted  on  the  assumption that  the most  important  thing  in  a writer's life is what   he  writes,   and,   having  produced during  the  195o's  an  excellent  series for the  Star  Weekly   on  his  recollections of Spain, he waits until  the appropriate time in his autobiography, and  reproduces the account  with   little   change  at   a   point twenty   years  after   the   experience  took place.  The time dislocation is a little disturbing, but the principle of  using existing good material which cannot be improved on is an  excellent  one.
An  interesting aspect  of Garner's  pres­
ent  attitude is his retreat from  the  politi-

g6
 cal  engagement which  led  him  to Spain; it  is not  the same  thing  as a  repudiation of  his  past.  Indeed, when  I interviewed him a few years ago for a CBC television programme on  the  Spanish Civil  War, Gamer defended   the  Communists as  the only  effective  fighters  against  Franco, though  he  was  no  longer   in  sympathy with them. In One Damn Thing after Another,  Gamer gives a long  account of that  meeting  between  us and  of his great binge which ended with his arrest and maltreatment by  the  Richmond RCMP. It was  during the  binge  that   the  inter­ view  took   place   and   though,  as  Hugh remarks, "poor  George  was  a  bit  appre­ hensive  that  I might   not  make  the  tap­  ing",  I can vouch  that  he indeed behaved  like  the  splendid  professional   he  is, and  gave a fine interview.
So here  is Gamer, warts  and  all,  with no  attempt to hide  the  bouts  of drinking that  alternate with  long  periods  of severe and  sober  work  (a  pattern  strikingly similar   to  that   of  Dylan   Thomas,  who would astound  one with fits of awesome sobriety when he was hard at work on his poems); with  no  attempt either to  miti­ gate   his  vanity  or  to  beautify  his  occa­  sional  fits of loud  aggressiveness. All  this goes with  the  refusal  to give  One  Damn Thing   after  Another  a  form  that  would falsify   the   experiences.   A   professional
writer's life, after  all, is "one  damn  thing
after    another",  since   only   those   with independent means  or university jobs can afford  to tum  down  the hack work  which the  ordinary professional   has  to  accept. The great   thing  in  that   life  is never  to let  down  your prose,  and  always  to learn what   you  can  in  the  way  of  facts  and techniques  which   can   be   retained  for better  uses; these rules Garner has at most times followed, and  so his periods  of hack

REVIEW ARTICLES



writing have  hurt  him no more  than  they hurt  Defoe  or Dickens.  He  emerges  from One Damn Thing after Another as  a writer dedicated and obsessed-and whenever I  am  asked  to state  in  a word the  secret  of literary  success, that  word  is "obsession".
A rather astringent gloss on One  Damn Thing After  Another is provided by Doug Fetherling's brief study,  Hugh  Garner, in the Forum House "Canadian Writers and Their Works" series  (a collection  of brief introductory volumes  that  is little  known because   the   publishers   have   been   very erratic  in   distributing  review   copies) . Doug  Fetherling is an excellent  choice for this  kind  of  study.  He  is a  young  poet, refugee from America-as-it-should-not-be, and   excellent   in   that   primary  art,   but also a journalist and  man-of-letters. From his  experience and   insight   in  these  last roles he has been able to generate an understanding of Garner as a literary professional  who defies all the literary categories. Fetherling wrote  his introduc­ tion   before    One   Damn    Thing  After  Another appeared; I  suggest  readers ob­ serve  the  same  order.  Hugh   Garner  is a sound  introduction  to  the  works  and   a shrewd,  sometimes   oblique   commentary on  the  life  of  Canada's toughest  crafts­ man  writer.
Compared  with   the   rough-cut  stone with occasional bright facets which Garner presents  to us, Ann  Charney had produced  in  Dobryd   a  curious  polished gem  of  autobiography. Not  a  diamond, for  what  it  projects  is no glitter  of white light; an  opal  rather, with  its shadows merging  constantly into  its  luminosities. It is the  account of  a childhood strange and   perilous,   emerging at  last  into   the safety  of a  promised  but  hardly expected land. Ann  Charney came  of a prosperous
 Jewish  family  in  Poland whose  members had  contrived between  the  great  wars  to become  landlords;  her   narrative   begins when,  at five years old,  having been shel­ tered   for  many   months  in   a   barn  loft from  the  Nazis, she and  her  mother and aunt  are  rescued  by  the  advancing Rus·  sians. The  narrative goes on  to tell of the shifts  of  living  in  a  war-ruined  country which  another  totalitarian power  is tak­  ing  over.  The  child   gradually learns   of the  pre-war  past  which  had  hardly been real  even  to  her  elders  when  they  lived month   after  month   in  the  barn, at   the mercy  of  the  one  peasant  woman   who knew  of  their  existence  and  wrung their money  from  them  bit  by bit  as  the  days lengthened   into   years.   She   grows   into self-consciousness  in  a  dead   town  where people  live by selling  the  fragments of a past  life  which   they  find   in   the  ruins, until, almost  miraculously after  long wait­ ing  and   many  further  dangers,  she  and  her  mother   are  able  to  sail  for  Canada, which   has   been   her   home   ever   since. Dobryd  is a document written with  sharp recollection,   and  with  a  truth  of  feeling that  never blurs into self-pity; what  makes it unique-at least  as far  as my reading among  refugee  chronicles  goes -is  that  it is told not from  the viewpoint of some­ one  who  remembered  living  in  a  better  past,  as  most  refugees  did,   but   through the  eyes  of  a  child   who   first  becomes aware  of  herself  in  the  closed  world  of a hiding place, and  who finds life expanded rather   than   narrowed-as  it  seems  to her  elders-when she  emerges.  Dobryd
is a haunting, subtly  written and  beauti­
fully constructed little  book.
Passing  from   autobiography  to  biog­ raphy,  one  moves  into  a  different  frame of vision:  ideally from  passionate involve­  ment   to   involved    dispassion.   In  other

97

REVIEW ARTICLES



words,  we have  to  judge  the  biographer by how far he can divide himself into the empathizer,  whose  aim   is  to  unite   with his subject, and  the observer, whose duty is to remain  apart.
I would say that  Roderick Stewart in Bethune leans  towards the  observer  side of this equation, and  Geoffrey  Stevens  in Stanfield   towards the  empathizer,  which I  suspect  is a  temptation bound   up  with his subject. Stanfield  is an eminently like­ able  and   intelligent man,   and   I  suspect that  when  he dies people  will say of him, as  Orwell  said   of  Gandhi,   "compared with  the other  leading  political figures of our  time,  how clean  a  smell  he has man­  aged   to   leave   behind!"  But   Stanfield  resembles  Gandhi in  little  more  than  his relative   honesty;  he   has   none   of   the flamboyant fire  of  politicians who  make easy subjects  for  biography, and  even  his eccentricities are  meagre. The  only  way to   make   him   interesting  is  to  try  and establish   a  searching, intimate  rapport with  him  as  a  subject, to  try  and  reach the  mind  that  seems to work  with  a great deal of slow power behind  the masking platitudes and   the  deceptive  hesitancies. The  danger of such  an  approach is that one  gets  entangled in  the  dull  details  of one's  subject's  daily  existence; such  en­ tanglement  has  at  times  slowed  Stevens and  his narrative to a Stanfield  drawl.
Stevens has also placed himself in the difficult  position  of a  man   trying  to  sell an  uncompleted  house  without  knowing the  final  plan.  At  present  Stanfield  lives in  an  expectant limbo; his  success  as  a Nova    Scotia    leader    is   already   over­ shadowed by his ambitions as a  national leader,  and  so his career  retains  a tanta­ lizing  tentativeness. Until  he  brings  it  to a  plateau of  election  success  or  drops  it into  an  abyss of failure, he does not offer

g8
 the   pattern  for   satisfactory  biography. And so what  Stevens  gives us is really the sketch   for   Volume  I,   which   will   un­ doubtedly have  to  be  adjusted  when  we get the material for Volume II.
Roderick    Stewart  has   had   a   much easier  task. Bethune is dead,  having  lived a dramatic and  well-plotted life; by splen­ did  irony,  long  forgotten in  Canada, he survives  as  one  of  their  great heroes  in the   minds   of   hundreds   of  millions   of Chinese.  There has been  time  to re-assess him,  to  look at  whatever  the  biographer discovers   with   a   new   eye.  A  previous  biography  does  exist,  but   so  unexciting that  the  field is  virtually clear  for a  new and distant view.
Stewart has  conscientiously  dug  over his field. He  has  spent  four  years on  re­ search,  travelling to  Spain, to  China,  to all  the  places  where  Bethune  performed as  medical   and    political   activist.   The  harvest  of significant facts  has  not  been abundant; leaving  out  the  irrelevant, the repetitive,   Stewart ends  up  with  a  thin volume- I 67 pages of  actual biography. But  in  keeping  his  text  bare  and  almost meagre,   he  has   perhaps  shown   us  why Bethune's life acquired such symbolic sig­ nificance; it did so largely  because  it con­ tained  only two passages of exceptional significance,   his   months    of   service   in Spain,  his less than  two years of fevered activity  in China, embedded in a ragged and frustrated life that  might easily have tipped  into futility.  Of such  boldly simple lives are  legends  made,  and  Stewart did well to present his facts starkly, without attempting a deep penetration into Bethune's inner  life. He  tells, in fact,  the biography of  a  legend   rather than   of  a man,   and   tells  it  admirably.  We  learn how  a  tormented, arrogant and  in  some ways  very  silly  man,   a  kind  of  belated

REVIEW ARTICLES



Byron, became  transfigured and  achieved the stamp of greatness almost  by accident. As Yeats  put  it of an  Easter  Day  martyr:

He,  too, has resigned his part
In  the casual comedy;
He, too, has been changed in his turn,
 Transformed utterly:
A terrible  beauty is born.

It is to  Stewart's credit   as  a  biographer that, revealing   with  a  restrained  frank­ ness Bethune's human flaws, he does  not diminish that  terrible  beauty.




THE STRENGTH TO RISE


ARVED VURLAID,  Graves without  Crosses. Clarke  Irwin, $9.50.
 


Morris Wolfe


TWENTY YEARS  AGO, as what I   thought  would   be  a   joke,  I   took  a recording of  the  Soviet  national anthem to  a  high  school  party, and  when  it  was my turn  to play a record I put it on. An Estonian  classmate grabbed  the   record and smashed  it. Until recently  I've  only vaguely   understood  why.  But   now  I've read  Arved  Viirlaid's documentary novel, Graves  without   Crosses  ( 195 r),   trans­ lated  into  English  by lise  Lehiste.
After   just  two  brief  decades   of  inde­ pendence following the  First World  War, Estonia   was   placed   once   again   in  the Russian  sphere  of   influence  by   the Molotov-Ribbentrop   Pact.  When  in August  1940 Estonia was "incorporated" into   the   Soviet   Union,  a  number of Estonian men  escaped  across  the  Gulf of Finland and  joined the Finnish  army. Less than    a   year   later   the   Nazis   took   the Baltic,  and  still  more  young  men  fled to Finland.  In   January   1944,   when   the Russian    forces   had   again   reached   the eastern   border of  Estonia, many  of  "the Finnish   boys"  returned home  to  liberate their  country from  German and Russian tyranny. Their  forces   were   decimated. After  the  Nazis  had  been  driven   out  in September 1944,  some  of  those  who re­ mained  formed  an underground resistance
 
movement  against   the  tightening  Soviet grip  on  their  country; others  fled  to Fin­ land  and  even to Germany.
The haunting power  of  the  story  told in   Graves  without   Crosses  is  apparent even in a bare outline. The book's  central figure is Taavi Raudoja, a construction engineer  in his mid-to-late twenties. His father had  been  murdered by  the  Com­ munists   in   1941.   In   that    year   Taavi became   one  of  "the  Finnish   boys".   In
1944, however, he returned to fight the Russians. When the novel opens, he, his pregnant wife lime  and  their seven-year­ old  son  Lemhi t are  trying  to  make  their way  to  Finland.  lime  and   Lembit  are captured by the  NKVD  and  placed  in a prison    camp.    Taavi   is   captured   and  beaten, escapes,  and   is  finally   captured again   and   placed   in  a  different  prison from   his  wife  and  son,  wholly  ignorant of their fate.
The   prison  scenes  in  Graves  without
Crosses are  particularly effective-as gripping as those in Arthur Koestler's Darkness at Noon. Taavi is locked  in an ice-cold  cell  too  low  to  stand   up  in,  too narrow to  lie  down  in.  It closes  out  all but  the  sounds  of  the  outside  world; he can   hear  screams   and   other noises  like "the sound  one  hears  when   tough   meat

99

REVIEW ARTICLES



is beaten   to make  it  tender." His  partial confession is enough  to get him into  a cell crowded  with  seventeen others.  While  he is in  this cell, the  war  in  Europe ends;  a dutiful  Russian   guard   cries  ecstatically, without understanding the  prisoners' lack of   response,   ''Comrades,  shout   for   the health  of great  Stalin! ... Hitler is down!
... Estonia  is free for ever." Shortly after­
wards Taavi escapes from  the camp.
Meanwhile his wife fears for the baby she's about  to give birth  to. " ... the child would be planted into the seedbed of communism, fatherless,  motherless, a being without a homeland or nationality." When   the  baby   (Hilja)  is hom, lime's half-crazed cellmate claims  it as her own dead child, and a tense struggle results. Eventually lime  and   her   baby   are   re­ leased.  She's   told   that   her  son   Lembit  (whom  she  never  sees again)   will  be re­ leased  if her  husband turns himself in.
lime's experiences in  prison have changed her  almost   beyond   recognition. On  looking  in  a mirror for  the  first  time after   her  release,  she  asks  a  friend, "Is that   me?"    But   the   world   outside   the prison   is  even   worse   than    that   inside. Five Russian soldiers attempt to rape her; her   baby   dies.   Her   only   defence   is  a retreat into  an  Ophelia-like madness. Taavi's reunion with  his broken  wife, her maddened pleas  that  he  give  himself  up for   their   son,   his   refusal   and   her   at­ tempted  suicide   are   also  almost  Shake­  spearean in  their  intensity. So  is  Taavi's decision at the end of the book to go alone to the "free  world" to tell the story of the horrors  Estonia  is   enduring.  "They needed    moral    support   from    the   free world. If somebody  would  only say:  Hold out,  men, we  know  of your  plight.  Hold out until the appointed hour.  But no such message came.... "


100
 The  novel contains  a number of superb ironies  reminiscent of Marcel Ophuls' documentary film about  wartime France, The Sorrow  and  the  Pity.  There are  the two Estonian village elders, for example, whose rivalry extends  to one of them wondering  why   the   Russians   chose   to bum down  the  farm  of  the  other rather than  his own. Or  the NKVD camps, reluctant  to  exchange  information   be­ cause they're  competing with one another for prisoners and  secrets.
The  novel has a number of weaknesses. Viirlaid's  minor   characters-with    the exceptions  perhaps of Hilda and  Reku - are   for   the   most   part   badly   realized. Graves   without    Crosses   begins   rather tediously  and  ends  in  a  confusing flurry of activity.  Viirlaid's prose is often  heavy­ handed. Here   are   the  last  lines  of  the novel, for example:

Are  these  people  really  lost?  If that  is so, then  truly humanity  itself is at  the  threshold of its ultimate  end.
Taavi   Raudoja   cannot   believe  it,  for  he
is still alive. These doomed people do not believe it for they, too, are still Jiving. They
are  Jiving their  lives for  future  generations, for  a  new  day,  and,  when  it  arrives,  they will be those who  have  redeemed  humanity in their graves without  crosses.

Still, the excesses of the twenty-nine-year­ old  Viirlaid in  a  novel  written just  after  his own  escape  from  Estonia  to  Finland, England and  then  Canada are  as under­ standable   as   the   reaction    of   my   high school  classmate  in smashing my  record.
The  most remarkable thing  about Viir­
laid and the people he describes is their courage. As Viirlaid  puts  it in  one  of his poems, translated in Volvox,

Son of man, where do you get the tenacity to shout into the storm?
Where do you get the strength to rise from your agony?

IN SICKNESS AND IN HEALTH

Ann P. Messenger


ERIC   NICOL,  The Clam  Made  a Face. new press.
DAVID   FREEMAN, Creeps.  University  of Toronto  Press.


ToRONTO THEATRE-GOERS, large  and  small,  had  the good  fortune to see both  Creeps  and  The Clam Made   a Face  in  1970  and   1971;   Creeps   had   a stunning  success  in   Vancouver  in   the Spring of  1973·  Now,  those  of  us  who could   not   share   these   experiences  can read   these  two  very  good  one-act  plays that   help   considerably  to  discredit  the myth  that  Canada has  no  native  drama worth bothering about. Both plays, though vastly  different in  their  contents and  their  intended audiences, deal intelli­ gently   ith
and   the  health-and with   the  difficult
task  of healing-in today's  world.
Eric  Nicol has  had  his ups  and  downs in  the theatre, from  success in Vancouver to  disaster  in  New  York.  In  The  Clam Made  a Face, he drops most of the rather facile  wit which  characterizes his writing to  present  a  genuinely   imaginative  play for children based on the legends  and customs  of West  Coast  Indians. The children enter  not  a  theatre but  a  long­ house, where  they attend not a play  but a potlatch  in  which   they   take   an   active part.  They  are  given  Indian  names,  they metamorphose  from   clams  into   people, they  whistle  like the  wind  and  croak  like frogs.  They  even  help  to  save  a  starving whale  by spearing imaginary fish for it to eat.  Perhaps  Nicol  remembered  that  his own  applause  at  a  performance of  Peter Pan  once  helped   to  save  the  life  of  the fading Tinker  Bell.
 The  link  among the  collection of  leg­ ends  is the  Chief's son,  Little  Bear,  also known  as Henry. Henry  is  discourteously late   for   the   potlatch   and   expresses   a sharp    contempt   for    the    old    legends which,  he claims, contradict scientific  ex­ planations of the origin  of species. He  re­ jects the culture of his fathers and  yearns instead  for  houses  and   boats,  stoves  and refrigerators and cars. But the Chief demonstrates to him  that  the  legends  do not conflict  with  science; both  the  theory of evolution and  the  legend  of the  clams posit  man's origin   as  a  formless  blob  in the   sea.   Henry    is   eventually  reunited with  his  own  heritage  when   a  magical ball   of   white   wool   given   him   by   the Chief  turns  into  fog and  blinds  the Can­ nibal  Ogre  that  is just about  to seize and devour  the  fleeing  youth.  After  this inci­ dent,    Henry    willingly    takes   back    the name  of  Little Bear.  Finally,  his  yearn­  ing for  the consumer goods of  white  soci­ ety  is  silenced   by  the  legend  of  T'elch who wanted  nothing  but  what  he had­ his wife, his health, his cave,  and  enough  to   eat-and    was   turned  into   Siwash Rock  as a  reward  for his  wisdom.
Since  Little Bear  is hostile  to  his own
culture at  the beginning, there  is some awkwardness  about    his   taking   part   in acting  out  the  legends  when  he  first  ap­ pears  at  the  potlatch. Nicol's   text  com­  municates  no  sense  of  why   the   young man  is  willing  to  perform;  perhaps  the actor   playing   Little  Bear  could   convey


101

REVIEW ARTICLES



a  reluctance to  join  in, although his first speech  as Raven is so lyrical  as to  make reluctance improbable. Some  tinkering with  the  text  at  this  spot  seems  to  me to be called  for.  However, the  play  certain­ ly deserves  the  success  it  has  had  in  the repertory of  the  Young  Peoples  Theatre as they  act  out  the communion of whites and  Indians at  the potlatch and  the heal­  ing  of  the  alienated young  Indian's sick spirit.
Creeps,   by  David   Freeman,  is  about
another kind  of sickness,  the  crippling of the  psyche  caused  by emotional  depend­ ence on a Big Mama. The plot and  struc­  ture  are  similar  to Sidney  Howard's The Silver   Cord   (I 926)   in  which   two  sons struggle  to break  away  from  a domineer­ ing  mother; one  succeeds  and  one  fails, forever.  In Creeps, Tom, a painter, man­ ages  to  break   his  chains, but  Jim, who wants  to  be a  writer and  whose  spirit  is weaker, stays home.  However, Big Mama here  is not  a person  but  a  kind  of home, a "sheltered workshop" for  the  victims  of cerebral palsy. Except for  the  two  social workers,  all the characters in the  play are spastics.  They   gather in  the  men's  lava­ tory   at   the   workshop  to   relieve   them­  selves   literally    and   metaphorically:   to talk,   and   to  escape   for   an   hour   their demeaning tasks  of  folding boxes,  sand­  ing   blocks,  and   weaving  rugs,   tasks  at which    they   earn   seventy-five    cents    a week. Their talk  is the  heart  of the  play;  its  steady   beat   is  the   life  force   of  the story  of  Jim  and  Tom.
All  the  men  speak  of  their   alienation from  the  world  outside,  the  physical,  so­ cial,   and   emotional barriers that  drive them  together into  their  own community. Each   man   reacts  differently  to  his  con­ dition. Pete, for example, who  wanted to be   a  carpenter,  soon   found    the   going


102
 rough  and  came  to  the  workshop with  a "why   not?"   attitude, willing  to  pay  for ease  with  humiliation. Sam,  in  a  wheel­ chair   but   sexually   active,   is  bitter   and destructive; he fights  with  every  weapon  he  has-his  urine,   his  vomit,   his  sex­ uality-to  pay  the  world  back  for  pity­ ing  him.  Here  I  have  one  small  quibble  with  the  play. Sam  has  been  in bed  with Thelma, an  apparently spastic  girl  who attends the  workshop.   Her   parents' dis­ covery  of   their   act   and   reaction  to  it drove  Thelma into   madness.   Thelma is still at  the  workshop,  but  her  attendance now  is  somewhat improbable:  she  is the only female  spastic  there,  and  a mad  one at  that.   She  serves  a  useful  purpose,  al­ ways  off-stage  and  calling  out  regularly, "I need   a   priest!",  which   underscores the  theme  of  spiritual death. But  she  is part  of  the  realistic  level  of  the  play­ the  men  speak  of her  and  shout  back  at her-so  her  presence  needs  to  be  justi­ fied more  clearly.
The   play  has   an   unrealistic  level  as well.  Three  times  the  remembered  out­ side world  breaks  into  the  men's lavatory  with   circus   clowns,  hot   dogs,   Shriners,  and  pretty  girls. They  treat  the  men  like children   and  like  freaks   (or  creeps)   in their  circus  show,  but   it  is  really  they, with    their    silly   costumes   and    phony benevolence, who  are  the  creeps.  These  unrealistic intrusions are   good   theatre, flashing   colour   and   action   across   the stage;   they  also make  a  point  about   the inversion  of reality with  which  these men must  live.
Creeps invites comparison with John Herbert's Fortune   and  Men's  Eyes,  an­ other   recent  Canadian  play  written  out of its author's particularly painful experi­  ence.  Yet  despite   the  time  that   Herbert spent  in  prison, his  play lacks  the ring  of

REVIEW ARTICLES



authenticity, the  genuineness  of language and  feeling  that  Freeman's play  has.  For Freeman  himself   is  spastic,   but   Creeps does  not  tell  us so. It is the  artist's  skill, not  simply  his experience, that  makes  the play  good.  Like  his own  character Tom, whose  paintings gain  recognition from  a critic  who  has  never  seen  him,  Freeman won  my  admiration  before   I  saw  Tom Hendry's essay in  Saturday Night   (July
I 972)   which  describes  his condition and his  life.  Perhaps a  better   comparison  is with Christy  Brown, an Irishman and a spastic,   who   has   written  his   autobiog-
 raphy,   My   Left   Foot    (the   only  part   of him  able  to  operate a  typewriter),  and an autobiographical novel, Down  All the Days. Working  in self-revealing forms, Brown  necessarily  wins  some  fraction of his  readers'   interest   by  showing   us  his own tormented being. But Freeman has chosen   a   relatively    anonymous genre; good   plays   tell   the    audience  nothing about  their  authors' lives. In  so choosing, he  has  cut  himself  off  from  winning  in­ terest and  sympathy  for  himself.  His  play succeeds  entirely  on  its own  merits.







































103








LIVES OF GHOSTS AND LOVERS

ROBERTSON   DAVIES,  Hunting Stuart and  other plays.  New  Press.  $8.gs.

THERE  IS  SOMETHING   perennially   ap­ pealing 	about     Europe   to    Robertson Davies'  Ontario-bred imagination; its his­ tories supply  the ghosts  for  his characters' minds,  and   its  ghosts  animate  the  lives that   his  plays   unfold.  Hunting  Stuart, about   a  Canadian  civil  servant's  blood tie   with   Bonnie   Prince  Charlie;  King Phoenix,   about    the   last   days   of   (old, merry)   King  Cole  of  Albion; and  Gen­ eral   Confession, about  Casanova's un­ conscious,  provide  three  examples of his dramatic response  to  that   appeal.  Writ­ ten  respectively  in  1955, 1948,  and  rg56 and  printed now  for  the  first  time,  they also  provide   a  retrospective  view  of  the developing experimentation with  Jungian archetypes which   led   Davies   more   re­ cently  into  Fifth  Business  and  The Man­ ticore.
General  Confession offers  the  most ob­ vious instance. The first scene opens with old  Casanova in  his  library,  overhearing an  unsuccessful   attempt at  a  seduction. The play gathers momentum  when  Casa­ nova offers to raise spirits  magically  from the  dead   for  the   young   people's   enter­ tainment, and  when  Voltaire, Cagliostro, and  "The Ideal  Beloved"  accordingly ap­ pear,  promptly involving Casanova in  a
 
series  of  scenes  from   his  own  life.  Vol­ taire  pronounces fluently on morality and  freedom;  Cagliostro   counters  with   hu­  miliating  revelations   and   comments  on character; the  Beloved  simply  exists and  enharmonically   alters   form.   The   other  characters see what  Casanova at first does not:   that   the  spirits  are  merely  part   of him-his    "philosophy",  his   "ideal  of womanhood",  and   his   "Contrary   Des­ tiny".  Horrified   at  such  a  revelation, he wonders   aloud   if  the  spirits are  sent  to madden him;  they reply:

We  do  not  want anything from  you-can­ not   want  anything from  you-which  you do  not  want   from  yourself.  All  that lies  in our  power  is  to  show  you  yourself. ...

It  is fairly  easy to  transform them,  then, into   Casanova's  Jungian  ego,   shadow, and   anima,  and   to  see  that   balancing them  becomes  his  task  in  the  play.  Old, at  the  beginning, he lives in memory  and history  and  wants  only  peace;  "rejuven­ ated" by the end,  he pursues  a new mani­ festation  of the  Ideal  Beloved  and  starts  life afresh.  With  a sign of the cross (sym­ bolically  mandalic), the  play  closes.
Comparable  rejuvenation of  "the  old
king"-and   a  concomitant  revitalizing of    his    kingdom -forms  the    central action  of King  Phoenix. Aging King  Cole in his healthy  merriment does not  recog­ nize  his  age,  but   meanwhile   his  Druid  archpriest is trying  to  poison  him  and  to sacrifice  the  princess's  suitor.  Blind  with Druid   faith,   young   Leolin   is  a  willing victim   until   he  and   the  princess  admit their  love;  then  the Shadow is robbed  of its  power.  Cole  dances  on  the  sacrificial  stone  and  topples to  his death, but  Leo­ lin  is  promptly   declared  the  new  king, and   the  characters  sequentially intone  over Cole's  body:
-you  died  that I might live....

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



-the King died  to  spite his arch-enemy ...

-he  died   laughing in  order to  show   that laughter -laughter like   his-is  holy and great ...

-he died  as all  men  do....

The  princess  Helena half  playfully  is  ar­ rayed  in  a  beard   and   wig  from  a  cere­ monial   mask,   which   dismays   the  arch­  druid, "for  it  is  as  if COLE  had  truly risen  from the  dead". Cole's commitment to life,  that  is, carries  on  in  Helena and Leolin  together. Static  history  thus  turns into  current  vitality,  and  one  of  Davies' recurrent themes becomes  clearer: reason is meaningless  without  passion,  and   ab­ ility without  imagination is constrained.
Casanova, towards the  end  of  the  vis­ ionary  scenes of General  Confession, ob­ serves  to his audience :

I did  not  promise you  completeness, or  ex­ planations.  Not   the   logic   of  music   or   the bustle  of  a  neat comedy. Only  a  man's  life.

In  the gift is life itself. Out  of that  which was life and  is history  comes  that  which is life  and  shall  only  be  history  unless  it is constantly rejuvenated. The  reiterated conjuror's  phrase   in   The   Manticore­ "Time is ... Time   was ... Time is past"
-argues the   timelessness,   the   freedom from history,  that  accompanies a moment of illumination; and  that  moment itself occurs when the correspondences between past  and  present  allow  in  a  kind  of  in­ tense excitement a concurrent experience of  the  two.  Casanova's   visions  provide  an  example.  They   also  provide  an  early version   of   David    Staunton's   Jungian therapy  in Zurich  in The Manticore, and the novel's  references  to  the  character of Canadian  life  spell  out   the  metaphoric meaning of  the  European connection. In the  September  1972  issue  of  Maclean's, Davies  himself  observed :
 A  lot   of  people complain  that  my   novels aren't about Canada. I  think they   are,  be­ cause   I see  Canada as  a  country torn  be­ tween  a very  northern, rather  extraordinary, mystical spirit   which it  fears  and   its  desire  to  present  itself   to  the  world   as  a  Scotch banker. This  makes   for  tension. Tension  is the  very  stuff  of  art.

The   European settings  thus  serve  not  as escapes from  the present  into  a romantic, ordered, noble  past-"imagination",  he writes, "is a good horse  to carry  you over the ground, not a flying carpet to set you free  from   probability"-but  as  frame­ works in which  to explore  the  interpene­ tration between  a world  bounded by time and  a world  fed  by  vision.
Hunting Stuart  gives  the  wittiest  form to  that   tension.  King   Phoenix   allows  it­ self some  barbed  one-liners about  "busi­ ness ethics",  but  if anything they  detract from  the play's  tonal  integrity. And  Gen­ eral  Confession  jokes  about  liaisons   be­ tween  men  and  women,  but  the  women  characters are  made  so  preoccupied with being  Anima  that  they  seem  too  abstract to give substance to  the  wit  or  real  psy­ chological  tension  to the play. In  Hunting Stuart  the satiric  thrusts  against  the  I.O. D.E.,  New  York  commercialism, English  cooking,  amateur  psychologists,  the  civil service,  and  what  has  since  come  to  be known  as  the  Vertical  Mosaic,   all  con­ nect  with   the  Davies   vision  of  psychic balance.  If  there  are  overtones of  Mer­  rill   Denison's  domestic  wit   and    Lister Sinclair's "A Play on Words", that  only shows   one   of   the   directions Canadian drama  was   taking    between    1930   and
1955;  in  search  of a  dramatic language, the theatre took language itself as its sub­ ject.  But  from  Davies'  pen  the  language
-varying from  jargon  and  cliche  to con­ temporary colloquialism and  lyrical eight­ eenth-century  formality-sparkles.  The

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



fey plot  is animated, and  the  potentially stereotypical characters  are   given   indi­ vidual  vigour.
When    the   play   opens,   mild   Henry
Stuart seems  a  nonentity. His  bourgeois wife is infatuated with a belief in her own noble ancestry; his daughter is infatuated with a psychology student with a com­ parably simplistic sense of his own im­ portance. When  the  Drs. Sobieska  arrive, unknown experts  in family  trees, they add another dimension to that   picture of ag­ grandizing ego. But  they have  come be­ cause  of  their  discovery  that   Henry  is a direct  male heir of Bonnie  Prince  Charles, and  they pursue  him  with  both  salesman­ like  vigour  and  "scientific" magic.  They have  a  potion   that   will  transform  their subject   into   his  ancestor   of  any   given date.  When  Henry  takes  it,  however,  his regal    transformation   startles    everyone. The  Sobieskas had  simply  wanted  control over  an  experiment-cum-prisoner. Lilian, the  wife,  after  a  glow  of  vicarious  pride and   a  shudder  of  personal   humiliation, wants  just a return of the status  quo. But as in General Confession, such stasis is no longer  possible after  the  enlivening en­ counter  with   anima  and   shadow.   For Henry himself, at the end of the play, the problem   (and   challenge)  is simply  how to get  his crown.  If we  judge  by Helena and  Casanova, he  already has  it  in  the sheer gusto with which he now greets ex­ perience.  His ghosts  are  his own,  and  his love makes him strong. Happily, here, Davies'  celebration of such  recurring hu­ man   spirit   invigorates  the   action   with more    than    ephemeral   merriment   and gives his ideas a stageworthy form.
W. H.  NEW





106
 SINS OF THE FATHERS

DAVID FRENCH,   Leaving Home. University   of
Toronto Press.

DAVID    FRENCH's   Leaving   Home   was, along  with  David  Freeman's Creeps, one of  the successes of  the  1971-72  season  at the  Tarragon Theatre in  Toronto.  Both are  naturalistic dramas that  stage  better than  they  read.  The  stronger  of  the  two, Creeps,   manages    both    sympathy  and humour towards  the  spastics  who  are  its subject;  they  are   three-dimensional  hu­ man    beings   whose    problems,    though  special,   are   recognizably   related   to   la condition  humaine,  and  this  is a  consid­  erable  achievement. The  play's  principal weakness  is  its  unsympathetic   portrayal of Carson, the  director of  the  "sheltered workshop,"   who    appears   late    (better never?)   and  is surprisingly  flat-almost
a caricature. Here  the  author's (and  the play's)   point  of  view  about   the  author­ itarian Carson  is too  egregiously  that  of the  spastics,  and  whereas   their   reaction  to him  is understandable, it is too limited to serve  us  as a total perspective on such a  character.
Leaving Home has an analogous prob­
lem.   Both   Freeman   and    French   are young playwrights who seem to have difficulty  treating father-figures with  un­ derstanding. In  Creeps it is only a minor  problem,  for Carson  is a minor character
-though he symbolizes the home that needs   leaving.   But   Leaving   Home   is much  more seriously marred by a failure of authorial sympathy for  the  pater  fam­ ilias, Jacob   Mercer. It is his  home  that  Ben   ( 1B)   and   Bill   ( 13)   are  trying   to leave  throughout  the  play,  as  Tom   and Jim   are   trying   to   escape   Carson's  in

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Creeps.  In  outline, at  least,  Jacob is not an   unattractive  character:   a   kind    of Newfie  hardhat-Archie Bunker  with  a dash  of  Zorba   the  Greek.  At  fifty,  after a  hard   day's  work,  he  can  sing,  dance, and  court  his wife with  the Song of  Solo­ mon.   Even   his   bigotry   has   a   comical innocence:

How  many  drunks you suppose is wearing Roman collars? More   than the  Pope  would dare  admit.  And    all   those    thousands  of babies   they   keep   digging  up   in   the   base­ ments of  convents. It's  shocking.

But  the  play is so "loaded" against Jacob that   it   becomes   impossible   to   take   his side,  difficult  even  to  take  him  seriously. Now  this  is a  problem, for  a  drama  re­ quires  tension,  which  needs  a  rough  bal­ ance  of  opposing   forces  for  a  while,  at least.  But  here  the  scales  are  constantly weighted    in   favour    of   one   side,   and hence  the  drama suffers. French's identi­ fication  with  Ben is  flagrant. Setting the action   "in  the  late  fifties,"  when  he  was about  r8, he  makes  Ben  articulate, rea­ sonable, intelligent, liberal,  and  generally  right;  the heaviest  father would  be  hard  put  to  find  fault  with  this:

Dad, will   you   listen   to  me  for   once? It's not   because home's bad, or  because   I  hate you ... I   just    want   to    be    independent, that's all.  Can't you  understand that?

Of  course  we  can -only  Jacob cannot. But   then   Jacob  is  inarticulate,   unrea­ sonable,   narrow, and   wrong,   as  a  rule. First  he lies to the family,  saying  there  is no  whisky  in  the  house  and  pulling out the   screech   to   test  his  sons'   "virility". Later, when  he realizes  Ben really  means to  leave,  Jacob  "charges  into  Ben's  bed­ room"  and   begins   impetuously  hurling personal   effects   onto    the   living   room floor. After  three  such  trips  French pulls the   rug,   as   Ben  coolly   comments:  "I
 don't   want   to  spoil  your  fun,  Dad, but so  far   all   that   stuff   belongs   to   Billy." While  Jacob   is  reeling   from   that   blow, he  absorbs  two  more.   First   French  hits him with a scene direction: "Jacob stares at the  scattered records and shirts, alarmed."  Then   Mary,   his   attractive wife, lets fly:

Now  you've  done  it,  boy.  Will  you  sit  down now?  You're just  making a bigger fool of yourself   the  longer you  stand.

Jacob's only  halfway   successful  relation­ ship  has  been  with  Mary, but  through­ out   the   second   half   of   the   play   they round  on  each  other. Mary is  the  play's most   sympathetic character,   and   when she criticizes  or refutes  or  gives  the  lie to Jacob,   we  listen:   "I  have  no  sympathy for  you.  You  brought  this  all  on  your­ self."  Agreed,  and   what   the  play  needs is a sympathetic father, who can  counter­ poise   Ben   as   Pierre    Gravel   balances Andre  in Gratien Gelinas's Yesterday the Children Were  Dancing. Near  the  end Mary    tells   the    "slightly  incredulous" Jacob    that    Ben   supported  the   family with  his own  money  during the  previous year   while   Jacob   was   in   the   hospital. Jacob   is  suitably   flabbergasted, but   the whole  deus ex  machina misses the  point. The   problem   is  not  to  make  Jacob  ap­ preciate the likeable  Ben, but  to  make  us like  Jacob.
Leaving  Horne would  be a good  effort
by a bright  undergraduate. Though  late­ adolescent    in   tone   and   perspective,  it does  give  shape  to  a  story  that   is  com­ mon  and  important,  several  of  the  char­ acters  are  genuine  creations, and   much  of  the  dialogue  is  workable. But  French is 34; he has been writing television  plays for  ten  years. Perhaps that's the  trouble: working  in  the different and, I think,  less demanding medium of TV may  have  re-


107

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tarded his development as a legitimate playwright. Certainly  he  should   be  fur­ ther  on.  When  we  hear  from  him  again,  as we certainly shall,  we  have  a  right  to expect   work  of  broader  sympathies and firmer  balance.
R.  W.  BEVIS


A DOUBLE EXILE

DAVID WATMOUGH,   "ashes for  easter"  & other monodramas. Talonbooks, $4.00.

DAVID WATMOUGH'S  three stage plays in Names  for the  Numbered Years  (1967) revealed  an imagination capable at worst of stiff, portentous dialogue, at best of making  ordinary experience come alive before  being  blighted  by madness,  horror or  despair. By writing within the  stricter limitations of monodrama performed by himself  on  stage,  Watmough  paradoxic­ ally  releases  more  creativity  and  finds  a greater emotional range  than in his plays. Those   who  have   not  seen  him  perform  can  listen  to  his  record  Pictures   from  a Dying  Landscape, on which  he reads ver­ sions of  three  monodramas, "First Job", "Trading  in  Innocence" and  "Ashes  for Easter",  discreetly   altered  and   cut,  pre­ sumably  to fit  the  timing  of  the  disc.  In "Ashes  for  Easter"   and   Other   Mono­ dramas   we  have   these  three  and  seven other  monodramas printed to suggest  the main  pauses in the reading voice:  clumps  of two or  three  sentences occur  separated by gaps.
The   monodramas  are   clearly   written for  performance, and  though they are in­ teresting  enough   as  writing,  they  should not  be considered as prose  poems or even that  kind  of dramatic  monologue  which Honan defined  in  Browning's Characters  (I g6 I)  as  "A   single   discourse   by  one

108
 whose  presence  is indicated by  the  poet but  who  is not  the  poet  himself". Where Browning  presents  a  one-sided  conversa­ tion  mainly   concerned with  the  revela­  tion  of  character  through  recited   verse, Watmough's  prose  form  is  designed   to convey actions  recollected in anxiety.  But the   narration  also  gives   us  irony,   and humour, while  the variety of settings  and voices  externalizes the  theatre of  mem­ ory.  The   stage   can   be   both   head   and heart;  under   the  lights   we  watch   and  hear  the  dissection  of  a  man.  From  our place  in   the  dark   we  can   see  what   is laid  bare,  we can  watch  him  stitched  up again,   and   feel   the   healing    fountains start.
The   different  rhythms  and   voices  of these  monodramas  demand  the  accom­ panying  flicker  of  gestures  and  mimicry  of  tones  and   dialects:   vigorous,  eager, guileful   Cornish,  Black   New  Yorker,   a European's  broken   English,   Vancouver Canadian, and  the  brisk, at  times wistful lilt  of   Watmough's   narrator  who   pro­  vides  the  story  line,   point  of  view  and  tone.
This  drama is subjective, yet it is more retrospective than  introspective. If the manner  is  sometimes   confessional,   it  is still the revelation of a densely peopled landscape of the past and  the self. The narrator's  homosexuality is a  theme  not vaunted for its own sake. It is not a guilty embarrassment of a furtive or mawkish kind;  nor  is it  a  prurient secret  revealed for sensational  purposes.  It is rather the painful, irrational destiny  sharply  defined in  "Scar   Tissue"  which   brings   with   it folly,  shame   and   danger. It cannot  be shaken  off,  nor  can  it  totally  heal.  The lurch  of desire, excitement and  degrading masochism which leads as far as death is powerfully  conveyed  in "Black  Memory".

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



His  range  also encompasses that  sensitive recollection of childhood, "Trading in Innocence", beautifully written for the actor,   as  if  by  a  Dylan   Thomas  whose inkwell   had   run   out   of  alcohol.   "First Job" is a gently  humorous piece in which healthy young  love  escapes  the  confines of the working  day and  the tyranny of decaying old men in the newspaper office. The   middle-aged narrator's  voice  harks to   young   Davey   Bryant's  love-making, but with irony, while now he recalls the cancerous old man,  Trebilcock, with compassion  and  tolerance. The least  suc­ cessful   piece   in   the   book   is   "Wickan­ ninish  Memory"; here  the  "wicked" gos­ sip  and  desultory talk  of   the  characters provides   a  setting   for  a  death,  but   the situation  fails   to  become  interesting  or moving,  while  the  glib,  knowing,  "soph­ isticated" voice  of  the  narrator seems ir­ ritating and  empty. But  Watmough's art fails  only  momentarily,  and  in  this  one piece.
In    "Ashes    for   Easter"  and    "Ship­ wreck"  he  summons honesty  and  tough­  ness to face  the desolation of  double  exile
-that of the  emigrant and  the  deviant. The   narrator imagines   at  one  point  his father's funeral procession.  His  last  links with  the old  land  and  family  are  broken. He  is  suddenly aware   "... as  I  walked in  isolation  behind   those  grim-lipped farmers,   that   I  walked   as  a  family   of one...."
Watmough  classifies  his  monodramas
as "Pictures From  a Dying  Landscape" (Cornwall) and  "Pictures From  a Living Landscape"	(British     Columbia)    but judging  from  this  book,  it  is the  elegiac note  which   stirs  his  imagination rather than  the  celebration of the  present.
ANDREW PARKIN
 RADIO AND STAGE


JOHN  REEVES,   Triptych. C.B.C.

Triptych is the first work  Mr.  Reeves  has published   in  more   than   a  decade.  His previous  piece, A Beach  of Strangers: An Excursion   won    the    prestigious  Italia Prize  in I 959 and  was  published by  Ox­ ford   two  years  later.  Both  were  written for  radio; both  are  full  of  literary  qual­ ities  that  merit  separate  consideration in print.
A great deal has changed in Canadian drama during the  past  twelve  years.  In fact,  this period  will come  to be regarded as the  beginning of a  dramatic tradition in   English   Canada  and   as   the   break­ down   of  the  colonial   system  of   whole­ sale  importation  of  foreign   plays.   The process  is  by  no  means  completed. The  majority of  our  subsidized   theatres con­  tinue  to  discriminate against   new  Cana­ dian  plays, which  is partly  explicable by the  fact  that  a  majority of  the  directors have  drawn  their  professional  experience and  inspiration abroad. But, despite  their resistance,    the    number   of   new    play­ wrights   is  on  the  increase   every  season. Several young and   poorly-subsidized companies are concerned exclusively  with the   production  of   Canadian   plays. Twelve   years  ago  a  published  play  was a  rarity; today-though   publication   is far from  automatic-many are  available to  libraries,  college  and  school  curricula or distributed as typescripts to theatre groups  throughout the  country.
Curiously,   this  new  fermentation  has been  neither   matched nor  even  reflected in   the   work   of   the   CBC,   where   Mr. Reeves has been employed  as a radio producer.  In   the  forties   and   fifties   the

109

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



CBC  was the sole outlet for  most drama­ tists. As a training ground, the  Corpora­ tion  indubitably fathered the  professional  theatre of  the  sixties.  At  the  same  time, the  effort  of  procreation  seems  to  have left  it  exhausted,  hopefully  temporarily. But  for  the  present, I believe  it  is gener­  ally   agreed that  television  drama pro­ grammes-the few  that  remain in  Can­ adian hands-are    derelict    in   major writing  talent. Radio drama  likewise  has been  greatly  reduced in  variety, original­ ity  and  importance:  playwrights tend  to use it as a financial sideline  to their  new­ found  opportunities  on  the  stage.
As a result,  when  A Beach  of Strangers
was produced and  published, it was an important event  in the  mainstream of dramatic activity  in  English  Canada. By the  time Triptych was brought out  by the CBC,  it was denied  the  cynosure  that  the work  deserves.
The Corporation has  spent  many  mil­
lions  of  dollars  on  transmitters and  sim­ ilar  hardware, to ensure  that  every Cana­ dian  could  listen  to  its  programmes. But it  seems  unwilling to  spend  a  few  thou­ sand   on   alerting  the  population  to  the programmes that  are  being  transmitted. Any  small   stage   production  in   a   pro­ vincial   city   penetrates  the   public   con­ sciousness  further than   the  drama  being disseminated on  a  nationwide  network.
I have  not heard  Triptych when it was broadcast by the  CBC  in  1971  and  1972. I regret  it, because  a full  appreciation of this work  is impossible  merely  by reading the  script.  For  one  thing,   it  breaks  new ground  as   the   first   full-length   quadri­ phonic   radio   drama  ever  written. Also, the author has composed organ  music for the   piece   which   is  not   made   available  with  the  text.  Both  elements are  integral to   any   production.   Triptych  has   been

II 0
 performed  by  students at  York  Univer­ sity, and-Professor  Mavor  Moore  tells me-it  worked  extremely  well on  stage.
Mr.  Reeves  has  taken  the  three  major festivals  of the  Christian calendar to pre­ sent   a  series  of   contrasts.  They   are treated on  the  one  hand   in  accordance with  the  faith   of  ages,  including direct  quotations from  Scripture and   medieval mystery  plays.  On the  other hand, both  in  terms  of  meaning and  sound  arrange­ ment,  we hear  the secular  sounds  of these holidays,  stripped  of  religious   connota­ tion. There is a  middle  ground of  com­ mentary on  a  variety   of  learned  topics. Mr.   Reeves  seems  to  use  verse  for   re­ ligious  emphasis  and  conviction;  various shades of prose depict  a progression  away from   that    conviction.   Because   of   the subject  matter, the  use of  poetry  is better here  than  in  A  Beach  of Strangers. But when  it  comes  to  conveying  vulgarity in a  vein  of gross  comedy,  the  earlier  work has   a  satiric   facility   and   edge,   which seem more forced  in Triptych. Masterful phrases   still   abound  and    startle    ("at seven  she  was still a  virgin", or  "her ab­ sentee  glandlord"), but  the  longer  pass­ ages of invective  are  there  as if to imitate a  style  the  author  used  so  well  before.  The   line  is  thin   between   the  seductive bite  of  the  satirist   and   the   underlying earnestness  of  an   insufferable   moralist. On   the  whole,  Mr.  Reeves  manages  to keep on the  more palatable side of satire,  but   it  is   (clearly)  costing   him   greater effort   than   in   the   previous   work.   No amount of original  language can hide  the fact  that   commercialized Christmas  and religion  are  commonplaces in  the  weekly and  monthly  press. Similarly, most of the information  imparted  by   his   Scholiast about   the  pagan   origins  of  our  festivals or the historic  background to the gospels,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



may   be  gleaned   in  greater  detail   from any  paperback on the subject. This  is not remarkable in itself. But  sometimes  I  de­ tect   that   this  material  is  introduced   to compensate  for   the   relative  scarcity   of delightful insights  or  clever   jibes,  which A Beach of Strangers abounds in. And  at times I catch  a creeping note of the High Anglican  snobbery  that  mars  some ofT. S. Eliot's writing and  also makes  the diff­ erence   between   early   and   late   Evelyn Waugh.
But  all  in  all,  Triptych is  a  work  of
considerable   distinction,    where 	every phrase   has  been-perhaps at  times  too noticeably-carefully licked  into  shape. It belongs  to a  tiny  body  of radio  drama of  which   Dylan   Thomas'  Under   Milk Wood  is the  best known,  and  which  not only   uses   the   medium  in   an   original manner but  also  transcends it.  Two  de­ siderata remain. The  contemporary  the­ atre   in  Canada must  discover   and  pro­ duce   the  work  of  Mr.  Reeves  on  stage. And  Mr.  Reeves  should,  in  my  opinion,  re-join  the mainstream of  dramatic activ­ ity   in   the   country   by   writing  for   the stage,  which  stands  in  great   need  of  his superb   linguistic  craft.
PETER  HAY


UP THE NEW!

GUY  DUFRESNE,   The   Call  of  the  Whippoor­ will;    MARCEL  DUBE,    The    White  Geese; ROBERT   GURIK,   The   Hanged    Man.  New Press. $6.95 ea.

THE  RECENT  RASH of  Canadian  play publications is a sign that  publishing companies are  finally  catching on  to  the fact   that   Canadian  playwriting is  alive and  well.  Unfortunately,  these same presses  still  do  not  seem  to  realize  that the  new momentum in  Canadian theatre
 has  been  generated  by  a  group of  play­ wrights  who  have  only  really surfaced in the  past  three  years.  These  new  writers, with   rare   exceptions, have   been   totally  ignored  by Canadian  publishers.
Since   1969,  my   main    preoccupation has  been   the  Canadian   playwright,  his work  and   his  advancement, and   I  was thrilled  to hear that  New Press would be publishing   a  series   of  Canadian   plays. What   a  disappointment, however,   when their   choices  were   announced!  Outside of  David   French's  hit  of  1972  Leaving Home,  New  Press  had   chosen   to  pub­ lish  works  by  playwrights of  the  Sixties
. .. and   the  Sixties  are  now  comparable to  the  Stone  Age  in  Canadian  playwrit­ mg.
This   was  supposed   to  be  a  review  of the   three   French-Canadian  plays   pub­ lished   in   English    translations   by   New Press  in  1972:   The   Call  of the  Whip­ poorwill,   The    White  Geese   and   The  Hanged   Man.   After    several   readings, however,   I   decided    that    the   first   two plays were not  worth  discussing. I  would like  to  blame   the   translators  for   these tedious  scripts  but   the  real  blame   must go  to  New  Press  for choosing   them   in the first place. New  Press did  not  have  to opt   for   conservatism  but,    like   several other   prominent   publishing  companies that   now  distribute  Canadian  plays,  it seems to be working  under the unspoken policy that  a  play must  satisfy one  of the three  following  criteria for  publication: It  must  be  written  by  a  "name"  (even if that  name  wrote  it  twenty  years  ago); it must  be edited  by a "name" (and that means the editor and not the play takes precedence); and   it  must   have   been  a "hit"  (whatever that   implies). It  seems that  publishing companies are scared  of publishing any  play   that   does  not  con-


II I

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



form  to traditionally safe formulas. These safe   formulas  did   not   make   Canadian plays  popular in  the  past  and   they  will not  make  them  popular in  the  present.
If a  play  is published, it  should  imply that   an  intelligent editor  really  believed that  it  was a  beautiful script,  and  if it is published in translation, it should  also follow  that  the  editor was convinced the translation  did   justice    to   the   original script.   Neither Dufresne's The  Call   of the  Whippoorwill, nor Dube's The White Geese can possibly have satisfied either category,  for   both   plays   are   boring   to read   and   aggravatingly  translated.  Du­ fresne   and   Dube,  like  Gratien   Gelinas,  are   playwrights   of   the   Sixties.   These  authors have  now  been  replaced by more stimulating  and    revolutionary   writers. Why  print  a play in  the  Seventies that  is no  longer  relevant?  I  believe  that   there  are  vivid  and   stimulating French-Cana­ dian  plays  by younger  authors waiting  to be  published, just as in English-speaking Canada  there   are   many   new  and   very fine plays crying out  for distribution now.
The status  of the  Canadian  playwright has   been  greatly   advanced  in   the   past three  years. The  Playwrights Co-op,  since I972,  has  served   the   majority  of  them well but  distributors are  still unwilling to handle  the   Co-op's  manuscript   copies. This is why  we need  publishers who  will print Canadian plays in paperback for distribution across  the  country. Talon, in Vancouver, is one  of  the  few  companies that   has  shown  some  courage of  choice. In  addition, Rolf  Kalman's handsome volume  An  Anthology of Canadian Plays, published   in   I972,   has   included   new plays and  even one  unproduced play. But these  are  rare  examples, and   no  contin­ uity   is  implied    since   Talon   is   poorly financed, and  its output  is  irregular as a


I I 2
 result,  and  Rolf  Kalman is an  independ­ ent  publisher   whose  commitment is sub­ ject  to  his  own  whim.  Money   does  not seem to be forthcoming from  the Canada Council   to  publish   Talon's  newest  pro­ jects, such  as their  Anthology of Factory Plays. The  Canada  Council is  also  im­ pressed  by "names" and  not by unknowns such  as  George   Walker   or  Larry   Fine­ berg or  by controversial writers  like John  Palmer.   The   ironic   factor  is  that    the Canada Council  will give subsidies directly  to  these  playwrights but  not  to  the  pub­  lishing  companies  that   propose   to  print  their  plays.  It's  important to  these  play­ wrights  that  their  plays appear in  paper­ back  if  their  work  is  going  to  be  better  known    across   the   country.   Until    the moneyed  companies break  free from  their hesitant   and   traditionally  gutless  choice of  plays, Canadian  playwriting will con­ tinue   to  be  a  rather  pallid   segment   of our  culture, especially  in  the  eyes of  the book-buying  public.
The   Hanged   Man, the  third  play  on the  New  Press list,  does  redeem  its  pub­ lishers  to  a  certain  extent. On  the  sur­ face,  The Hanged  Man is a simple  play, about  simple  people.  The  play is about  a crippled  father   and   his  blind   son,  who live together in a decrepit mine  hut. Joel, the  son,  had  been  blinded  in  a  mining  accident. He  supports his father by beg­ ging in  the village. Suddenly his sight  re­ turns.   He  continues  to  beg  but   people stop  giving  him  money.  Times   are  bad for   everyone,   and   Joel   despairs   about life. The  father, however,  comes  up  with a brilliant plan  to make  money. Joel  will pretend  to hang  himself and  the old man will sell bits of the lucky  hanging rope  to superstitious  and   wealthy    buyers.   The plot   succeeds;   Joel   and   his  father  are getting   rich;  the  rope  brings  luck  to  the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



village.   The   poor   begin   to  call  Joel   a saint.   As  a   result,   he   starts   to   dream about   a  new  world  where   the  poor  can create   a   better   life  for   each   other   by working   together.  He   decides   to  come down   from   his  rope  to  lead   them.   His dream, tragically, is shattered by a group of beggars  and  misfits that  he has invited to  share   a  banquet. They  are  quarrel­ some  and  unchanged and  fearing loss of their  luck,  they  turn  on  him and  furious­  ly kill  him  while  the  father cowers  in  a corner.
The  Hanged   Man   is  a  tragedy   and Joel  the   universal  sacrificial  victim. Throughout  the   play   there   are   subtle repetitions of Christ-imagery. Joel  stands with   his  arms  outstretched  on  his  table above   the  beggars,   he  breaks   a  loaf  of bread   to  settle  a  quarrel, he  is betrayed by his father and  so on. Gurik  is in  con­ trol  of his craft  and  never  overplays  this imagery   which  adds  a  deeper  dimension  to  the  play.  The  author  has  not  written a   grand-scale   masterpiece  but   he   has created a  powerful  theatrical space.  The Call  of the Whippoorwill and  The White Geese   leave   you   on   the   outside,    The Hanged  Man  pulls  you in. This  is a rare accomplishment. With   the  exception  of the songs which  seem unnecessarily cum­ bersome,    the   translation   preseiVes   the honesty   and   sensitivity   of   the   original script.  The play  is not  only  readable but also  seems  eminently   producable.  New Press  made   one  good  choice.  Oh,  for  a dozen  more  in  the  future!
CONNIE  BRISSENDEN
 DRAMATIC IMAGINATIONS

WILLIAM H.  NEW,  ed.,  Dramatists  in  Canada.
University of British  Columbia Press.  $s.so.

To  THE  CASUAL EYE   it  must  appear that the   dramatic  imagination surveyed    the land,  from   St.  John's to  Vancouver  Is­ land,   shivered,   hunched  itself   into   its parka  and  fled  in  panic. Perhaps it  was bushed   early   in  its  struggle  to  suiVive. How  many  plays  does  Margaret  Atwood mention  in Survival? What is  the  size of Jack   Gray's   bibliography at  the  end   of his article  on  drama in  Read  Canadian? Canadian poetry  and  fiction, by compari­ son,  are  alive  and  well  and  at  home  in every province.
As George  Woodcock  reported to the Ontario Royal Commission on Book  Pub­ lishing  in 1972:

The one  field  of writing in  Canada that has been   neglected  by  publishers  of  all   kinds and  in  which large  numbers of  good  manu scripts   may  still  lie  unpublished, is  that of drama. In  Canada a  book  of  printed  plays is  a  publishing  occasion merely  because  of its  rarity; even  a  well-known and   relatively successful   playwright like  George Ryga   has to  publish his  plays  with  a  small,  non-com­ mercial Vancouver press, Talonbooks, and   I know   several   other  good  dramatists  whose plays  have  never  seen  print. The reasons  for this  special   situation  are   complex, and  the responsibility  may   lie   less   with    Canadian publishers than  with  Canadian   playhouses, which, despite  their  professions of  interest in  native  drama,  have   been   notably  more  reluctant  to stage  Canadian plays  than  pub­ lishers    have   been    to    present   Canadian books.  Publishers, understandably,  have   in their  turn   waited  on  a  stage success  which for  most  playwrights here   never  comes.

This    situation  is,   however,    improving daily.  The  Brock   Bibliography  of   Pub­ lished  Canadian Stage  Plays  In  English,
1900-1972, is making  scholars,  actors  and

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



producers aware  of the  number of usable plays in print. New  Press is expanding its drama series, and  play anthologies like Eugene  Benson's Encounter, Canadian drama in four  media,  are  reaching the market.  What   has   been   missing,  apart from  Murray Edwards' incidental  evalu­ ations  in  A  Stage  in  Our  Past, has  been a  critical  overview   of   whatever   drama there  is in this country. William  New has now  supplied   this  in  a  volume  of essays, Dramatists in Canada, culled  mainly from Canadian Literature.
Of  the  three  categories which  organize groups  of these essays, Part  I, "The Voice of Tradition", Part II, "The Voice of the Artist", and  Part  III, "The Voice  of  Ex­ periment", the  latter is  by  far  the  most densely   packed.  Its   eleven   essays  over­ power   the  four   articles  in  each  of  the other    two   sections.   Since   four   of   the eleven  contributions to  the  third  section were   commissioned,  this   diversity   and  range   of  views   constitutes   part   of  the strategy    of   the   anthology:   rightly    or wrongly,   the  editor seems  to  have  con­ cluded  that Canadian drama and  theatre must  be  saved  and   regenerated  through experiment.
If this is indeed  a wholesome  prescrip­ tion for  the cure  of the fabulous invalid's ailment  in Canada, how do  the  contribu­ tions   to   Parts    I   and    II  help   to   es­ tablish  a  diagnosis  of  the  disease?  "The Voice  of  Tradition" speaks  to us through Michael  Tait's  "Playwrights in  a  Vacu­ um"  and Norman Shrive's "Poets  and Patriotism", commenting on  the  serious and Victorian phase of our drama, while William   Solly's   "Nothing  Sacred"  and M. W. Steinberg's "Don Quixote and  the Puppets" focus on a characteristically Canadian blend of  twentieth-century comedy.  These   articles,  each   in  its  own

I 14
 way,  are   well  worth   the  reader's  time. Michael   Tait's essay, a  chapter from  his I963  University of Toronto M.A.  thesis, combines   the  methods of  historical,  bio­ graphical  and   formal   criticism   to  offer perspectived  assessments  of  the  value of Heavysege's 	and 	Mair's	pioneering dramas, Saul  and  Tesumseh.  He  is  less tolerant of  the  shortcomings of  Wilfred  Campbell's  Poetical   Tragedies. Norman Shrive,  like  Tait, sees the  main   ailment of   the   nineteenth-century  Canadian drama as remoteness  from  life on the one hand  and   from   the  stage  on  the  other. Shrive   finds   it   particularly   deplorable that   Mair, so  directly   and   dramatically involved  with  the  Riel  uprisings,  should have   ignored   his   personal   involvement with  Canadian history and  have  returned to the  war  of  I 8I 2 instead  for  his heroic materials. "Distance  lends   enchantment to  the  eye" was  a  truism, surely,  for  the Romantics  and   Victorians  alike.   Their aim  was moral  uplift,  not  social  reality.
Solly's  article  is a  delight. Canadian drama has  certain unique  features, after all:   of  the  three   types  of  comedy -the satiric, the gentle, and the "sugar-coated" didactic-the first  is definitely  rated   as best.  Its  typical  features of  the  butchery of sacred  Canadian cows, the  naive  hero or heroine,  and  the satire  directed against the    institution-deriding   audience,    evi­ dently  supply  a  perfect  success-formula, for Canadian radio, T.V. and  stage. The gentle  comedies  may  be  insipid,  but  the didactic ones  in  which   martyrs are   de­ stroyed  by the  insensitive,  envious  multi­ tude,  seem to  strike  home.  M.  W. Stein­ berg concentrates on one dramatist, Rob­ ertson  Davies,  who  provides  some of  the finest specimens  in the third  group of comedies.   Fortunately,  Davies'   artist-re-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



deemers  survive  to transform the  insensi­
tives.
Individualism even m the face of the shared  pain  of  audience  indifference sounds   in   "The  Voice   of   the   Artist", Merrill   Denison's rejection of a  national theatre  for   Canada,   written  in    I928 when he was smarting from  Hart House disappointments and  about to launch into hectic  historical serial-writing for  Cana­ dian  radio.  Canada, he  says, lacks  a cul­ tural  centre  and  looks to New York, Lon­ don or Paris for its standards. That is,  its cultural stance  is colonial, although it be­ came   a  nation  in   r867.  The   same  dis­ illusioned  tone of voice,  but  a more  posi­ tive concern for  the development of orig­ inal  Canadian dramatic talent, emanates from  George  Robertson's explanation of the  mediocrity  and   technicism of  much radio  and  television  drama. The  most op­ timistic   statements about  the  health  of our  theatre come from  James Reaney  and Wilfred   Watson,   both  adventurously ex­ perimental despite  their  academic estab­ lishment  connections. Here,   it  seems,  is the   beginning  of   the   patient's  health, which  is to  be  examined in  much   more detail  in  Part  III.
We are not disappointed. Although perhaps fewer than  three  essays, in this section,   on   Reaney's  plays   might   have been   preferable,  and   although  another two articles  by Michael   Tait in  addition to   his   Part    I   contribution  may   have robbed  us of some other interesting points of  view  (such  as Brian   Parker's, for  ex­ ample,  who edits Canadian plays for New Press, or  Michael   Booth's,   who  explores Canadian theatrical history),  the  variety actually  achieved  satisfies. Of  these eleven pieces which  make  up section  three,  four deal   with   the   Quebec   scene,   three   of them   in   French.  Well,  we  do  want   to
 know  what   is  going   on  there,   and   this over-emphasis is part  of  the  prescription for a cure.  Quebec theatre, all four essay­ ists   agree,    is   rapidly   moving   towards health. Marguerite  Primeau,  writing about  Gelinas,  and  Edwin  Hamblet, ana­ lyzing   Marcel   Dube's   dramatic  world,  show that  these endeavours of highly  suc­ cessful playwriting take the form of a very close probing of the wound; these drama­ tists, one  might  say, are  in  phase  one  of Atwood's Survival:   they  show  the  audi­ ence   their   true   victim-condition.   Nairn Kattan in French and  Max Dorsinville in English  provide  very  useful  overviews  of Quebec dramatic activity.
Les  Anglais, on  the  other  hand,  seem
to  perceive  a  number of  different  symp­ toms.  Mavor   Moore,   following   Artaud, would  have  the  Canadian  dramatists re­ vitalize  their art  by a re-emphasis on  non­  verbal   communication.  James    Reaney's language of props  and  poetic  symbols,  as discussed by Alvin Lee and  Michael Tait, offers such  a departure from  the  literary drama  of   masterpieces,  which    Artaud and    Moore   would    shelve   rather  than stage.   George   Ryga,   Simon   Gray   and John   Herbert  bring   to  Canadian   dra­ matic  writing   unhackneyed  subjects  and surprising character  explorations. Ryga's  characters,   Indians    and    other   disin­  heriteds,  "are  partly  tormented  by  their need for love in a world  that  denies  it or corrupts  its  expression,   [and]  many   of them  are  even  more  profoundly troubled by  existential longings", Neil  Carson ob­ serves. It is the  blend  of  the  comic  and the  sinister,  according  to  William  New, that   makes  Simon  Gray's  victim-victim­ izer  plays  "so  arrestingly   bizarre". Ann Messenger,   investigating  John   Herbert's themes,   concludes   that   his   redemptive figure,  "instead of  redeeming on  Christ-

I I 5

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



mas Eve, ... is dragged off to yet another crucifixion.... in   the  world   of  Fortune and   Men's  Eyes  all  Christs   must   fail." The  didactic comedy  praised  by William Solly in "Nothing Sacred" has been meta­ morphosed into  black  comedy.
A  helpful   selected   chronology rounds out this anthology which,  despite  William New's modest, and correct, introductory claim  that  Dramatists in  Canada  "makes no  pretense   to  be  a  definitive  analysis", has   a  catalytic  effect   upon   the   reader who does care  about the  health of  Cana­ dian  drama. As the  editor says, "success­ ful  drama puts  people  into  critical   posi­ tions   and   watches    them   make   ethical  choices  and  either solve their  problem   or worsen it." Here  is our prescription. Heed it, Canadian  dramatists, producers, audi­ ences, scholars.
ROTA   LISTER


GLOOM, DOOM AND PROMISE

72   New   Canadian   Stories,   edited   by  David
Helwig  and  Joan  Harcourt, Oberon,  $2.95.

INI 97 I,Oberon Press published Four teen Stories  High, a collection of short  stories never  before  published, in  an  attempt to give  exposure   to  a  number  of  younger short story writers. The experiment was successful   both   in  uncovering a  market for short  stories,  and  in revealing a signi­ ficant   number  of  writers  working  with the  genre.  As a  result,  Oberon has  made  their   project an  annual  event,  and   this book  is  the   current  offering   of  sixteen stories  culled   from   close  to  a  hundred submitted from across Canada.
Recent  anthologies  have   had   a  ten­
dency  to duplicate their  authors and  their

116
 story  selections;  therefore it  is something of  a  treat   to  sit  down   with   one  which offers   a   completely   new   set  of  stories, many   by  unfamiliar  writers.   Six  of  the authors are published  poets. Among  these Margaret Atwood,  John Newlove, and George McWhirter show the most promis­ ing use of the short  story genre.  Atwood's "The Grave  of the  Famous  Poet" is con­ cerned  with the final breakdown of a relationship.  Ego   brings   isolation;  the male  lover  assimilates  the  identity of the dead   poet;  the  woman   is left  arranging shells "like teeth, like flowers". George McWhirter writes  a  lyrical  tale  entitled "The  Harbinger". An  explicit   story  of sexual barter  in a European marketplace, the  story  uses a  rich   blend   of  dialogue and  interior monologue to create an effec­ tive mood piece about the relationship between  sexuality  and  death. John  New­ love's  "The Story  of  a  Cat" is  perhaps too didactic to be a first-rate story. Writ­ ten as a monologue,  it contains a series of observations  about   loneliness,   fear,   and the  pressures  of  responsibility.  Newlove, in   spite   of  his   pedantic  passages,   can handle prose with considerable skill. Poetry  readers  will find  this piece an attractive contemplation on themes  which frequently appear in his poems.
Gloom  and  doom  continues to oppress
these younger story tellers. Two authors, however,   manage   to   bring   a   touch   of humour  to  their   stories.  Leo  Simpson's "The  Ferris   Wheel"  is  a   rather   light­ weight  piece  which  puts  down  civil  ser­ vice   "pecking orders". John   Sandman brings more weight  to bear  in his story of mismatched youths  hitch-hiking to Van­ couver. He  has a good  ear  for colloquial­ isms, and  he  develops  his characters with skill and  understanding.
The  collection   is  intelligently edited.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Helwig    and    Harcourt  have    obviously been  aware  of  the  need  for  a variety of techniques  and   styles  to   balance  what could   have   been  a  straight  diet   of   ob­ scure,   subjective    "mood"  pieces.   It   is usually   these  "mood"  pieces  that   have difficulties.    On   several   occasions,   one wonders if they warrant the work to ferret out  what  kernels  of insight  they  do  pos­ sess. Obscurity has  become  a  virtue   for some   without  the   redeeming  values   of symbol and  significance.
Gail Fox's "The Man  who Killed Hemingway" is not overly obscure, but  it misses the mark  partly  because  it is about dull  and  lack-lustre  people  who  lack definition and credibility. Andreas Schroeder's "The Mill"  also fails  to con­ vince  me  that  the  death of his  character who ends up "keeping alive huddled over the fitfully burning limbs of his own body" is any loss. I do not know why he suffers, and  for  me at  least he fails to become  in any meaningful sense representative of the human condition.  McWhirter, Newlove, Nora  Keeling,  and  Jane Rule  handle the impressionistic   mood  piece   with   much more success.
Generally  speaking,  however,  this is an
intelligently edited  and  interesting set of stories.  There  are   no   crashing  failures among  the  tales -something  one  might expect   from   sixteen   newcomers-and there   are  a  number of  very  fine  pieces which  say  a  good  deal  about   the  health of  the  short  story  genre  in  Canada. One would hope that  future  anthologists would  feel less inhibited about  broaden­ ing  their  selections  to include  more  work by some of these very  promising authors.

S. E.  MC MULUN
 HOPES AND TREPIDATIONS

VICTOR  COLEMAN,    Parking   Lots.   Talonbooks.
$3·50.
VICTOR coLEMAN,  America. Coach House Press.
$4·95·
ROBERT   Hooo,   Standing  Back.  Coach  House
Press.  $3.00.

VICTOR  COLEMAN  is  a particularly  diffi­ cult  poet  to  come  to  terms  with.  Some­  times  I suspect  he  both   likes  and  plans it  that  way:  he  just  does  not  care  if he reaches  a wide audience. When  Coleman writes   poems   that   many   readers    find strange  and  uninvolving, it is highly  like­ ly  that   he  knows  very  well  what   he  is doing.
I  came   to  his  two  new  books,  then, with  quite  high  hopes  and  some  trepida­ tion. I have  read  both  a  number of times now,  and   while   I  am  still  not  entirely  clear  of  his  intent, it  seems  to  me  that  Coleman   is  trying   to  achieve   in  poetry  certain   effects  remarkably  like  those  of the  new  fiction   (Borges  et  al.)   In  "The Beachcomber"   (itself  a  pertinent  image of the kind  of  poet  Coleman often  strives to be: language is his beach,  thought and life  his  sea,  and   the  poems  he  picks  up mere  flotsam  and   jetsam  thereon)   Cole­ man  writes of "objects of speech" so as to suggest  that  speech  both  has  and  is "ob­ jects".  Art   has  its  objective  correlative, too,  and   Coleman  appears   here   to   be speaking   of   both   the   inner   and   outer  worlds  at  once,  rather than  merely  using the  latter   to  mirror the  former   or  vice­ versa. This  attempt  is  fascinating to  fol­ low, even  if it doesn't  always  succeed.
What   does  emerge   from   the  attempt is a  poetry  so intensely  private that  even some  of  Coleman's  friends  must   some­ times  wonder   what   he's  saying.  Perhaps

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the  matter is unimportant if the  manner is   enjoyable;  perhaps.  Certainly,  with their  allusive  punning and   rhyming wit, the   poems   in   both   Parking    Lots   and A me rica are  often   pleasing  enough even when  they  are  most  opaque.  Coleman  is a  fine  manipulator of  language and rhythm, and   sometimes   meaning in  the sense of  personal meaning for  the  reader does emerge. Many of the poems in both books   "flashed"  on   occasion   with   sur­ prisingly  sharp images  of a  truly  revolu­  tionary   nature. Coleman is  a  man   pos­ sessed  of  his  visions,  and   possession/ob­ session  shines  through  all  the  poems.
The poems of Parking Lots are more accessible  to the ordinary reader  than  are those of  America, but  they  are  part  of a whole  and  what   they  share  is  more  im­ portant  than   what   differentiates   them.  Nevertheless  the   natural  speaking  voice and   the  obvious  poetic  rhythms  of   that  voice   recorded  on   the   page   are   more easily  observed  in  Parking  Lots. Parking Lots  is like a series of  letters  to far-away friends; America  reads  more  like a series of  messages  in  special   code   to  a  select few.
All the poems in America are acrostics: forced   acrostics   in   that   Coleman  often breaks  words  in  two at  the  ends  of lines to get  the  right  letters  at  the  beginnings. Thus, as Allan  Ginsberg says in  his short Afterword:  "Ear  rythm   choppy,  mind very   high./ Acerb repugnant  honesty." Ginsberg  is  correct;  these   are   grittily honest  poems,  however  much  the  games­ manship of  the  acrostics  suggests  a  kind of  flippant foolery.  But  I  was  surprised, after   reading  Coleman's   earlier  poetry, to  discover   such   a  careless attitude  to­ wards   rhythm  in   the   poems.    (On   the other hand,  Coleman has,  since  the  ap­  pearance of  these  poems,  stated that   he

II8
 has given  poetry  up  for "collaborations," and  these,  obviously,  cannot possibly  re­ flect an  individual's personal  rhythms; so maybe  America  is merely  a  first  attempt to break  poetry out  of this "confinement"
-Coleman perhaps sees it.)
In  some of  the  early  poems  the  acros­ tics are  words  such  as Marijuana,  Hash­ ish,  Tape Recorder. "The  Elements" of course   has  EARTH,  AIR,   FIRE,  and  WATER.  "The  Heavens"   contains  all the  major   astrological   signs,   while   the two  major  poems,   "America"  &  "The Trumps,"  contain   every   card    of   the Tarot  pack.  By  itself,  this  game   is  not enough   to  sustain   a   long   sequence   of poems,  and  it  is  certainly  not  the  only thing Coleman offers. His  use of internal rhymes and puns is often  provocative, pulling   the  reader   back  into  the  poems just as boredom  begins to threaten. There is also what  Ginsberg calls Coleman's "Acerb  repugnant honesty," repugnant because  we  both   turn   away   from   it  in him,  and   from   what   it  mirrors   of  our selves. These  poems  state  nothing clearly, but   they   do,   at   their    best,   haul    the reader,  in a most circuitous manner, into a series of systems of meaning which  de­ mand  reflection  and  consideration. Cole­ man   is  writing   about  the   present,  the here and  the now as he envisions  it, how­ ever  distortedly, and  when  he  is success­ ful  he convinces  his  readers  that  the  dis­ tortions  he  records  are  not  his but  those of his environment. This  is no mean  feat.
I  have  no  such  trepidations when speaking  of Robert Hogg.  He  is not  one of our most prolific  poets, but his one previous book, The Connexions (Oyez, Berkeley, 1g66), was one of the most powerful  of its year  (he  also  had  poems in  New  Wave   Canada).  Standing  Back is not  a  large  book,  but  it  reveals  a  dis-

BOOKS IN  REVlliW



ciplined  and  rigorous  talent, and  the long poem,  "L'Anse aux  Meadows," reveals  a new  direction  in  his  work  that   possibly points  to important poems to come.
The poems  in  Standing   Back are,  on
the  whole,  more  restrained than  those of The  Connexions. The poems  of the  early book  were obsessed visions of various ex­ treme   situations  while   the   new   poems seem   spiritually  serene   in   comparison. This serenity  is neither false nor  escapist; rather it appears to be a serenity  born  of peaceful  living  and  hard-won craftsman­ ship.  Unlike  Coleman who  is something of  a   large-scale  muralist  in   his  recent work, Hogg  is a miniaturist: he achieves his effects in small, subtle,  delicate thrusts  of  language and  imagination.
I envisage  Hogg  as a gemologist  in poetry,   carefully  polishing    every   word until  the  whole  poems glows  (his fine ear for  nuance and  rhyme  shows  through at every  turn) .  The   short   poem,  "Once," is  an  example of  his  verbal   and  rhyth­ mical  dexterity: every  word  counts   and is placed  with  the greatest care:

There was  a  line  in  my  head
that would   have  gone  around  you delicate as  hair

now  the  syntax evades   me the  words   I hear

fall  about your  shoulders but  do  not  rime  or  cast

patterns on  your  face or  mine

"L'Anse aux  Meadows" appears to de­ mand   a   much   more   complex   response from  the  reader, if  only  because  it  is a longer   poem,   an  interwoven pattern  of historical and   mythic   meditations  and historical and   contemporary  narratives, but  to say this  is to deny  the  great  subt­  lety  of  such  poems  as  "Waki's Dream,"
 "Aries  in Pisces Dream," and  "Passages," to  name   just  three.  The  greater  length of "L'Anse aux  Meadows", plus its docu­ mentary "contents", do  create a  specific kind  of complexity in  the  poem,  but  it's merely   a  different  kind,   rather   than   a greater  kind,   of  complex   artistry   than  that  found  in the other  poems.  I find  it a fascinating experiment,  for  Hogg  is here attempting  something  new  for  him:  an objective    examination   of   other    people and   their  experiences.  With   great   com­ passion  and  clear  poetic  vision,  the  poet sees and  renders the contrast between  the hopes and  presentiments of the early Vik­  ing   explorers    and   the   lost   hopes   and weary acceptance of the contemporary fishermen    whose   way   of   life   is  being slowly destroyed.
Robert   Hogg   is  a  fine  craftsman,  he uses his language with  devotion and  lov­ ing  care,  he  has  a  pure  poetic  imagina­ tion;  and  Standing   Back  is  a  small  but powerful  poetic  testament to  his  growing  talent.  I look forward to  his  next  book.

DOUGLAS  BARBOUR


MARSHMALLOW WORLDS

SEYMOUR   BLICKER,   Shmucks.  McClelland  &
Stewart, $5·95·
JOHN  MILLS, The Land   of  Is.  Oberon, $3.50 paper.

WHERE IS  the   land   of  is?  One   of  its outposts   is  John    Mills's   Vancouver, a city  of  sordid  brothels   and  sleezy hotels, also containing a university whose sole identified  faculty  member is a Professor Jackell   who  is  given   to  having  embar­ rassing erections  in the Faculty Club.  An­ other  is Seymour  Blicker's  Montreal, the

119

BOOKS IN  REVffiW



chief landmark of which  is a bitterly con­
tested  downtown alley.
The  boundaries of the Land  of Is are defined   for   us  halfway   through   Mills's novel by a British  Museum clerk turned blackmailer: "a  marshmallow world   of Is  which   doesn't  expand  the  conscious­ ness ... but   rather shrinks   it  to  the  di­ mensions of a pin-head." This "huge cos­ mic  marshmallow", the   modem  world, blunts  the sensibility  of  those  who live on it,  producing a  tangle  of  blackmail, sex­ ual   perversion    and   murder  in   Mills's book, and  of  frustrated  anger and  sexual ambition in  Elicker's  novel.
Mills reminds us that the marshmallow world did not always exist by continual, ironic   reference   to  The  Tempest. The chief  characters of  his  brave   new  world are  called  Prospera, Ariel,  Mirabelle and Ferdinand; more  subtly,  incidents of Shakespeare's  plot   are   parodied:  Mira­ belle  (a  whore)   prefers  the  novel's Cali­ ban    (half   Eskimo,   half   inbred   English aristocrat)  to  Ferdinand   (the   heir   ap­  parent of a  prominent  bootlegger).
-Mills's  novel  overflows   with   parodies and   literary  allusions.   The  plot   is   re­ markably  inventive  and    skilfully   man­  aged. There is a formidable array of nar­  rative   devices:   letters,  confessions,  tales, codes, editorial  notes, charts. Yet, for one reader at  least,  all   this  energy   and   in­ genuity   is   ultimately  tiresome.   Mills  is able  to give  his  characters interesting at­ tributes: his prostitute is intellectual, his Eskimo  has  (or  believes he has)  an enor­ mous   flaccid   penis   that   causes   him   to black  out  in  crucial   situations,  his  Ariel has  become  inarticulate  through  reading  Finnegans   Wake.  But  these   traits   seem imposed   on  each  character, rather than  given   a  genuine  imaginative  life.  Only the  Eskimo  (one Dominick  Fester)  seems

120
 to   be   convinced    of   the   reality   of   his bizarre  identity.  The  others  smile and grimace  as the  puppeteer bids  them.
So, despite  the  bewildering assortment of characters and  narrative methods,  the chief  impression   the  novel  leaves  is that of  a  single  satirical   voice,  the  author's. This  is true  of many  satires.  But  the  sat­ iric  voice  here  is not  incisive  or  wither­ ing:   it  is sour  rather than   acid,  peevish rather  than   penetrating. Take,  for   ex­ ample,   the  description  of  a   character's arrival in  Vancouver:

The megrim of  passengers from  the  London plane had   long  ago  disembarked and   were now  herded, bored   and   irritable, into  con­ frontations  with   officialdom-some   to   be stamped  and    duly    entered,  others   to   be frisked   for  drugs, a  few  to  be  detained  at Her     Majesty's   pleasure.    Most    made   it through   the    gates    into   the  pinesol    and  tobacco fume  atmosphere  of  the  main   con­  course,   where   some   got   their  faces   kissed by  relatives, others their   hands  shaken  by sales  managers  and   the  rest   their   freedom to   be  set   adrift  in   the   streets  of  the   city once  more  alone  and  masters, whatever that means,  of  their  destinies.

The   satire   seems   willed   and   self-con­ scious,   feebly   lunging  after   ill-defined targets.   One   does  not  wish   to  damn   a book on the basis of a single  passage, but in this case the  passage seems representa­ tive  of  stylistic  weakness  and   a  lack  of satirical  focus in  the  novel  as a whole.
If Seymour  Elicker's  Shmucks appears more  consistently  successful,  it  is clearly a  far   less  ambitious  work   than   Mills's novel, both  in its form  and  in  the  range of its satirical  attack. The action  of Shmucks  begins  in  an  alley  which   two cars enter  simultaneously from opposite directions; it ends  there  the next morning after  both  drivers,  a Roumanian taxi op­ erator and  a young  Jewish  businessman, have  stubbornly  refused  to back  out,  and

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



have   remained  in  their   stationary  posi­ tions   all   night.   Apart  from   occasional  flashbacks,  the  rest  of  the  novel  stays  in the alley, which  is visited  by a young girl, a rich drunk, an  irate local  resident,  and,  finally,  a  policeman.
The   trick,  of  course,  is  to  maintain a sense  of  momentum and   interest   within the framework of an essentially  static situation. Elicker  does this  remarkably well.  All  the   characters  are   types  and some   of   the   jokes   are   tired,    but   the central situation is never  allowed   to  be­ come   tedious;  it  is  exploited  just   long enough   and   then   resolved   by  a   clever ending   appropriate  to  the  characters of the  two  protagonists. For  the most  part,  the  action   is allowed   to  speak  for  itself, with  very little  of the authorial intrusion so pervasive  in  Mills's  novel.
What Elicker  tries to do,  then,  he does very  well.  Nevertheless,  his  novel  gives the impression  of being  a succesful enter­ tainment, rather than   a  serious  achieve­  ment.  In   part,   this  is  because  his  char­  acters   are   convincing enough   to  main­  tain  the  comic  situation, but  often  have neither subtlety   nor  depth,  and   do  not seem  to lead  to any  moral  or  philosoph­ ical speculation (the difference in this re­ spect  between  Elicker  and   Richler, who draws  on  much  of  the  same  source  ma­ terial,  is obvious). Elicker's  most  success­ ful   creation  is   the   taxi-driver,   Pelzic, whose   painfully  self-defeating  attempts to seduce  a girl  or  cheat  a  rich  customer are  pathetic as well as funny. If the other characters could  induce equally  complex responses,  one's  praise  would  be  less grudging. But  the  other   principal  char­ acter,   Levin,   seems  shallow   and   much less vital.  His  stubbornness in  withstand­ ing  constant  sexual  temptation in  order  to  prolong  the  duel  with  Pelzic  is amus-
 ing  in  itself,   but   much   less  distinctive than   Pelzic's  muddled vision  of a  finan­ cial  coup.  None  of  the  other  characters are   of   more   than   superficial   interest, apart   from    a   Westmount   millionaire whose   hobby   is   to   scrawl   "something that'll strike  at  the core  of  a  particular situation"  (i.e.  "the  Queen sucks")  on the bathroom  walls of his club.
Shmucks  ends   with   a   reconciliation,
though   an  involuntary one,  between   the two   antagonists.  Pelzic   is  granted   his dream  of  a  fat  insurance claim,  in  con­ trast  to  Mills's  characters, who  exit  pur­ sued  by their  own  neuroses, and  the  elu­ sive grail  of  a  Yugoslavian  buried treas­  ure. In  Elicker's  world, the  marshmallow Land  of  Is  leaves  a  sweet  after-taste; in Mills's  novel,  the  marshmallow is satiric­ ally  roasted.  Not  bad  in  either   case,  but hardly  fit for The Gourmet's Canada.
T. E. TAUSKY


LOVE DISGUISED

ROY    MAC SKIMMING,   Formentera.  new   press.
$7.95  cloth, $2.95   paper.

FoRMENTERA,   the   smallest   of  the   four best-known   Balearic   islands  and   the  lo­ cale  of  Roy  MacSkimming's  first  novel, lies  just  off  lbiza. But  when   the  novel opens  the  outside  world  seems  far  away to  the  few  North   American  expatriates who live there.  Among  them  are  John, a Canadian lamenting the  apparent loss of his  Toronto  girl-friend  Joanna; and   his friend  Bruce,  another  Canadian. John is living  with  Bruce  and  a Scots  girl,  Deir­ dre.  He  sleeps with  Deirdre while  Bruce gets along  on absinthe and  masturbation, which  he later supplements with  Liromal tablets. When  Deirdre leaves, John meets a  new  arrival, an  American named   Syl-

121

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



vie, who  has  taken  a  European vacation from   her   fiance  back   home.  Sylvie  has been  sleeping   with   everything  in  pants since she  came  to Europe but  with  John she   finds   a   temporary   happiness,  only broken  when  their  neighbours, a nice Communist couple,  suggest a bout of committee sex. John backs out  but Sylvie, distressed   because  her   fiance is about   to arrive   and   all  seems  lost  anyway,  com­ plies.  The   next  day  John,  who  has  the stuff  of which  martyrs are  made,  ration­ alizes:

Turning  back   to   Sylvie,   he   watched  the frantic play  of  doubt in  her  eyes. The  ques­ tion   attacked  his  brain:  What did  she  get from   them   last  night, besides  this  horror of herself?  Pleasure?  Did   she   enjoy   it?   The first  answer was  Yes,  but   it  led  to  another question: Does  she  need  it like  that? And the  reply  he  heard was  No,  because it  costs far   too   much.  And   what's   today   going   to cost   her,   cost   me-yet   I  know   she  wants me  and  it makes   me  want  her,  random ir­  resistible process   I'll   never  understand, giv­ ing  in  to  it  at  last,  thankfully, like  its  fuel sex,  the   excitement  of  friction:  the  giving  and   hurting and  enduring  both, loving.

This of course, is an echo of the book's epigraph,  a  line   from   a  Joni   Mitchell song:    "Will   you   take   me   as   I   am?" Sylvie breaks  up with  her  fiance and  with John  leaves the island. The Communist couple  also  leave,  but  for  different  rea­ sons-they're fleeing  from   the  Guardia Civil.  Bruce,  a material  witness  in a kill­ ing,   must   stay.   Nor   does   he   seem   to mind: the  island  is a  sensual  compensa­ tion  for  his virginity. But  even  Ferment­ era's  sensual  simplicity is  doomed   by the influx  of fat  German  money-makers and the  paranoid  denizens  of  the  drug   cul­ ture.
Formentera,  says   the   book's   jacket, (since  MacSkimming is a partner in new press,  jacket  copy  must  be taken  serious­ ly)  "is a lyrical  novel  about the  disguises

122
 of  love  and   the  forces   that   repress  it." Indeed, love  is so  well  disguised   that   I cannot  find  it.  There  is  sentimentality about  island  scenery,  and  sexual  satisfac­ tion-the  girls  seem  fond  of  fellatio­ but   the  core  of  the   novel,  John's  rela­  tionship    with    Sylvie,   is   unconvincing. Love implies emotional intensity, and  this is lacking; it gets  lost  in the  traffic  jam. MacSkimming seems not  to have  decided  whether  his  novel   is   about  John    and  Sylvie,  or   about   the   Formentera  com­  munity.   As  a   result   the   reader  has   to keep  track  of  numerous  personal   names  (I   counted   48   in   a   187-page  novel)  which  remain  only  names.
Nor is the reader  helped  by the novel's structure.   John's   viewpoint  alternates with  Bruce's  and  Sylvie's,  Bruce's  chap­ ters  being  told  in  the  first  person, John's and   Sylvie's  in   the   third.  This  shuttle service,   though    interesting   technically, fails   to   bring   anyone's   character  into  fuller  dimension. Deirdre, for  instance, is from  Glasgow,  but  for  all  her  individu­ ality   she  might   as   well   be  from   Pago Pago. If the technique is meant to mirror the  restless  drifting of  the  expatriates it succeeds,  though   it  doesn't  make   much  of  a  novel.
What is good about the  book? Some of the  detail   succeeds-"a  white  she-goat with  a  face  like  Bertrand  Russell." The island   motif -psychic   and   geographic
-is  an  old  idea,  but   not  necessarily  a bad  one.  The  "love" scenes,  usually couched   in  prose  that   is  a  combination of  D.  H.  Lawrence and   An   Analysis  of Human Sexual  Response, occasionally aspire  to be something more.  These  suc­ cesses, minor  in  terms  of  this  book,  are enough  to make  me  hope  MacSkimming will write  another one.
FRASER SUTHERLAND

BOOKS IN REVIEW



SINGING SMALL



RAYMOND  SOUSTER,   Selected   Poems.   Oberon
Press. $2.95·

SINGING SMALL   seems   to  be  Raymond Souster's way of being a poet in the world (something he shares  with  his friend  Cid Corman, and  with  William  Carlos  Wil­ liams,  mentor to  them  both).  Souster  is at  his  best  when  dealing with  local,  im­ mediate,  concrete  experience.  Plenty   of evidence  for   this   can   be  put   together  from   the  work   under   review,   but   it  is much  less easy  to  see what  principles of selection   have  been   used  for   the   book
since it overlaps  with  other  Souster  titles'
The   Years  and   So  Far  So  Good.  The'

latter was sub-titled "Uncollected  Poems" but  its general  quality is very  much   that'
of  these  Selected  Poems. So,  these  can­ not be the Selected  Poems? Good work in the  other   volumes  is  not  included  here (nor   is   the   nice   little   baseball    poem "Yeah Tigers", which  appeared in Made in Canada).
A  number of  the  Selected  Poems  are
overt  testimony  to Souster's long-standing affinity  with  Williams.  Souster's "Queen Anne's Lace" (subject  also of a Williams poem)  offers his sense of the poet making poems:

as brief, as spare
so natural in  themselves
as to  take  breath  away

which    corresponds   closely   m    attitude
(and tone)   to Williams's:

what  is a poet -if  any
exists?
a  man
whose words will
bite
 their  way home-being actual having  the  form
of motion

Souster's   opening  lines   echo   Williams's
"things others  never  notice":

It's  a kind  of flower
that  if you didn't know  it
you'd  pass by the  rest of your  life.

Noticing   such   things   is  Souster's   chief strength: the  face of the  ragged  postcard seller on Yonge Street, the  movements of cats  (another preoccupation shared   with Williams), of small  birds,  the  shapes  and colours  of  old  buildings,  the  small   im­ mediate   actions   of  people.   Yet,   in   the strict  sense, Souster's are  not  the  imagist  poems   they   are   often   said   to   be,   but rather (in  Gary  Geddes's phrase)  "mini­ parables". They  are "mini" in  more  than  the obvious formal  sense. As parables they tend  to be judgments and when  the  judg­  ments  are  small  and  local,  involving the minutiae of daily  life,  they  often  contain a  "shock  of   recognition", either   painful or exhilarating, but  in any case very real:

Paper handkerchief or silk

it's how you wave that  puts  the  kiss in  goodbye
(At  the  Airport)

In  the  light  of  such  poems  it  is  diffi­ cult  to  understand Souster's  allowing  re­ print    here   of   "Death   Chant  for   Mr.  Johnson's America". In  length  and  scope the  largest  poem  in  the  book,  this  is far  too close to Ginsberg's "America" and   it lacks  the  saving   humour  of  Ginsberg's closing  line:   "America  I'm   putting my queer  shoulder  to  the  wheel". The  tub­ thumping  oratory  of  Souster's  piece  is quite unsuited to his temperament. Even though   he  probably feels  what  he  says,


123

BOOKS IN  REVmW



his statement of it  here  has  a stale  air. We come  back  to the mini-parable and
Souster's  very  real   virtues,   and   we  en­
counter a  paradox. Souster  presents him­ self  (justly)   as a man  whose eye is deter­ minedly  on  the  object, as  one  who  will not say more than  is there. When in prac­  tice his aesthetic is most  fully  realized  he often  says  a good  deal  less than  is there. Place  together two poems from  the  xgsos. First  "The  Opener";

From where I was  sitting
it  looked  like an  easy  double-play.

But  at  that   precise   moment a  sloppy-looking freighter
slipped through the  Western Gap
with  a  clothesline of  washing half  the  length of  her  deck,

and  the  runner going into  second took  one  look  at the  ship
and   yelled: "Hey, look,  they  got my  old  lady's  black  pants
flying  at the  masthead."

And  when   all  the  infield turned around to  get  a  gape, he  made second, stole  third, and  scored  standing up
the  winning run  in  what otherwise was one  of the  cleanest-played openers in  a  Toronto  ball-park.

Now,  for  comparison, "Welcome  to  the
South":

Kidnapped, beaten, shot  in  the  head,
his  body  tied  to  a  ninety-pound weight
and   dumped in  a  river:

a fifteen-year-old schoolboy, negro, vacationing from  Chicago,

enjoying just  a  sample
of  that  good  old  southern
hospitality.

The irony  of  the second  is heavier, more obvious,  but its real  limitations may be located  in the use of the indefinite article. All appearances to the contrary, this is an abstract poem, while "The Opener" (one


124
 of  the  happy   handful of  Souster's  base­ ball  poems)   is  more  subtle   in  its  irony and   genuinely   humorous,  including  ad­ miration  for   the   tricky  know-how   with which  the  run  was scored. A similar  and equally  successful  baseball  poem  is "The Roundhouse".
When   he  truly  has  his eye on  the  ob­ ject Souster  is good  at  recording  nuances  of behaviour, particularly in  relationships between  people or  in  capturing moments in  which  someone  is  revealing  a  particu­ lar sense of himself  ("Dominion Square", "The  Ugliest   Woman",  "Central  Park South",   "Decision   on   King    Street"). What  makes  these  poems  is the  recogni­ tion  of   a  moment's  uniqueness. Seeing clearly at  the  precise  moment  is the good thing,  but  simply  seeing  clearly  in  itself is  not  enough   to  make  a  poem,  as  the shrug  which  may  attend upon  a  reading of Souster's flatter poems  will attest.
The   particular  technique depends   on
a  catch   of  the  soul,  or  epiphany, and when   it  fails  results   only  in   (the   very thing Souster would set himself against) explanation (see, for  example, "Shoe Store"). Sometimes the  poem  is all there already, but he explains  in a tagline ("Armadale Avenue   Revisted").  Better, in "Late Arrival", the moth  at  the poetry reading, which:

changes in  the  winking of an  eye to  the  young  unspoiled face
of a girl  in  the  third row  smiling   up  at me.

Souster's other  strength is in  his sense of   humour,  well   exemplified    in   "The Spider   Outside Our  Window", wherein the  spider  has  to cope  with  the  problem of  what   to  do  with  a  rose  petal  which has fallen  into  his web:

Then one  day,  inspiration!
He  painted up  a  sign  in  bug's   blood, hung  it  out  proudly:

BOOKS IN REVIEW



HAPPY CHARLIE'S ROSE GARDENS WHERE  YOU'LL  ALWAYS MEET  A
FRIEND.
Because   of   its   characteristic   brevity and  opacity   (in  Pound's sense)  Souster's work  does  not  lend  itself  to  (or  require) analysis.   His   successes   (and    there    are happily   a  good  many   in  his  work  as  a whole)    are   like   baseballs   which    have been   well  hit,   both   for  lift   and   flight. WHOMP! and   they're   over   the  fence. His  batting average is  pretty   good,  too!
MIKE DOYLE


THERIAULT'S LAMENT

YVES    THERIAULT,     Ashini.     Tr.    Gwendolyn
Moore. Harvest  House.  $2.00.
YVES   THERIAULT,    N'Tsuk.   Tr.   Gwendolyn
Moore. Harvest  House. $2.00.

YVES THERIAULT'S  two  books  are  a  la­ ment  for what  was and  what  might  have been. The protagonists, an elderly Indian man   and   woman,  Ashini   and   N'Tsuk, are  telling   their  stories  near  the  end  of their   lives.   The  author  is   particularly adept in  his comparison of  the nature of white  man's time and  Indian's time. The  narrators speak  in  the  present  tense,  be­ cause   they   think   in   the   present   tense. N'Tsuk, the  old  woman, says, "Accord­ ing  to  these  same  Whites,  I  would  be a hundred  years old."  But  her  life  is  not measured  in years, it is measured in mar­ riage,  children, seasons  of good  hunting, and  finally,  in  death. She  embodies   the continuity  that   the   Indian  has   known, but  is losing, and  that  the white  man,  at least  in  his  North American fury  of  ex­ ploitation, has never  known. "Your coun­  try  with  its  people,  will  it  not  become  a vast  and  evil  land   where  human  beings
 unlearn how  to  live,  progressively,   from one generation to the  next?" asks NTsuk. Ashini,  "the Rock," show  the  will  for cultural survival,  and  with  it  provides a key for  cross-cultural understanding. He uses a  logic  which  Theriault succeeds  in representing  as  alien   to  white   thought, but   remains  clear   and    natural  in   the novel's  context. Ashini  is not  unrealistic, but  he  tries  to  maintain his  Montagnais way of life even  after  his family  has  died or gone  away  and  his  tribe  has  given  up and  gone to the reservation. To  him,  and to  Theriault, it  is  immoral  to  abandon in one generation the  incredibly complex culture  required to  survive   and   flourish in   the  wilderness,   a  culture  which   has taken  thousands of years  to evolve.  He  is not  hidebound or  inflexible; he  can  im­ agine   co-operation  or  compromise  with the   whites.    "... It would    have   been praiseworthy," he says, "to  have  allowed a  third  culture to  flourish  here,  another race,  a different language, capable of en­ riching   the  country  with   its   traditions,
with  its wisdom  and  its  intelligence." Theriault's novels  are  really  about  us,
the  whites,  for  Theriault is a white,  and
by showing  us the value  of what  our  civ­ ilisation  has destroyed  he is trying to give us  a  standard of  comparison.  His  tech­  nique  is effective,  but  not  bitter or chast­ izing.  Stop   and   look,  he  is  saying,   put yourself    outside    your    culture,   be    it French or English,  and  see what  you  are part  of, and  see what  it has done.  Was  it worth   it?
The narrative style adopted by  Theri­ ault  for  his  Indian characters  and   their  slight   tone   of  one   speaking   a   foreign  language with  care,  have allowed  the  or­  iginal  French to lend  itself well  to trans­ lation. Gwendolyn  Moore's version  reads fluently  and  accurately. My  only  reserv-


125

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ation  concerns  her  use of excessively liter­ al  terms  such as "ingurgitate" for French "ingurgiter,"  but   these  do  not  seriously detract from  over-all  quality of  the trans­  lations.
HECTOR  COWAN

PROPHETIC ANACHRONISTS

JAMES    POLK,    Wilderness Writers. Clarke  Ir­
win.  $3.50.

THIS  IS A  SET of  three  compressed  bio­ graphical  essays,  attractively   illustrated and  designed.  Its  subjects  are  the  patri­ archs:  Ernest  Thompson  Seton,  Charles G.  D.  Roberts, and  Grey  Owl.  Readers misled   by   the    title    into   expecting  a survey  of  wilderness  writers,   or  even  of Canadian  wilderness   writers,   should   be placated  by  Mr.  Polk's  gentle   introduc­ tion   and   by   the   charm  of   the   essays themselves.   Like   Roberts's  best   stories, this  is a  simple  book  but  not  a  childish one.
The thesis  of  Mr.   Polk's  "The  Lives of the  Hunted"-that Canadian writers have a special identification with wild animals-is   presented  in   muted   form. He  argues  that  by facing  the  harsh  real­ ities of wilderness  life, Seton  and Thomp­ son were  able  to lift  the  beast  tale  above its anthropomorphic level,  and  that  it  is no  accident Canadians  did  this  first.  It is an argument which overlooks  the effer­ vescently    human    creatures  of   Indian yarns  and  legends, as well as the  wave of conservationist concern that  was building  all over  North  America by the end  of the last  century.  Indeed, a  cynic  could  con­ tend  that nostalgia, as much  as anything, sold  Seton's  books,  packed  Roberts's lec­ ture  halls, and  sent  Archie  Belaney  trott-
 ing  from  city  to  repellent city  in  his  in­ congruous  Plains   headdress,   for  by   the time  they  matured as  writers  wilderness  had   ceased  to  be  a  threat  both   in  the U.S.   and   Canada.  Three   years   before Grey Owl  was born  we had grown  suffici­ ently   smug   to   begin   creating  national parks.
In  one  sense, therefore, the  careers  of these  men  were  anachronistic from   the start,  and  they themselves  were  mere en­ tertainers to  a  complacent  time.  Yet,  in championing wild  creatures, and  in  do­ ing so with  authority and  skill, they gave adrenalin  to  the   youthful   conservation movement, and  for this reason  alone  Mr.  Polk  has  chosen  his  subjects  well.
He acknowledges Seton's and Roberts's debt  to U.S. sales and  sympathies, but  his over-all  approach remains  a  bit  paroch­ ial.  He  might  have  reminded  his  readers that   by  1893  the  Sierra  Club  had  been formed, John   Muir's  books  were  selling briskly, and  Walden  had  been  discovered  at   last;   or   that   by   I 903,   nearly   fifty pieces of state legislation  had  been  passed to protect threatened wildlife, and  Teddy Roosevelt,  concerned with  national fibre and   lost  frontiers,  was  lending  formid­ able  support   to  the  wilderness  lobby.  By not  placing  his  subjects   more  clearly  in their    continental    context,   Mr.     Polk denies   his   book   a   useful    perspective which  it could  easily have  had.
Also, it  is a  real  pity  that  he  does  not trace   any  major   literary  influences. An enticing moment   in  Nancy   Ryley's  fine CBC Grey Owl film occurred when the camera panned  across Archie's  boyhood bookshelf,  and  it  would  have  been  good if  a   writer   of   Mr.   Polk's   insight   had paused for a more leisurely examination. Instead, he stresses family  and  social  in­ fluences,   often   encumbering  his   essays

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



with  quasi-fictional and  improbable  dia­ logue.  The   credibility  of  the  Seton  bio­ graphy is weakened   by  an  unlikely  epi­ sode   at   the   beginning,   and  too   much valuable space  is given  to  the  chatter of Belaney's   aunts   and   mother. Because  it contains less of such speculative dialogue, and   because   Mr.  Polk's   expository  and critical  skills  are   more   firmly   in   com­ mand, the  Roberts essay is the  most  suc­ cessful.    Ironically,   it   is   Roberts  who seems  most alive-a genial,  humorous, introspective scholar,  oddly  restive  with success.
Indeed,  despite   the   sometimes   intru­
sive talk,  Mr.  Polk  brings  fresh  air  to all three  lives-no small accomplishment  in so short  a  book.  His  insights  are  shrewd, his  judgments reserved,  and  his vignettes often   poignant.  It   is  impossible   not   to sympathize  with   poor   Seton,   watching myopically  while his dream of an  Indian Woodcraft  Movement  is  diverted  by  a militaristic Baden-Powell; or  with  Grey Owl,  separated and  sick  at  heart, seeing Anahareo and   his  child   pass  by  him  in the  sunlight. Mr.  Polk  does  well  to  re­ mind  us that  Canadian  wilderness-the Kawarthas, Tantramar,  and   Temagami
-helped to shape  these writers,  and  that they  have  repaid  their  debt  many   times over.  Their influence  is inestimable, both because  it  has  been  huge  and  because  it is  continuing. Against   great   odds,  what they  championed has  survived; Ojibway is still spoken, and  there  are still wolves. Whenever the preservationist ethic  wins even  a small  victory  over  the  GNP  these men   will  be  in   part   responsible.   Grey Owl's  verdict  on  his  own  life  stands  for them  all:   "Atavistic? Perhaps it  is;  but good  has come of it."
Good   should   also  come   from   James
Polk's book.                        WAYLAND  DREW
 OXFORD COMPANIONS
THE  Oxford Companion to  Canadian History and   Literature  has   become,  since   it  was  first published in  1967,  an  indispensable handbook for  anyone needing quick and   accurate  refer­ ences  on  matters relating to  Canadian  writers, their   writings, and   the   facts   of  the  Canadian past   that formed   their material.  The  Supple­ ment   to  The  Oxford  Companion  to  Canadian History    and    Literature   (Oxford   University Press, $9.50)  brings  the  record up  to date, and  it  is  an  astonishing sign  of  the  abundance of recent   Canadian writing that  it   should  take
3 I8 pages  to do so.
It is an  even  more  astonishing tribute to  the
erudition and  industry of Norah Story, who single-handedly compiled  and  wrote the  origi­ nal  Oxford Companion, that  the  supplement has   involved  the   labour  of   no   less  than  37 contributors, under  the   general   editorship  of William Toye!  Among   those   37  contributors one  is glad  to  welcome  again  Norah Story.
Admirably planned and  co-ordinated, the Supplement  continues  the   excellent tradition of  the  Companion, and   we  can  doubtless  look forward to  the  establishment of  an  institution, with  successive  volumes transforming  the origi­ nal  Companion into   a  Company, in  the  origi­ nal sense, of course.
L.T.C.

LATE CALLAGHAN REPRINTING
IT   IS  RATHER SURPRISING, at  this   stage   in Callaghan's old-master repute,  to  realize   that two   sizeable   early   works   have    not   been   re­ printed for  more   than forty   years.  Yet  this  is the  case  with   his  two  novellas, "An   Autumn Penitent"  and   "In His   Own  Country". Both  of  them  appeared in  A  Native  Argosy  in  1929,  but    they    escaped  collection -doubtless  be­ cause of length-in Morley Callaghan's Stories
( 1959), and  were   not   reprinted  separately­ doubtless  because  of   brevity.  Together,  how­  ever,   they   make   up   into   a   respectably  sized small  volume, and  as  such  they  are  finally   re­ issued   in   the   Laurentian   Library  under  the title   of   An   Autumn   Penitent   ( $2.25).  Old  wine   is   not   necessarily   good   wine,    and   one doubts if  these  pieces  will  ever  be  regarded as vintage  Callaghan. They  belong   to  the   same  period  as  Strange  Fugitive  and   share with   it


I27

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Callaghan's evident inability at this  early  stage to   adapt  his   gifts   as   a   short-story  writer  to the   dimensions  of  a  novel  or  even   a  novella. Their  appearance reminds one  how  short   was the   period-the  three years   between Such  is my Beloved and  More  Joy in Heaven  -during which  Callaghan  showed any   real   mastery of long  fiction.
 Jasmin,  Jacques  Hebert,   Louis   Dantin  and others which are  promised for  the  forthcoming seasons.
G.W.

SUPPLEMENT TO




TRANSPORTED AND TRANSLATED
 G.W.
 THE BROCK
LAST YEAR   appeared  the   Brock  Bibliography of Published  Canadian  Stage  Plays in English
1900-72,  an   extremely  useful   checklist  in   a field   where   there  was   no   competition. The project has  been  continued, and   now  appears The   First  Supplement  to  the   Brock   Bibliog­

INDivmUAL NOVELS  written by Quebec writers
in  French have  been   translated and   published in   English  Canada,  but   rather   sporadically, and   often   for  reasons of  sensationalism rather than quality. A few  have  found their way  into such   series  as  the  New  Canadian Library, but we  have  long  lacked a planned series  of  trans­ lations that  would   make   available in  English those  works  of French-speaking  Canada  which  we should be  reading if we  were  serious  about our  bilingualism, but  which  we rarely do.
Harvest   House,  an    English  publisher  in
Montreal,  is   now    undertaking   this   task­ selecting   works    that   are    representative   of Quebec writing and  at the same  time  excellent in    their  own    rights.   Their  series    is   called  "French  Writers in  Canada", and   already we have  noted in  these  columns the  excellent ver­  sions   of   Theriault's   Ashini   and    N'Tsuk   by Gwendolyn Moore with  which  the   series  first appeared. Now  Gwendolyn Moore presents her version  of  Anne   Hebert's classic   collection of novellas  and  short   stories,   The  Torrent ($2.50),  and    Pierre  Cloutier  has   translated Jacques Ferron's novel,  Dr. Cotnoir   ($1.95).
The  beginning is  good,   and one   looks  for­
ward  to  the   translations of  novels   by  Claude
 raphy  of Published  Canadian   Plays, which   is
obtainable for  $1.50  (plus 25¢   postage and handling costs)   from   Playwrights  Co-op, 344
Dupont Street, Toronto M5R 1Vg.
In  the  first  supplement the  editors have  not
only  listed   the  hundred new  plays   (a  gratify­ ing  total)  that   have   seen   print  in  English in Canada  during  the   past   year,   but   they   have
also   added  a  considerable  number  of  earlier plays  unnoticed in  the  original Brock  Bibliog­ raphy, and  for the  first  time  have  included lists of published radio, TV and  film  plays.
In  the   process    they    have -in all   these categories-added   about 700  titles  to  the original  bibliography;  the   supplement  covers
32  three  column pages   (not counting prefaces and   indexes)  while    the   original  covered  35 pages.  The editors  claim that in  the  process  of researching off-stage   plays   they   have  encoun­ tered  "old  myths" and  "disproved" them. "For instance,  Canadian  radio  plays   do   exist   in published form," they  say, "and in  rather large  numbers." In  fact,  however, they  list  a  mere
112  that have  seen  print, a  meagre proportion indeed  of  the  thousands that  have   been  pro­ duced by CBC alone.
o.w.
