$3.00  per copy




CANADIAN l TERATURE N°·76
Spring, 1978

SOURCES

Articles

BY  STEPHEN SCOBIE, OFELIA COHN-SFETCU, MICHAEL GREENSTEIN, LORRAINE WEIR, ROBERT LECKER, ANNE SRABIAN DE  FABRY,
MAX  DORSINVILLE, EDWIN HAMBLET

Poems

BY DERK WYNAND, MICHAEL ONDAATJE, GEORGE WOODCOCK, CYRIL DABYDEEN

Review Articles and Reviews

BY  JAMES BACQUE, SILVER DONALD CAMERON, ANN  P. MESSENGER,
C. H. GERVAIS, KEVIN ROBERTS, IAN  A. GORDON, ROBERTS. ANDERSON, STUART NEWTON,  FRED COGSWELL, LAURENCE RICOU, RUSSELL  M.  BROWN, ROD WILLMOT, GARY  WERDEN, LLOYD ABBEY, AL PURDY, CLARA THOMAS,
PAT  BARCLAY, MARY JANE  EDWARDS, L. T.  CORNELIUS

Opinions  and Notes

BY GERTRUp JARON LEWIS, MARSHALL BROOKS


A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW








THE ONCE AND FUTURE PAST






AT THE END OF HIS HISTORY of New Zealand,  Keith  Sinclair quotes from  a  I925  New   Zealand   Herald  comment  on  the  election  of Gordon Coates as Prime  Minister,  to the effect that  "All is yet molten,  mercurial.  There are more departures to make  than  precedents to follow. To  have a  history may be an old land's glory and safeguard: to make history is a new land's  perilous employment." It is an interesting  phrase, full of calvinist optimism  and  coloured by a romantic  sense of a national  future  and  an imperial  past. Fifty-three  years later, the perils of the employment  may be even clearer than  they were in  I925: for Canada at least, whatever  the case might be in New Zealand.  Perhaps  not so curiously, one of the  perils seems to be the temptation  to assume that  the events of the  nation's  first century  have  established rigidly for  all  time  the  limits and structure  of the  nation's  character. Growth  and  change  are  not,  of course,  in­ trinsically admirable; nor is structure  intrinsically vicious. But the fear of  change
-and any demand  for the rigid maintenance  of order  (whether  the order is right
or wrong,  admirable or  not)   which is itself born of the  fear  of change-is  as debilitating  as unbridled  license. The  way things were may  provide solace from the way things are, but seldom a solution. We ought not to relive the past in the present, but  to reinterpret   it. And  knowing that  the  past exerts its fascinations, we have sometimes to remind  ourselves sharply of our responsibility for the  past that is yet to come.
Several books published  recently in Canada  coincidentally  reveal varying atti­
tudes  to  the  past. They  range  from  The  Shopping Guide   of the  West   (J.   J.
Douglas,  $9.95), which  reprints  two of Woodward's  mailorder  catalogues,  for I9I2  and  I929, with an enthusiastic  and entertaining  introduction by Robert  D. Watt,  to Conrad  Swan's Canada: Symbols  of Sovereignty (University  of Toronto Press, $29.95), a handsomely  illustrated, solemn and scholarly guide to Canada's symbolic identifications  of "authority and  jurisdiction." In  between are a variety

2

EDITORIAL

of  histories,  anthologies, memoirs,  and   perspectives   which   partake in  differing degrees  of scholarship and  nostalgia. Some  of these are  local  histories,  like F. R. Berchem's The Yonge  Street  Story   I79J-I86o (McGraw-Hill Ryerson, $12.95) and  the  Urban Reader editors' pictorial   volume  Vancouver's First  Century:  A City   Album  I 86o- I 960  (J.  J. Douglas,  $I 9·95). The  titles  themselves  describe the different approaches. Berchem  uses Yonge Street  to tell a narrative; the Van­ couver  book  relies for its effect  on an  engrossing  accumulation of  advertisements and  photographs. The  pace  of the  narrative varies-in  large  part  with  the  cast of characters (Berczy,  Mackenzie, Col.  Moodie  and  others)-and  so  does  the quality of the  prints.  But the contrast between  the  two tells of more  than   just the distinction between  verbal  and  visual books. The accident  of the  year  r86o  being the end of one book and  the beginning of the other draws attention to the different kind of world  that  existed when Toronto and Vancouver grew from  their  separate wildernesses.  Whereas the  camera focussed  on  Vancouver from  its earliest  days, Berchem  had  to make  use, rather  unsuccessfully,  of line  drawings to give  visual stimulus to  his  contemporary  narrative. In  yet another book,  The  Drawings of fames  Cockburn by Christina Cameron and  Jean  Trudel (Gage), we find  Cock­  burn's  arresting,  though   somewhat  static,   watercolour  paintings  reproduced, mostly  in  black  and  white,  as  "A  Visit  through Quebec's Past." Paradoxically, the camera can  be taken  now into  the Ontario and  Quebec countryside to photo­ graph structures  from  the  early  days, whereas  Vancouver's forest  past  has  long since  disappeared. Cockburn and  Trudel's interest  seems  to  be in  revisiting  and identifying particular scenes;  Berchem's interest  is less in structure than  in  people, whose  actions   and  attitudes created   the  life  of  his street;   and   where   Berchem strives  for  a  sense  of character in  the  past,  the  Vancouver editors,  much   more tangibly, simply  show  us people  in their  landscape.
Books  like  Allan   Anderson's  Remembering  the  Farm   (Macmillan, $I 2·95) and  Lawrence  Klippenstein and  Julius  G.  Toews'  Mennonite  Memories  ( Cen­ tennial, $r5.oo)  combine elements  of local and  ethnic  history in an  endeavour to isolate both  roots and  attitudes of mind. The  former  is a tape-recorder-book, whose virtue  lies in  the  way  it  catches  Canadian voices;  the  latter, a  compilation  by several  hands, is much  more  formally  written  and  is  more  than  anything else a testament of a persisting  faith.
One   can  read   roots  and   attitudes into  both   books.  Mennonite  Memories is inturned, its concern  for  privacy  and  propriety possibly the  characteristic stance of the  ethnic  community it describes, and  Remembering the  Farm  amply  reveals "Rural  Philosophy" and  "Rural Anecdote." But such generalizations about either Mennonite or agricultural communities would  be presumptuous, and  both  books as a result seem curiously  artificial. The  past they  portray  seems a contrived past, so that  even  the  hardships they announce are made  to appear like goals to which a contemporary age should  strive.

3

EDITORIAL

Robert  Watt, writing the  introduction to the  Woodward's catalogues, suggests that  they  will offer  readers  "a  nostalgic  trip  down  memory  lane  . . . [which] will be fun  and  hopefully ... lead  to some real  understanding of the  way  we were." The  important component there  seems to me to be not "real understanding" but "fun." Enjoying memories is often  bound  up  with  embroidering memories;  nos­ talgia  allows us to alter  the  past  and  remember it selectively, which  is a  comfort­ ing process. But it is also perilous, for if we ever forget that  selectivity does govern our  memories,  and  accept  our  casual  recollections,  or advertiser's  deliberate illu­ sions, as whole  truth, then  we begin  to rewrite  history  in  unacceptable  ways.
In  My  Childhood  and Yours  (Macmillan, $g.gs), a series of engaging  anec­
dotal  "happy memories of  growing  up,"  Robert  Thomas Allen  provides  narra­ tives about  childhood magic  and  childhood  joy. But he also recognizes the degrees of illusion  which  he is both  drawing upon  and  creating. His story  of a  boy  who could  pray  better  than  play, but  who was nonetheless elected  captain of  a hockey­ team  because  he  took  the  heat  off the  other  boys in Sunday school  is  a  case  in point. The man  writing about the boys knows why the boy is put in goal:  because if he  couldn't skate,  there,  at  least,  he could  hang  on  to  the  goal  post  until  the game was over.

It wasn't  the right ending for someone who had been a cowboy, a jungle explorer, a  human  fly, and  The  Greatest  Champion  of Everything  the  World  Had  Ever Seen, but somehow, without  actually thinking about it, I knew that it was the most common  ending,  and  that  it  happens  far  more  often  to  most  people  than  the things that  happened to the heroes of my boyhood.

This  comment provides  the  ending  for the  anecdote, but  not  for  the  book. The book ends  by asserting  the  continuity of people's  ability  to live with  a  dream. If the  dream  dies, the  society  dies with  it, which  is why we should  be so conscious of our  sources  and  our  ideals. To  ignore  the  past is dangerous; to see the  past  as the only possibility is foolhardy; to accept  either  course alone  is the greatest  peril of a nation  that  thinks  it is making history.

W.H.N.















4



RETURN JOURNEY
 POEM




Derk Vt7nand


now  the sun  goes down  in the west as it should and  the  red  turns  to blue in  the sky as it will

and  the shoplights are dimmed and  the shutters are  drawn as  block  after  block the  streetlights

come  on  and  the  women  have  kissed their  weary lovers  good-bye  and  the drunks  have  been  shut

up in their  corners and  the city workers  begin
to water  the  hanging flower  baskets as the  blue

sky goes black  and  the black sky fills with  the obligatory stars  to guide  the  women  safely home

while  the lovers lose themselves in ever deeper sleep and  the  husbands begin to see things they

did  not  want  to see for which  reason  they  water the  hanging flower  baskets in  the  light  spilling

in from  the  distant streetlights past  which  their wives are  walking  their  dreams  turning as dark  as

wet brick  or drawn blood from  which  they fail  to draw  conclusions save that  they should  hurry  on

past  the  drunken flower  baskets and  the  obligatory city workers  and  all  the snoring  shadows  in corners

and  it is midnight already  when  the  women  lie with their  dark  husbands it is good  to be lying in  bed











5

HIS LEGEND A JUNGLE  SLEEP
AJichael Ondaatje and Henri Rousseau




Stephen Scobie




Having to put  forward candidates for God
I nominate Henri  Rousseau  and  Dr  Bucke.

"The  Vault"
LCHOmE,FOR Tms EXALTED PosmoN, of  Richa.-d Mau­ rice Bucke ( 1837-1902), psychiatrist, intrepid wanderer  in the Rocky Mountains, superintendent of the  London  insane  asylum, author  of Cosmic  Consciousness,
friend,  pallbearer,  and  literary  executor of Walt  Whitman/ may  come as some­ thing of a surprise to the reader  of Michael Ondaatje's poetry, for he is not, with this exception, a prominent  figure in it. On the other hand, there is nothing at all surprising  about  the  choice  of the  Douanier,  "gentil  Rousseau,"  artiste-peintre,  since Ondaatje's fascination  with him is visible throughout  his  poetry.
The   Dainty  Monsters   contains  one  complete  poem,  "Henri  Rousseau  and Friends,"  and  Rousseau  also turns  up,  appropriately  enough,  in  the  zoo poem "You  Can  Look But  You  Better  Not Touch." In  Rat   felly, the  poem  already quoted,  "The  Vault," proceeds to a discussion of Rousseau's  last great  painting, The  Dream, a postcard of which is also to be found on the poet's desk in "Burn­ ing Hills." Earlier  in the  book, Ondaatje uses as the text  for a found  poem the famous letter "To  Monsieur  le Maire,"  in which Rousseau, with his usual unset­ tling blend of naivete and  shrewdness, offers The  Sleeping Gypsy for sale to the citizenry of Laval, the home-town  which he shared  with the  author  of Ubu  Roi,
Alfred Jarry.2
There  is of course no mention  (at  least no direct  mention : the  presence may still be felt indirectly)   of Henri  Rousseau in The  Collected  Works  of  Billy the Kid:  in 1881, the year of Billy's death,  Rousseau was still an  obscure employee of the  Paris octroi,  who had  not  yet painted  a picture.  Only  his apocryphal  in­ carnation   (in  the  legend  fostered  by Guillaume  Apollinaire)   has visited  Billy's part of the world, playing clarinet  in Mexico for the army of the doomed  Maxi­ milian,  whose ruined  palace  haunts  the opening chapter  of Under  the Volcano.

6

ONDAATJE & ROUSSEAU

Rousseau's entire   life  and  work  present  a  fascinating complex   of  paradoxes and  contradictions. His  genius  was largely  instinctive, yet  he  was  a  painstaking craftsman; unable to detect  irony,  he accepted praise and  abuse  alike  as evidence of  his  own  greatness; a  committed admirer of  the  official,  academic school  of painting, he  nevertheless   exhibited  with   the   most   radical  and   anti-academic groups  of  painters, and  may  indeed  have  contributed to  the  naming of  one  of them: the  Fauves.  The  kindliest  and  most  humanitarian of  men,  he  was  twice imprisoned for larceny. Personal anecdotes delight  in exposing  his naivete, yet in many  ways  he was  very shrewd-shrewd enough, even,  to  play  up  to  his own naive  image.  Dora  Vallier  comments:

One  day, in his lawyer's office, he made a telephone  call. "Suddenly  I heard  him shouting," Maitre  Guilhermet  tells us. "Surprised,  I asked him why he was speak­ ing so loudly, and  he replied, 'The  people I'm  talking to are so far away.'" Rous­ seau was trying so hard  to appear  naive that  he occasionally  overacted  the  part. This was a form of self-defense, but the naivete with which he approached the part made him seem much more naive than he really was -hence, the distorted  image that  those who knew him passed on to us.... On another  occasion he was handed  an invitation to a party being given by the President of the Republic  [by friends as a  joke].  When  he  came  back,  he  told  a  long story:  the  guards  had  refused  to admit  him, he had insisted, and  the President in person had come out and,  patting  him on the shoulder,  said, "It's a  pity, Rousseau, that  you're in everyday  clothes. You see, everybody is in evening dress. Come back some other  time.''  But did  he ever really go to the Elysee?
(Vallier,  pp. 82-83.)

The  Mexican legend  is another case in  point.  Apollinaire, and  most  of  Rous­ seau's  friends  in  the  last  years of his life, may  have  been  all too  ready  to believe in  it  because  it  provided a suitably exotic  source  for  Rousseau's exotic  pictures. "When questioned about this  period  in  his life,"  Apollinaire's version  runs,  "he  seemed  to remember only  the  fruits  which  he had  seen there,  which  the  soldiers were forbidden to eat. But his eyes had  preserved other  memories: tropical forests, monkeys,  and  strange flowers.... " Historically,  it appears certain  that  Rousseau did  not  go to Mexico: at  best, he may  have  had  the  opportunity  to  talk  to sur­ vivors of the expedition. The  forbidden fruits,  and  the "tropical forests, monkeys,  and  strange flowers"  actually   had  humbler, more  domestic  sources: the  Jardin des Plantes, and  the  international displays from  the  Paris  World's Fair  of 188g.
But  to  some  extent, Rousseau   had  to  invent   a  past  for  himself.  "A   curious phenomenon occurred," writes Dora  Vallier: "his  painting provided him with  the raw  materials for a past. Since  he excelled in exotic landscapes, his obscure years of military service  became  a  fabulous journey  to  Mexico." Rousseau was  forty years old  before  he began  to paint,  but  from  that  time  on  he devoted himself  to his art,  and  to  his conviction   (naive?  shrewd?  laughable? correct?)  of  his  own greatness,  with  an intensity  which  blotted  out  and  transformed almost  everything

7

ONDAATJE & ROUSSEAU

about  his early years. His art  became his life, and  in the Mexican  legend his life learned, in a Wildean  manner,  to imitate his art. Asked once if it was not uncom­ fortable  to have to sleep in his cramped  and  crowded studio,  Rousseau  replied:  "You know, when I wake up I can smile at my canvases."
In  his life as in  his work,  Henri  Rousseau  was one of the  most bizarre,  and ultimately mysterious, of all artists. This alone might well account  for Ondaatje's interest, for Ondaatje's own work shows a lively interest in the bizarre. What,  for example, could be more like an Ondaatje narrative-the shifting of tone between absurdity  and  profundity  of, say, "Letters  & Other  Worlds"-than the  many stories which surround the famous  Rousseau Banquet  held in Picasso's studio  at the Bateau  Lavoir?
The banquet  was held in November  xgo8, in honour of Picasso's acquisition  of a Rousseau portrait, sold to him for five francs by a dealer who said that  he might be able to make use of the canvas. In fact, it remained  to the end of his life one of the treasured  paintings  in Picasso's personal collection. The  gathering  of those who came to honour  this most unsophisticated  of painters reads like a roll-call of the Parisian  avant-garde: Pablo  Picasso and  Fernande  Olivier;  Georges Braque; Guillaume  Apollinaire  and  Marie  Laurencin; Gertrude  Stein,  Leo  Stein,  and Alice B. Toklas;  Max  Jacob,  Andre  Salmon,  Maurice  Raynal,  and  Maurice  de Vlaminck.  Picasso ordered  the food for the wrong day but  still had  fifty bottles of wine;  Apollinaire  caught  up  on  his correspondence  and  improvised  a  poetic tribute  to  Rousseau;  And11e  Salmon  and  Maurice  Cremnitz  chewed  soap  and foamed  at the mouth  in an elaborate  impersonation  of delirium  tremens  for the bemused benefit of the Americans. Gertrude Stein, writing of course in the person of  Alice B. Toklas,  records  that  "Guillaume   Apollinaire  solemnly  approached myself and  my friend  and  asked us to sing some of the  native songs of the  red indians. We did  not either of us feel up to that  to the great  regret of Guillaume and all the company."
Throughout all this, Rousseau  was seated on a makeshift throne  consisting of a chair placed on top of a packing crate, directly beneath a lamp which "with remarkable  regularity," according  to Raynal,  "let  fall drops of burning  wax on his head."  Fernande  Olivier's  account  perhaps improves on the story, but  in its bizarre simplicity and  juxtapositions it certainly reflects the centre of the Rousseau legend:

Rousseau was so happy that, throughout the evening, he received on his head drops of wax from a large lamp that hung above him, without finching. They ended by forming a small eminence on his head like a clown's hat which he kept right up to the moment when the lamp caught fire. He was made to believe that this was his final apotheosis. Afterwards he started to play a shirt piece on the violin which he had brought with him.

8

ONDAATJE & ROUSSEAU

Gertrude  Stein's   version,   however,   shows  that   Rousseau  was  still  assiduously propagating his own  versions of legend: "Rousseau blissful and  gentle  played  the violin  and  told  us about the  plays he had  written  and  his memories of Mexico." But it is not  just this quality of the bizarre  which  accounts for Ondaatje's inter­
est  in   Rousseau.  They   are   in   many   ways  very  different  artists-Ondaatje, obviously,  works at a level of sophistication and  self-consciousness  entirely  alien  to Rousseau -but nevertheless  there  are areas of affinity between  their  works. I use the  word  "affinity" rather than  "influence," because  the  latter  would  suggest  too direct  a  causal  relation. There are  aspects  of  Rousseau's work  towards which Ondaatje is drawn, but  the  poet  does  not  treat   them  in  the  same  way  as  the painter. This  essay will explore  two such areas of affinity:  in each  case, the  use of Rousseau's paintings as  an  approach to  Ondaatje's poems  is not  to  be  seen  as limiting our understanding of the poems but as opening  up possibilities, and show­ ing  how  the  self-conscious  development of  theme  in  Ondaatje  inevitably  raises questions  which  Rousseau's naivete  stops  short  of.  It is, of  course,  the  glory  of Rousseau's work  that  he  does stop  short: it  is the  limitation  of  his imagination which  produces  those inimitable qualities  which fascinate us still in the irreducible pictorial  vision of the  gentle  toll-collector  who  never  went  to  Mexico.

*
... a postcard  of Rousseau's The  Dream.

"Burning  Hills"

The  Dream is a large  painting (8oY2 by II7Y2"), depicting one of Rousseau's characteristic jungle scenes:  thick foliage with spiked leaves in intricate crisscross patterns, exotic  pink  and  blue  flowers, oranges.  One  painter is reported to  have counted more  than  fifty shades  of green in the  painting. An  orange-breasted bird sits on a branch; an elephant hides in the undergrowth; two playfully  drawn lions stare  around them  in  a  rather baffled manner; a large  black  snake  with  a  pink belly glides towards a charmer playing his pipe. And  plumped down  in the middle of this, dominating the  left  side  of the  composition, is a large  red  couch  with  a naked  woman  reclining  on it, stretching out  her  hand  towards the  scene.
The  couch  had  long  been  in  Rousseau's studio-all  his friends  recognized  it
-but  its  presence  in  this  painting proved  a sore  trouble to  the  literal  minded. Rousseau  courteously  and  patiently explained it to the  art  critic  Andre Dupont:

I am answering your kind letter immediately in order to explain  to you the reason why the sofa in question is included. The  woman sleeping on the sofa dreams  that she is transported  into the forest, hearing the music of the snake charmer's instru­ ment. This explains why the sofa is in the picture.... I end  this note by thanking  you in  advance  for  the  article  you will write  about  me. Please  accept  my  best wishes, and a hearty and cordial handshake.

(To the  poet  Andre Salmon Rousseau  gave  a  slightly  different versiOn:   "The


9

ONDAATJE & ROUSSEAU

sofa is there  only  because  of its glowing,  red  colour.")  Attached to the  frame  of the  painting was the following  poem:

Yadwigha  dans un beau reve S'etant  endormie  doucement Entendait les sons d'une musette
Dont  jouait un charmeur bien pensant. Pendant  que la lune reflete
Sur les fleuves, les arbres verdoyants, Les fauves serpents  pretent  l'oreille Aux air gais de !'instrument.

Yadwigha,  peacefully asleep, Enjoys a lovely dream:
She hears a kind snake charmer
Playing upon his reed,
On stream  and foliage glisten
The silvery beams of the moon; And savage serpents listen
To the gay, entrancing tune.
(Vallier's  translation.)

Describing the  pamtmg in  "The Vault," Ondaatje emphasizes   the  intimate connection between   the  dreaming lady  and  the  landscape she  has  created   for herself in her dream : she

has been animal  and  tree her breast a suckled orange.
The  fibres and fluids of their moral nature
have escaped within her frame.

The  hand  is outstretched her fingers move out in
mutual  transfusion  to the place.

The  identity between  the dreamer and  the dreamed is complete, a "mutual trans­ fusion" has  taken  place.  The  red  sofa  belongs  in  the  imaginary jungle;  the  en­ chanter's pipe plays in the small  studio  on the Rue  Perrel.
This,  then,  is the  first  area  of  affinity  between  Rousseau  and  Ondaatje:  the
coexistence,  amounting to interpenetration, of a domestic scene and  a  jungle. Ondaatje's poetry  reaches  towards the  kind  of balance  found  in  the  visual  com­ position of The  Dream, but for him it is more difficult to attain. Rousseau's jungle is more exotic than  violent; but for Ondaatje, violence is the essence of the  jungle, and  time  after  time  it breaks  through his poems with  disturbing effect.
Not  that  violence  is entirely  absent  from  Rousseau's paintings, though in The
Dream it is held  in check: Yadwigha's dream  is not  a nightmare but  "un beau reve," and  the charmer is "bien  pensant." Similarly,  with regard  to The  Sleeping


10

ONDAATJE & ROUSSEAU

Gypsy, the letter to the Mayor  of Laval insists that  "A  lion wanders  by, detects her and  doesn't  devour  her."  Indeed,  the absence of any footprints  in the sand, in an otherwise meticulously realistic picture, has led some critics to suggest that The  Sleeping Gypsy may also represent a dream. But in other Rousseau paintings, violence does erupt,  as is shown  by such titles as The   jungle:  Tiger  Attacking  a Buffalo, Tiger and Buffalo Fighting, Negro Attacked  by a jaguar, Horse Attacked by a jaguar, Scouts Attacked  by a Tiger, The  Repast of the  Lion  (a lion eating
a  jaguar), and  the  famous  Hungry  Lion,  the  painting  which  may  have  con­ tributed  to  the  naming  of  the  Fauves,  with  its straight-faced  commentary by Rousseau:  "The  hungry  lion throws himself on the antelope and  devours it;  the panther  waits anxiously for the moment when it too will have its share. Carnivor­ ous birds have  pecked out  a  piece of flesh from  the back  of  the  animal,  which weeps. Sunset."
The  extraordinary  understatement of  these  final  words  (like  the  "effect  of
moonlight, very poetic" in the description of The  Sleeping Gypsy)  may be delib­ erately ironic, or simply naive, on Rousseau's part;  Ondaatje's use of this kind of comment is more clearly ironic, as in "Application  for a Driving  License":

Two birds loved
in a flurry of red feathers
like a burst cottonball,
continuing while I drove over them.

I am a good driver, nothing shocks me.

The irony, and absence of shock, are constants in Ondaatje's poetry, even if they do not always emerge quite  as blatantly.  Within  the domestic scene, violence is always liable to erupt,  and irony is frequently a way of dealing  with the intensity of this perception.
The  dog in "Biography" is "tacked  to humility all day"  by the  children  who
arc  "unaware that  she/  tore  bulls  apart,  loosed/ heads  of  partridges,/ dreamt blood." But if the children  see only Yadwigha asleep on the familiar  red couch, the poet sees also the  jungle, the dreams of blood.
Such dreams intrude  all the time:  a summer  badminton  net becomes tangled with dragons, and "My  mother  while caressing camels/ had  her left breast bitten off." For Ondaatjc, the problem is to achieve some sort of equilibrium, or "mutual transfusion."  It will not do simply to repress such knowledge -"In  spite of this I've no objections/  to camels" -although this is undeniably what the social struc­ ture will attempt-"a vulture calmly resting at a traffic light/  would undoubtedly  be shot, very messily,/ by the first policeman who spotted  him." Here  again  the ironic tone-the comic understatement of "I've  no objections," the more chilling understatement of "very  messily" -is reminiscent  of  the  distancing  Rousseau achieves by his naive description.


I I

ONDAATJE & ROUSSEAU

Ondaatje's responses to the irruption  of the violent into the domestic are rarely phrased  as direct  statements: at  their  best, the statement  is indirect,  controlled by tone, by what  is not said.  Often  this emerges not as "un  beau  reve"  but  as various kinds of nightmare: the tight hysteria of "War  Machine," the surreal  but savage humour  of "Rat Jelly" itself. Occasionally the terms are reversed:  "Mter shooting Gregory," Billy finds his carefully controlled world of violence disrupted by the intrusion  of a domestic  element, the chicken, which  pushes the scene to a height of surreal  horror  before Ondaatje, reasserting the poet's control of tone if not Billy's control of death,  dissolves the scene in laughter.
Most of these illustrations,  both in Rousseau and in Ondaatje, have centred  on the  role of animals.  Ondaatje's fascination  with  animals  is too  well  known  to require  much  comment:  what  is remarkable  is the  way that  they  retain  their integrity  and  absolute  identity  as animals at  the same time  as they  provide  an almost continuous commentary  on what is done in human society. From the dog's dream  in "Biography" through  to the terrifyingly detailed observation  of the porcupine quills in "Dashiell," 3 the violence of the jungle is immanent in the most domestic of pets; the mad  cracked eyes of Livingstone's mongrels are reflected in the  one-eyed  owls of Sallie  Chisum's  menagerie.  Introducing his anthology  of animal  poems, The  Broken  Ark,4   Ondaatje wrote that  he was not  interested  in pretty  pictures  of  animals   as  pets,  but  rather   that  he  wanted   the  reader  to "imagine  yourself pregnant  and  being chased and  pounded  to  death  by  snow­ mobiles." Ondaatje's vision reaches to levels of harsh reality which the Douanier's  gentle exoticism never accounted  for.
But if the violence is harsh,  vivid, and  uncomfortably convincing,  the domestic
scene is no less real. Rousseau's  sofa, whose "glowing, red  colour"  provides the necessary visual counterbalance to the fifty greens of the jungle, was also the most familiar and affectionately regarded  of the objects of his daily life. In The  Dream it provides a fully adequate, and  even humorous, image of the domestic security in which Yadwigha's  dream  is based. In the same way, Ondaatje's poetry is full of images which establish the warmth,  reality and humour  of the domestic scene. One such image, that  of the Chisum ranch,  is, as I have pointed out  elsewhere, 5 lovingly built  up in direct  contradiction to the acknowledged  source  material.
In Rat  felly, the first section, "Families," is dominated  by the evocation of that small  circle-"wife kids dogs couple  of friends" -which  forms  the  necessary complement  to the  jungle of "Live  Bait."  It  is often more  difficult to  present a convincing  portrayal of happiness than of unhappiness;  but Ondaatje is a master at this -as, indeed, is Rousseau. There  is a skillful use of small details, observed with  the  most intimate   affection,  out  of which  the  reader  can  reconstruct  the fabric of a whole relationship:
I am writing this with a pen my wife has used
to write a letter to her first husband.

12

ONDAATJE & ROUSSEAU

On it is the smell of her hair.
She must have placed it down between sentences and  thought,  and driven her fingers round her skull gathered  the slightest smell of her head
and brought  it back to the pen.

The  centre  of this section  is the  group  of joke poems-"Notes for the  Legend  of Salad  Woman," "Postcard from  Piccadilly  Street," "The Strange Case" -which are marvellous jokes but  even better  poems. Their humour is not  there  just for its own sake,  but  plays a functional role in establishing the  tone  and  the  credibility of the  domestic  image.  If Rousseau smiled  at  his canvases,  Ondaatje must  surely smile at  these  poems.
The  finest poems in this section,  however, are those in which,  as in The  Dream,
the  red  sofa  is firmly  set  in  the   jungle.  In  "White Room," the  image   of  the woman's body  as  "cool  fruit" gives  way  to  an  image  of  her  "stray  bones" as "scattered fragments/ of a wrecked  aircraft." Ondaatje's descent,  "like  helicopters onto  the  plain," may  be taken  as the  arrival  of rescue helicopters at  a crash  site; but it also carries  uncomfortable evocations  of the Vietnamese television  war.  The final line, "within the angles of the  room," remains  ambiguous: these angles  may provide  the security  of a solid structure, but  they are set harshly  against the "col­ lapse" of human "flesh."
In  "Letters &  Other Worlds," the  domestic  scene -again  evoked   by  affec­ tionate detail  and  the masterful narration of comic incident-becomes the scene for an intensely  private  struggle  with an interior  jungle. This  is one  of  Ondaatje's absolutely  finest poems:  the  control of tone,  as the  poem  moves  from  comedy  to deeply  moving  simplicity, is breathtaking. It  is one  of Ondaatje's  fullest  realiza­  tions of that  "mutual transfusion" between  the  jungle and  the sofa; but  here,  con­ tinuing the metaphor of blood, the transfusion is deadly: the "blood screaming in/ the empty  reservoir of bones" so that  "he  died in minutes  of  a new  equilibrium." "Equilibrium" is here a key word.  (One is reminded again  of  Robert Kroetsch's description of  Canadians as  "fascinated with  problems  of  equilibrium."6 )  As I mentioned earlier,  the   jungle  dream cannot   be  repressed:   a  balance  must   be sought, and  maintained in  the  control  of  the  poems'  tone,  whether it  be  ironic distance, surreal  or affectionate humour, or the highly sophisticated manipulation of various  tones in "Letters & Other Worlds." At any rate,  equilibrium is the  task of the  artist.  Rousseau, not  Yadwigha, is the  real  dreamer; and  it  is Ondaatje's
dream which  must  attempt to mediate between  "Families" and  "Live Bait."

*
Breavman  loves the pictures of Henri Rousseau,
the way he stops time.

Leonard  Cohen, The Favourite Game.7

ONDAATJE & ROUSSEAU

Rousseau always had trouble  with feet. One of the points of technique  that  the naive self-taught  painter   never  mastered  was the  natural perspective  by  which feet appear  to be placed squarely and firmly on the ground. Frequently,  Rousseau avoids this problem by hiding the feet behind low vegetation;  but when he cannot do  this,  the  deficiency  is obvious-as,  most obviously, in  his famous  Myself: Portrait-Landscape (note, in passing, the similarity in title to Klein's great poem), in which  he seems to be standing on tip-toe on the  banks of the  Seine, or else gently  floating,  like a  ghost  oblivious to  land  subsidence,  a  few  inches off the ground.  Although  Rousseau  was very concerned  with  the  interaction  between  a figure and its setting, and  was proud of having "invented" the genre of  "Portrait­ Landscape," in most of his portraits  there is a curious dislocation  between figure and ground.  Rousseau's  people all seem to float in space, cut off  from its normal continuum. One  consequence of this is that  they are also dislocated in time.
Rousseau's  technique  is an  extraordinary combination  of primitive,  child-like
naivety in the modelling, and  high polish and exactness in the finish. The effect is to give his own awkwardnesses in space and time a very precise, fixed quality. He was capable of painting  swift impromptu sketches of a scene which in manner  and execution would stand  with the best of the Impressionists;  yet these were always painstakingly transformed  into the precisions of his own style, all the rough edges made hard, all the sweeps of colour clarified to exact forms. Curiously, the eye accustomed  to Monet  sees these sketches as far more "realistic,"  at least in their sense of perspective and  illusion of depth,  than  the finished works. Compare,  for example,  the sketch  and  the  final version of Path  in  Pare  M ontsouris   (Vallier, plates  6o,  6r). This  is what  lies behind  Rousseau's  famous  comment  on  the Cezanne exhibition  of rgo7:  "You  know, I could finish all these pictures."
A good example of this aspect of Rousseau is The Football  Players. Four  men with  identical  moustaches  are  playing  football   ( rugger)   in  a  neat  little  field framed  by trees whose trunks  seem to rest on the ground  like stage-props  rather than  grow out of it. The  men's  positions are drawn  as if they had been frozen in the middle of a rather  jolly ballet;  their feet, of course, have no solid connection with the ground  on which they supposedly stand.  One man  is about  to catch the ball, which hangs suspended  in the air above him, surrounded by a haze in which the leaves of the background  trees are less precisely drawn  than  anywhere  else in the  painting.  Rather than  watching  the  ball which  he is trying  to catch  (and probably  therefore won't!) this man -like all the four-square,  straight-on  faces in Rousseau's  portraits-stares directly out at the viewer. The  effect is, totally, one of suspension.* The  players stand  as awkwardly in the temporal  continuum as they do in the spatial.  The  eyes staring straight at the viewer induce an intense awareness of the artificiality of the situation: they stare out of the canvas and out

* Shattuck writes: "The  figures move ... in total stillness.... They appear to have no location, to float in air" (The Banquet  Years,  p. 95).

ONDAATJE & ROUSSEAU

of time,  out  of the  whole  temporal-spatial situation of Henri   Rousseau in  1908
into  the  timelessness of art.
This  approach -through  the  naivete  of  the  technique, seeing  the  paintings' temporal dislocation as the result  of their  naive  handling of space -is, I believe, the most profitable  way of understanding that  quality in Rousseau  which  Leonard Cohen  eulogizes in the first section of Book II of the The  Favourite Game. Cohen, however,  approaches it entirely  through subject-matter:

Always is the word that  must be used. The  lion will always be sniffing the robes of the sleeping  gypsy, there  will be  no attack,  no guts on  the  sand:   The  total  en­ counter  is expressed. The  moon, even though it is doomed to travel, will  never go down on this scene. The abandoned  lute does not cry for fingers. It is swollen with all the music it needs.
(The  Favourite Game, p. 58.)

This sounds  very much  like Keats  addressing  his Grecian  Urn,  and  indeed, when the  young  Breavman  is being  lionized   (excuse  the  pun)   by  literary  Montreal Cohen  comments that   "Canadians are  desperate for  a  Keats"  (The  Favourite Game,  p.  I o I). One  of Breavman's obsessions, throughout the  book,  is with  the stopping of time -most notably  in the midnight car-ride with  Krantz -and this is associated  with  the  vision  he  has in  the  brass  foundry, of  the  "liquid metal" which  was "the colour  gold should  be.... The  arch  of liquid  came  to represent an intensity  he would  never achieve" (The  Favourite Game, pp.  I04-6.)
This  is an  aspect  of The  Favourite Game  which  Michael Ondaatje  does  not
deal  with  in his book  on Leonard Cohen.  He  does comment, briefly,  on  Cohen's reference  to the  other  Rousseau,  Jean-Jacques,8  but  there  is nothing at  all  about Henri. This  is very curious,  considering  Ondaatje's interest  in Rousseau, and con­ sidering  that  this  whole  theme  of "the  way  he stops  time" is as central  to  On­ daatje as it is to Cohen. In his poetry, Ondaatje does pick up the associated  image  of the arch  of liquid  metal:

To learn  to pour the exact arc of steel still soft and  crazy before it hits the page.

("Taking")

The  obsession with  fixing moving  things  in time  is most  clearly  announced  in the opening of The  Collected Works  of Billy the Kid:   under  the  empty  frame of the "picture of Billy" is the quotation from L. A. Huffman describing the progress made  in  photographing moving  objects: "I am  able  to take  passing  horses  at  a lively trot  square across  the  line  of fire-bits  of snow  in the  air-spokes  well defined - some blur  on top  of wheel but sharp  in the main -men walking  are no trick."  This states, at the outset, one of the main  themes of the book:   fixing the

ONDAATJE & ROUSSEAU

image of Billy, a character  constantly in motion both literally (the finger exercises) and ontologically  (as his image shifts between historical fact, legendary  accretion, and the creations of Ondaatje's personal imagination). I have already  discussed9 the differences between  Ondaatje's fixing of Billy in legend, and  bp  Nichol's evocation of Billy as rumour: here it should be noted that  Ondaatje's Billy, while constantly in motion, can in fact be frozen, as in Huffman's photographs  (or Rousseau's  paintings), to a much greater  extent than  Nichol's can.
This  concern  is also present in the early poems of The  Dainty  Monsters,  and interestingly, it is directly associated with Rousseau. In the zoo poem, "You  Can Look But You Better  Not Touch," Ondaatje comments:

ROUSSEAU  wisely eliminated leopards from his follies
A mistake to imagine them static

The leopard is too much a creature of movement, Ondaatje says, to be frozen into the static image of Rousseau's  paintings, and Rousseau was wise to recognize this. (In  fact,  Rousseau  managed  to incorporate  lions, tigers, and  jaguars,  so  there seems no reason why he couldn't  have included leopards as well:  but the interest­ ing point is Ondaatje's insistence on the static nature  of Rousseau's art.)
The  motif is associated with  all of Ondaatje's major  themes. In  "The Sows,"
the  "immobile" animals  "categorize   the  flux  around   them."   In   "The  Time Around Scars," one of the results of the sudden eruption  of violence into a domes­ tic scene is to "freeze irrelevant emotions/  and divide us from our present friends." The  task of the artist  in "Four  Eyes" is to "freeze  this moment  ...  and  in im­ mobilized  time j attempt   to  reconstruct."  He  can  do  this,  in  "The  Respect  of Landscape," only  by  "translating" himself  and  "taking   the  egoism"  of  birds, "becoming  like them  the centre."
In Rat  felly, the idea is most thoroughly explored in " 'The  gate in his head'," a poem written  for Victor Coleman. The  poem celebrates the beauty of things in motion:  "not  clarity but the sense of shift." A book left in a fishbowl opens "like some sea animal/ camouflaging  itself," and  the  "clarity" of the  typeface  letters acquires a new beauty,  "going slow blonde in the sun full water."  Ondaatje sees his own mind as "pouring chaos ... onto the page," in the same way as the liquid metal  is poured.  But  these  movements j moments  are  also caught  and  fixed in time:  the chaos is poured  "in  nets." Coleman  provides the climactic image with "a  blurred  photograph of a gull ... The  stunning  white bird j an  unclear  stir." Again, this is a "Caught vision," and the same word is repeated in the final stanza:

And that is all this writing should be then,
The beautiful formed things caught at the wrong moment
so they are shapeless, awkward
moving to the clear.

16

ONDAATJE & ROUSSEAU

This   is, in  another  form,   the  "equilibrium" which   I spoke  of  earlier. The balance to be struck  here is between  the essential  beauty  of movement, the  "sense of shift," and  the  artist's "catching" of that  movement. The  resulting image  is simultaneously a fixed  moment abstracted from  time,  and  a  moment which  im­ plies and  contains  the  continued "moving to the  clear." It is a clear,  unmoving image  of a blurred  movement towards  clarity.
This  kind of paradox is also implicit  in Ondaatje's portrait of Wallace  Stevens writing:

his head  making  his hand move where he wanted
and  he saw his hand  was saying
the mind is never finished, no, never

("Dates")

Stevens  creates  a clarity,  a  fixed  moment  under  his control, which  immediately and  uncontrollably generates a further movement  towards a further  clarity.  An­ other  poem says that  Stevens  "is thinking  chaos is thinking fences"  ("King Kong  Meets  Wallace  Stevens"). The   lack  of  punctuation equates the  two  activities, runs  them  together  into  one;  it could  also be read  that  what  Stevens  is  thinking is that  "chaos  is thinking fences,"  and  in a circle, fences  are  thinking  chaos.  The  artist  performs  these impossibilities; under  Stevens'  hand, the  page  is  "becoming thought where  nothing had  been," just  as  the  spider-poet "thinks  a  path   and
travels I the emptiness  that  was there" (Spider  Blues") .
The  effect  is always  to  stop  time: in  "Taking," Ondaatje speaks  of  how  he has "stroked  the  mood  and  tone I of hundred year  dead  men  and  women," and thus,  for  himself  "removed them  from  historical  traffic." It could  be said  of  all
Ondaatje's images,  and  also for  the  figures in  Rousseau's paintings, that  "Their idea of the immaculate moment is now."
There is a distinction to be made,  however,  here as always,  between  the  poems
and  the  poet.  The   poems  may  aspire  towards   the  timelessness  of  the  sleeping gypsy, the  Grecian  urn,  or the  blurred  white  bird; but  the  poet  is still  caught in flux and  change,  and  so is the  reader. Art  may  achieve  moments of equilibrium, but  these cannot  be entered into  by the artist  or the spectator: the  experience of them  must  pass. Ondaatje's  description of The  Dream suggests  that  this  is  anti­ cipated  even within  the  painting itself. The  reason  that Yadwigha "looks  to  her
left"  is that  "that is the  direction we leave  in I when  we fall  from  her  room  of
flowers."  (This  is, incidentally, factually correct  for  the  present   hanging of  the painting in  the  Museum of  Modern Art,  New  York.)   Time is stopped in  the "room  of flowers,"  but  both  artist  and  spectator must  sooner  or  later  "fall" out of it.
The  perfect  moments when  the  intensity  of "the exact  arc" is achieved   may

17

ONDAATJE & ROUSSEAU

go some way towards  mediating  between "Families"  and  "Live  Bait,"  but  they cannot   go  all  the  way.  Rousseau  died  in  despair  when  the  petite  bourgeoise Leonie refused to become Yadwigha for him, even when Robert Delaunay  pleaded with her to visit the painter's deathbed. The  artist does not escape from the destructive  movement  of time: indeed,  he may feel called upon  to immerse him­ self in it.
The  Huffman  quotation which sets out the image of caught  movement  in The
Collected Works  of Billy the Kid closes by insisting that "many  of the best [were] exposed when my horse was in motion,"  in other  words, when  the artist  himself partook of the nature  of the subject. The  relationship between  Ondaatje and  his persona in this book is a very complex one:  although  Ondaatje has to stand  back at  times in his familiar  ironic  pose, he cannot  totally separate  himself from  the outlaw  personality.  Ondaatje as artist  moves towards  Billy as outlaw,  and  vice versa. It  is Billy himself who stops time to replay the scene preceding  his death which "I would  have seen if I was on the roof looking," and  who prolongs the moment  of death  itself with "the  bullet itch frozen in my head." When  the blank frame is finally filled, it is not with a photograph  of Billy, but with one of Michael Ondaatje.
The  image of the artist projected  in many of the poems in the "White Dwarfs" section of Rat  jelly is a self-destructive one:  the herons who find "ways of going/ physically mad"   ("Heron Rex"), those who commit "Our suicide  into  nature" as insects eat the brain  ("Near  Elginburg") , the unwinding  body from Vaughn­ James' The  Projector which "will be consumed before ever reaching the ground,"  Icarus  "fished ... from this Quebec  river"  ("Fabulous shadow"), and  above all the  "heroes"  of  "White Dwarfs"  itself. "White   Dwarfs"  is  a   hymn  to  self­ destruction,  to those who are-returning  for  a moment  to  the  terminology  of Leonard  Cohen-beautiful losers. The  artists are "those who  disappear," those who "die in the ether  peripheries,"  the outcasts who "sail  to  that  perfect edge j where there  is no social fuel."  The  artists can  "understand  their  altitude" only by the "Release  of sandbags" to take  them  higher from  the  ground.  The  artist moves into silence: the lonely "silence of the third cross," the silence of mules with their  tongues  cut  out,  the  silence  of  the  "perfect  white  between  the  words." Participating in the very movement  which their art cancels, immersing themselves in the destructive  element which their words have transcended,  they become like stars  gone nova,  collapsing in on themselves,  imploding into  that  silence which Eliot proclaimed  words could reach into, "beyond speech."
Ondaatje understands this type of self-destructive artist, or beautiful  loser (as is shown, in fact,  by his interest  in Cohen) ; but  he is not  himself one of them. Neither indeed was Rousseau, and though  Ondaatje's main  poem on a Rousseau painting  ("The Vault") is included  in the "White  Dwarfs" section of Rat  ]elly, his major  poem about  Rousseau's  personality  ("To Monsieur  le Maire") is not.

r8

ONDAATJE & ROUSSEAU

Rousseau is live bait rather  than  white dwarf, at least in the  pathetically  vulner­ able naivete which the letter displays. But if we remember that Rousseau's naivete may well have been fully as calculated  as it was genuine, and if we note that  the price  that  Rousseau  asks for  his  painting  in  this "naive"  letter  is considerably higher than  any he had  up till that  time been paid, the same letter  may be seen as demonstrating an intelligence and  ironic control of  tone not too far  removed from Ondaatje's. When  Ondaatje uses the Rousseau  text as a "found  poem,"  it is hard  to tell which of them has the last laugh.
There  is a clear distinction,  then, between the misery of Rousseau's  last days, which  he  certainly  did  not  seek to  bring  upon  himself, and  the  obsessive  self­ destruction  of his friend,  sponsor, and  fellow townsman  of Laval,  Alfred  Jarry.  Having  created  the monstrous role of Ubu in his work, Jarry  came to adopt it in his life to such an extent  that  he broke down all barriers  between  the  two. The result was what Roger Shattuck  calls "Suicide  by hallucination":  Jarry  died  at the age of 34, becoming in the  most literal sense one of those  who  "die  in  the ether  peripheries."  In  The Banquet Years   (the  book which  Ondaatje acknowl­ edges as his source for Rousseau's  letter), Shattuck  writes:

The willfulness with which [Jarry]  kept himself saturated with ether was no longer a form of drinking or alcoholism; he was simply killing himself.... One of his last writings, a chapter called "Descendit  ad infernos" intended for La dragonne, con­ tains this visionary description of the hero's approaching  death:   "But  soon he could drink no more, for there was no more darkness for him and, no  doubt like Adam before the fall ... he could see in the dark."
(The  Banquet  Years, p. 221.)

These  are  of course the lines which Ondaatje uses, without  identifying  their source, as the epigraph  to "Letters  & Other  Worlds";  the source adds yet another dimension to this rich and complex poem. Ondaatje's father, in the terrible isola­ tion  of the  room where  he  "stayed  ... until  he was drunk/ and  until  he  was sober," is also the artist  immersed in self-destruction, yet "moving  to the  clear." His  tragedy  is the  failure  of equilibrium:  he  "balanced   and  fell,"  so  that  in death  he is only human,  "without  metaphor." For  him  as for  Jarry,  the  self­ destruction  of alcohol provided  a new vision; but  unlike Jarry,  what  he  created
-the "gentle  letters ... of the most complete empathy" -were  expressions of love rather  than  of  contempt.  When  Jarry  died,  he  became  completely  Ubu; when Ondaatje's father  died, he became completely himself.
"White  Dwarfs," then, despite its climactic position in the book, does not seem to me to be Ondaatje's ultimate  word on the nature  of the artist.  Rousseau  and not Jarry  must continue to serve as the paradigm: Rousseau  who stops time, not Jarry  who is destroyed by it. The  maintaining  of equilibrium  is a matter  of  con­ trol, and  Ondaatje is himself, always, a highly controlled  artist.  He  is of  course aware of the dangers of control, as "Spider Blues" shows-"Spiders like poets are

ONDAATJE & ROUSSEAU

obsessed with  power" -but this does not mean  that  he will endorse  the surrender of control, the dissolution of personality,  as completely  as Cohen  does in Beautiful Losers. The  poet in "Burning Hills,"  who has the Rousseau  postcard on his desk, and  who  prizes "one  picture that  fuses ... 5 summers," is described  in the  final lines  of the  poem  as  writing "slowly  and  carefully/ with  great   love  and  great coldness."  It is  precisely  that   equilibrium which  Ondaatje at  his  best-as  in "Letters & Other Worlds" -so triumphantly displays.
So perhaps a more  profound statement is to be found  not  in  the  last  poem  of the  "White Dwarfs" section  but  in the  first:  "We're at  the  Graveyard." It is a moment frozen  in time,  a moment of that  small  circle of friends -"Stuart  Sally Kim  and  I" -preserved  against the  unfriendly world.  Above  their  heads  there are  both   mobility   and   immobility, together-"still stars   . . . sliding  stars" - which   form   "clear  charts,"  a  "geometry  of  moving."  The   stars   provide   an "intricate" form  within  which  movement and  clarity  coexist;  this  form  is paral­ leled  "down  here"  by  "friends/ whose  minds   and   bodies/ shift   like  acrobats to each  other." Only  the  presence  of such  friends  can give expression  to the clari­  ties of the stars -"When we leave, they  move/ to an  altitude of  silence" -but the human limitations of these friends are clearly if unobtrusively indicated by the graveyard setting. At  the  same  time, Sally is pregnant.
(If  this poem  is reminiscent of any Rousseau  painting, it is Un  Soir de  Carna­ val, with  the  lucid  ordering of its night  sky, the  clown's / acrobat's costume,  and  the mysterious  pale mask  hung  on the wall.)
The  human function, which  is here  the  artistic  function, is as always  to give
form,   to  exercise   control,  to  maintain  equilibrium,  to  "shape/ and   lock  the transient." The image   used  here  is that   of  "bats/ who  organize the  air/ with thick  blinks  of  travel" -like the  spider  poet  who  "thinks a  path  and   travels/ the  emptiness   that was  there," like  Wallace  Stevens'  page  "becoming thought where   nothing had   been." In   the  closing  lines,  Ondaatje offers  another  such image,  a  shape  to  lock  the  transient. Insofar   as  it  achieves  this,  it  is  certainly fashioned with  "great  coldness" and  control  on  his part; but  it  is also,  just  as certainly, fashioned like  his father's letters,  "with great  love":

Sally is like grey snow in the grass. Sally of the beautiful  bones pregnant below stars.


NOTES

1 This information  is derived from the article on Bucke by Robert  W. Cumberland  in A  Standard  Dictionary  of Canadian  Biography, ed. Charles  G.  D.  Roberts  and Arthur  L. Tunnell, Toronto, 1934.
2   The  best short  biography  of  Henri  Rousseau  is to  be found  in  the  book  which
Ondaatje acknowledges  as his source:  Roger  Shattuck,  The   Banquet  Years,  first

20

ONDAATJE & ROUSSEAU


published 1958,  Vintage edition 1968. The   most  useful  full  length   study   is Dora Vallier, Henri  Rousseau   (Abrams, 1g6o.)  Most  of the  biographical information  in this essay is derived  from  these  two sources.
3  Michael Ondaatje, "Dashiell," Canadian Forum   (March 1975), 26.
4  Michael Ondaatje, ed., The Broken  Ark:  a book  of beasts. Ottawa:  Oberon, 1971.
:;  "Two Authors in Search of a  Character: Michael Ondaatje, bp  Nichol,  and  Billy the  Kid," first  published in  Canadian Literature no. 54, and   reprinted in  George Woodcock's anthology Poets and  Critics  (Toronto: Oxford, 1974).
6  Kroetsch makes  this comment in  Donald  Cameron's Conversations With  Canadian
Novelists   (Toronto:  Macmillan, 1973), Vol.  I, p. 85.
7  Leonard Cohen, The  Favourite Game   (Toronto: New  Canadian Library, 1970),
P· 58.
8  Cohen, p. 33; Michael Ondaatje, Leonard  Cohen  (Toronto: McClelland & Stewart,
1970)' p. 34·
9  See footnote 5, above.











BUCK LJIKE STORE  JIUCTION

Michael Ondaatje

Scrub  lawn.
A chained dog  tense and  smelling. The  outhouse.
50 cents  for  a mattress.  50 cents
for  doors  that  allowed  privacy. What else can you sell?
A rain swollen copy of Jack  London
a magazine drawing of a rabbit bordered with  finishing  nails.
6 chickens,  bird  cage  (empty) , sauerkraut cutting board


down  to the rock
 
trees


21

POEMS

not  bothering to look
into  the old woman's eyes as we go in, get  a number have  the  power  to bid
on everything that  is exposed. After  an  hour  in  this sun
I expected her  to unscrew
her  left arm  off	and  donate it to the auctioneer's excitement.

In certain rituals  we desire only  what  we cannot have. While  for  her,  Mrs  Germain, this is the  needle's  eye
where  maniacs of heaven  select.
Look,  I wanted to say,
$ro for  the  dog
with  faded  denim  eyes










COUNTRY NIGHT



The bathroom light  burns  over  the mirror

In  the  blackness  of the house
beds  groan  from  the  day's  exhaustion hold  the  tired  shoulders bruised
and  cut  legs the  unexpected
3 am  erections. Someone's  dream involves  a saw someone's
dream involves  a  woman.
We have  all dreamed of finding  the lost dog.

The last  light  on  upstairs throws a circular pattern through the  decorated iron  vent
to become  a living  room's  moon.
 


Michael Ondaatje


22

POEMS

The  sofa calls the dog, the cat
in perfect  blackness walks over the stove. In the room of permanent  light cockroaches march  on enamel.
The  spider  with  jewel coloured  thighs the brown moth with corporal stripes
ascend pipes and look into mirrors.

All night the truth  happens.






TWO SONNETS


George Woodcock


The  biographical interest  of  these  two  sonnets  may  well  be  greater than  the literary. They  were  the  first  poems  I wrote  in  Canada, after  returning in I 949 and  going  to live on the land  in a remote  corner  of Vancouver Island where  the vestiges of a frontier society  still survived.  Among  the  things  that   impressed   me after  so long  in  Britain   (where deer  live  in  parks  and  eagles  in  zoos)   was  the abundance of wild life, from  cougars  down  to garter snakes, and  I wrote  my first poems  there  out  of encounters with  such  creatures. When  I had  written them  I was surprised at  their  archaic form  and  tone,  and   put  them   away  in  a  folder from  which  I have  taken  them  after  more  than  a  quarter of  a  century. Seeing them  again, I recognize  a  pioneer   phenomenon I  have  since  noticed   in  many early  Canadian and, for  that  matter, American poets;  faced  with  a strange and physically  compelling-perhaps hostile-world, one  at  first  retreats into  tried and  familiar ways  of  expressing  one's  feelings  towards what   is  both   new  and formidable. Like most writers  confronted by old  poems,  I have  tinkered slightly, tightening a line  here  and  there,  but  the  only  major change I have  made is to rewrite the  weak  closing line of "Eagle." "Eagle," incidentally, is the  poem  that most shows both  where  I came  from  and  when  I came.  "East" then  had  for  me the  European connotation of Asia;  now  it would  mean  to  me  the  Maritimes or perhaps Toronto. And   1949  was  a  time  when  the  Asian   East   was  especially "ominous," since  that was the  season  when  the  two  rival  forces  in  China  were locked in their  final, fateful  combat.

23

POEMS
























































24
 

E](GLE
Down  the  cliff's edge, high on a leaning cedar Whose  branches hang  in drooping deprecation, Quietly resigned, as if mourning desolation
Left  by the  petulant saw and  brutal tractor,
An  eagle  sits like the  poet's  conquistador, Erect  and  peering through the  lifting  mist Haughtily  towards Japan and  the  ominous   East.  This is a conqueror who seeks no glory,  nor
The smoky  golden  loot of distant lands.  His eye slants  over,  not  beyond  the  ocean,  Seeks the betraying ripple, form  above  sand, Refracted through slack water,  trembling fin. Then on  wide  wings he falls, a shabby  terror, And  ragged  hunger breaks  the  sea,  his mirror.







DEER

A dog  barks  in the distance.   A moment later Delicately through the sword fern  steps the  buck, Polished  prongs  high,  tense ears,  his fear Dwindling as he stops in  the  old  cart  track
To  nibble  the  amethyst daisies between  the  ruts. A dry  crack  in  the  wood:  he pauses  an  instant, Tapestry beast  among  the  python  roots
Of  the giant  fir-trees,  tawny  against  the  jet Charred Christ-year stump.   A dead  branch falls And  he leaps away  like a northern kangaroo, Plunges in  the  glossy darkness  of salal
As the  bluejays  scream  in derision  to see him  go. Lord, preserve  him  from  the  pitlamper's greed, Avert  the  hunter's fury,  the  cougar's leap!

TO LIVE
IN ABUNDANCE  OF LIFE

Time in Canadian Literature


Ofelia Cohn-Sjetcu


1:TITLE AND  SUBSTANCE OF   THIS  STUDY will come as a surprise  to  those  who  consider  twentieth-century   Canadian  literature   gloomy,
pessimistic and  obsessed with  the  problem of survival  in a wild country,  among wild animals  and  at  the  mercy of a wild climate.  While  it is undoubtedly   true that  contemporary  Canadian prose and  poetry are deeply concerned  with  man's unremitting  struggle  against  an  inclement environment, it is also accurate  to say that  what  is ultimately  administered   to  the  reader  is  not  a  debilitating,  self­ defeating  drug,  but  a strong  mental  tonic, able to produce  a stimulating effect. Indeed,  Canadian authors  consider that  the individual  has to reach  that state of acquiescence in which he is able to accept himself as a finite creature surrounded by an indifferent  universe, yet capable of scoring victories and  making  contribu­  tions in spite of his frailty.  What  is running  through  their  work is a clear intel­ lectual  tune  affirming the dignity  and significance of  human  existence, with  the weight of novels and  poems as its appropriate orchestration.
One  notices in twentieth-century Canadian  literature  the  presence of a funda­
mental  premise to  the  discussion of the  human  condition : the  idea  that,  time being an ineradicable  factor in the universal totality, a temporal  index must neces­ sarily enter into the study of man. Moreover, that time is man's most characteristic mode of experience, for it applies equally to his external  reality and to the world of his emotions and  ideas for which no spatial order can be given.1 One  manifest feature of a concern with time is that it is a consequence of consciousness. In truth,  from Grove to Purdy and Richler, from Avison to Aquin, Canadian authors  have found themselves in a world they understand  and  control only partially,  yet have attempted  to order  their  consciousness of reality, to  put  themselves in  harmony  with the  patterns  they  discern, and,  thus, find  foundations  for  the  forms of be­ haviour one prizes in a full man and a fulfilled society.
What is characteristic of the best works produced in Canada during this century is a mature  assessment of the human  condition, equally opposed to facile optimism or facile despair. The  pessimism pervading the intellectual  climate of our age has

25

TIME

taken its toll on Canadian authors,  yet they are not exhausted  by the  knowledge of man's  impermanence. Though  fully aware  that  man's  life is not  only  insigni­ ficant within the overall pattern  of existence, but also subject to crucial limitations, they do not conclude  that  human  existence is a great mockery and  life the ulti­ mate four-letter  word. On  the contrary,  with the human  being  moved  from  the privileged position of culminating  point of Creation to that  of  integral  part  of an ecological system, Canadian authors  try to contend with the awareness that  man's  reason for existence is not supplied  by an external  agency, but  is consubstantial  with the individual  who thinks.  It  is, therefore,  to man  himself that  the  task to create living value is set, to find the inner reason to sustain himself in an existence which may otherwise be considered a purely biological accident.
But,  where  to  look for  the  redeeming  feature  of the  life of man?  In  man's
uniqueness, comes the  unequivocal  answer:  in man's  possibility to engage  men­ tally in  a  vertical  temporal  movement,  rather  than  follow a  merely  horizontal sequence  of moments.  Indeed,  the  concept  of time  as formulated  by  science is only partly  the  time  of the  human  being. There  are  categories  of  time  which, though  not meaningful  in the framework  of objective reality, are  highly signifi­ cant  in experience.  Memory,  imagination, dynamic interpenetration and  subjec­ tive metric  are only a few of the concepts that  find  expression in  the  context  of experience, not in that of the phenomenal world.
The  direct result of this "new  departure"2  in the treatment  of time is the crea­ tion of a  philosophy  of life primarily  based on subjectivity,  and,  with  this, the reader  of Canadian literature  is taken from  the  periphery of the  human  experi­ ence engrossed in local and  transitory  preoccupations to the centre  of the experi­ ence itself, where the spatial order  is no longer important. And it is precisely this distinct  quality  that  catapults  Canada  into a literary order  where  people do not face  Canadian problems solely, but  men  face  the  problems of man,  and  reach towards a universal spiritual  reality accessible to all mankind.
The  present study  will focus attention  on five authors:  Grove, Purdy,  Avison, Aquin and Richler. In selecting them, I have considered not only their status in Canadian literature, but also the diversity of the stances they adopt  towards  the unique  issue of  how  to  use  time  itself in  the  service of  a  meaningful   human existence. In addition,  an examination  of their works gives the reader  the oppor­ tunity  to follow the progress of this approach  to time, and  of the spiritual move­ ment  accompanying  it, from  early in the twentieth  century  to the  present.




GROVE's WORLD  is basically that  of  pioneers  and  immi­ grants:   these two words conveying not only their  primary sense, but  also  ecom­ passing all those whose most immediate  enemy is space. It is precisely this particu-

TIME

lar spatial  index attached  to his heroes that  explains the rather  uncommon  out­ look on time which Grove holds. In an epoch predominantly convinced  that the experiential  properties of time are more important  for human  lives than scientific concepts, he constructs a theory of time which satisfies objective conditions, even if by so doing he partly discourages the practice of certain subjective  qualities  of time which are charged  with great significance in human  experience.  Yet, while advocating rigorous synchronization  with present time and objective reality, he is not rejecting temporal  perspective, but expressing concern over the harmful  effect which  an  imaginative  approach to life may  have  under  conditions  of  extreme environmental pressure. Pioneering  and immigration  are such extreme  situations, and Grove's constant  preoccupation  with the importance of the present is obvious throughout his work. In  Over  Prairie Trails, however, his concern  is articulated with  particular  poignancy, for, here, the challenge issued to man  by both space and time is at its utmost, and the author's  response is adjusted  proportionally.
The  framework  of the book is deceptively simple -an  almost  bare stage and three  performers in dramatic confrontation: Man,  Space and  Time.  The  man is alone  and  stands  against  space  in its most brutal  form:   hostile  nature -cross­ country  driving  on  unmarked   rut  trails over the  prairie,  through  impenetrable marsh fog, impassable snow and  blizzard. Time itself allows the driver only a few hours  to wrest distance  and  join  his family, for  the  journey  has  to  take  place between  4 o'clock in the afternoon  and  the fall of darkness. Each  moment  con­ stituting  the trip is therefore  central  and determinant, the whole development  of the story being in effect a function  of correct timing. "I looked at my watch," and "I looked at  my watch  again," are  phrases which  punctuate the  narration, for Grove plays upon this theme abundantly and  repeatedly.
Permanently  affixed to the  present, man  is able to achieve  perfect  timing  and control  over his actions, to do the right thing at the  right  time,  and  thus  trans­ form  each instant  from  a situation  of being acted  upon,  into  an  opportunity to act. And it is precisely through  well-timed action that  the driver in Over  Prairie Trails  makes it possible for himself to reach his destination, rather  than  become lost in the marsh, or freeze to death in the blizzard. Conversely, when man abuses the objective time and  thus loses his unique  point  of authentic and  vital  contact with reality, the very opposite can happen. Significantly enough, on the particular trip  when  the  driver  releases his  attention   from  the  things  around   him  and indulges in day-dreaming,  he almost loses his life.
This  is not to say that  Grove advocates the restriction of an  adult's  temporal perspective to one single element. On the contrary,  numerous  pages in the  book are written  precisely with a view to encouraging the expansion of man's imagina­ tive grasp of objective  reality. The  way in which he endows  with  physiognomy the  houses he  sees by  the  road,  or  the  attention   with  which  he  pauses  over moments  when the spirit  of man  transcends objectivity, and  through  a gigantic

TIME

leap  experiences  a  reality  beyond  rational  expression,  testify  to  his  interest  in modes  of  perception   which  do  not  suffer  from  shallowness  and   unilaterality. Lifted  on  top  of a  drift  which  buried  the  trees around,  the  driver  feels seized with a

feeling of estrangement, as it were-as if I were not myself, but looking on from the outside at the adventure of somebody who yet wasI -... a feeling of  having been carried beyond my depth where I could not swim-... .

Such moments  do exist and  are immensely precious. However,  Grove was too astute an observer of the human  condition not to point out that the intense instant experienced on the top of the drift was flanked on both sides by moments of cruel factuality: one of urgent  necessity to ascend, and one of equally  imperative  need to descend. A peak squeezed between two points of low altitude,  a situation  whose symbolic value is obvious. Private  time cannot and should not be annihilated, for this  would  mean  a  contraction of human  experience,  but  man  must  also stay keyed  to  objective  reality.  The  "cheerless  night"  when  he  nearly  lost  his  life taught  Grove a painful lesson: if an accident happened  to him on his way home, it was nobody's fault  but  his own,  for he "should  have watched  the  road  more carefully instead of giving in to the trend of his thoughts."
If Grove's  Over  Prairie Trails  urges the  reader  to stay  keyed to the  time of
clocks and calendars,  Aquin's  Prochain episode seems to exhort  him to avoid liv­ ing in the present to the point of totally ignoring the objective dimension of  time. It  is true  that  Aquin's  heroes  have  always found  it difficult to  reconcile  them­ selves to the  reality around  them,  yet, the reason for the extreme  point  of view adopted  in  Prochain episode springs  not from a general  dissatisfaction  with  the present,  but  from  the  nature  of  the  particular  situation  described.  Indeed,  the narrator of Prochain episode has been imprisoned and subsequently  hospitalized for terrorist  activity,  and,  at  the  moment  delineated  in the  book, he  is both  de­ prived  of his freedom  and  waiting  for the date  of his trial  and  sentence.  Under the terrible stress of solitary confinement  combined  with  prolonged  suspense, the prisoner discovers his self disintegrating  and considers committing  suicide. Realiz­ ing, however, that  lack of coincidence  with  the  present  would shield  him  from the lethal effects of detention,  the  prisoner decides to draw  on his memories and write  a  story,  thus  interposing  a  subjective  world  between  his  psyche  and  his physical life in prison. Grove advocated  synchronization  with the present because the driver's success in his book was predicated  on his ability to stay constantly in direct  contact  with  the  space  around.  Conversely, for  the  prisoner  in  Aquin's novel, it is imperative that he should separate himself from his immediate  environ­ ment if he is to survive, and  preserve his sanity till the day of his trial.
Through writing, however, Aquin's narrator-prisoner  achieves much more than refuge from  an  unsatisfying  present  and  release from nervous  tension.  Through

TIME

writing, the  man  deprived of an  authentic future in  the  absence  of a  court  sen­ tence  creates  a future, and  thus  gives his mental life the quality of duration  which otherwise it  misses. The spy-story  the  prisoner  writes  is highly  autobiographical, but  what  seems, at  first sight,  to  be a collection  of fractured  past  moments, is in fact  a deliberately created system.  The  story  does not  revive  a  past  dictated by a mere  concatenation of  precedence, but  only  the  narrator's  immediate  past  in­ volved  with  K  and  the  F.L.Q. The events  recorded  are  distanced in  space  and  time,  yet  they  are  united   through the  unique   feeling  aroused   in  the  man   who writes  about them.  He  re-invents them  continuously  according to the  well-deter­ mined  intention to set himself  in  resonance  with  them,  to re-establish with  them a  relation  of  mental continuity, and  thus  become  again  an  integral part  of  the great   flood  of  the  revolution. Indeed,  by  attaining  concordance with   the  past containing the  objects  of  his  love  and  commitment, the  narrator  attains con­ cordance with  their  future as well, even  if following  the  trial  and  sentencing he will, or  will not,  join  K  and  the  F.L.Q. physically.  "En   moi,  deprime explosif, toute  une  nation  s'aplatit  historiquement ... " admits  the  prisoner  in  a supreme statement of identity, and it is precisely through this rhapsodic identification with his own  people  that  he  gives himself  a  future. And,  since  this  particular group  with  whose  future he  wants  to  coincide  is part  of the  universal  totality of men,  the  prisoner  is ultimately setting  himself in resonance  with  the  whole  of mankind,
and  moves  in  rhythm with  it  in  spite  of  the  immobility imposed   by  detention. "Pour t',ecrire, je m'adresse a toutle monde," the prisoner writes to his beloved  K,
at  once  woman  and  Quebec. "L'amour est le cycle de  la  parole," he  continues, fully aware that  by imposing  upon  disordered  temporal elements  a system deliber­ ately constructed, he obliges them  to constitute themselves into  coherent  duration, and  ultimately produces a work of art.
Writing, therefore, is revealed  not  only as prophylaxis against  a  highly  insuffi­
cient  present  time and  phenomenal world, but also as the dimension within  which man  can  express  his creativity, and  human intelligence  can  score  a  victory  over the  irregularities of natural time.  Of  course, what  Aquin  proposes  is, in the  final analysis, a mode  of perception which  favours  temporal categories  not  meaningful in  the  framework of  objective   reality,  but  in  the  microcosm  of  the  situation  in Prochain  episode;   this  artificial arrangement of  human experience through an almost  total  negation  of present  time  is in order,  for only  the  denial of intimacy with the  prison world can save the inmate's mental balance  till the day of his trial.




Wa_EN, HOWEVER, THE OBJECTS OF  LITERARY ANALYSIS  are not  conditions of extreme environmental pressure,  Canadian authors have differ­ ent  views to communicate. Avison  and  Purdy, a  woman  and  a  man, a  believer

TIME

and a non-believer, do not advocate the cultivation of modes of perception favour­ ing one of the dimensions of time to the detriment  of the other;  they  attempt  to achieve an ideal balance  between the two, to let the subjective consistently enrich and transfigure the objective. And, significantly enough, for both poets, the literary notation  of this newly emerging sense of human  time is the tree. This  can hardly be a  coincidence.  On  the  contrary,  the  presence of a  common  central  symbol seems to indicate the existence of a unifying intellectual concept, in terms of which, the recognition of the uniqueness of man becomes the basis for the acquisition  of a  newness in spirit,  capable  of redressing each  instant  of temporal  existence in stability and consistency. Filtered  through  an "optic  heart"  or a "hearing blood" each objective "now" is endowed  with that particular  quality which distinguishes living from merely existing, and gives life new dimensions.
Margaret Avison looks at the "orphan  urban  tree" squeezed "among the knees of clanking panoplied  buildings," yet desperately forking skywards for air, realizes that  the direction  of the spiritual  movement  aiming at re-organizing  human  ex­ perience  is "up" and  transforms  this  realization  into  the  theme  which  recurs transfigured  throughout her  work. Man,  Avison claims, should  no longer  try to enjoy  time  horizontally,  as a  massive and  continuous  development  of  duration,  but  should  become  engaged  in  a  constant  attempt   to  emerge  from  the  super­ ficiality of mundane affairs,  and  fly into  the  world of vision.  Disengaged  from pure duration  and  oriented  vertically, time becomes spatialized as an inner event, and,  though  man  does not  escape the frame  of reference  of  objective  time,  he ransoms it within the span of a "now"  which seems to last  beyond its clock limits. Such  intense moments  are felt as a unique state of  stretching  and  swelling with strangeness  and,  juxtaposed  to each other,  are able to reveal to man  similitudes which in tum  unveil essences. The  grasp of the  universal totality  becoming pos­ sible, a twofold harmony  is achieved:  a reconciliation of opposite drives in human nature  and  a  tuning  in  with  the  whole  universe. The  "poles  and  latitudes" of human  spiritual geography  witness a "curious encounter" and  the poet who com­
plained : "I find myself I but lose myself again,"  feels her mind  join her body and
is finally able to say:  "I am."  Concomitantly,  the sense of division between  the self and the rest of the world is annihilated  and, comprehending the deep related­ ness between  inside  cadences  and  outside  occurrences,  the  individual  melts  in
general communion  with "the  remotest fishrib I the hairiest thing"  which "as one
fragment I make towards"  fullness.
Yet, not protracting into each other, vertical moments pattern  life on an alter­ nating  rhythm  of withdrawal and  return. Successively, man  feels he is given and relieved of everything,  realizes the absurdity of his condition and sees the whole of existence deflated  to a  "luxuriant deep-breathed  zero." At  this  point,  however, Margaret  Avison has a profound  religious revelation  and  understands  that  love, with its power to overwhelm  the moment, is the only conciliatory means of asso-

TIME

dating temporal  and spatial aspects of objective reality. Transfigured  by love, the discontinuous  becomes continuous,  and  the  direction  of time  is no longer  from past to future,  but from isolated moments to authentic  duration. It  is important, of course, that  Margaret Avison comes to this understanding through  a religious experience. More important is that,  having undergone  it, she goes beyond it, and proposes a way of life whose terms are equally addressed  to the  believer and  the non-believer.  Indeed,  the system once found,  the task is with each  individual  to impose it and attain  that synchronization  which allows intense moments to remain autonomous,  yet become  part  of a huge co-ordinate.  The  universe has to be  re­ invented, "the  optic heart  must venture" both "a  jail-break" and  "a re-creation," if man is to achieve plenitude  of life. Hence, Avison's constant  plea:  "Come  out. Crawl  out"  from  a too serious immersion in the  affairs of a  present  which  has turned  into a mere function  of material  productivity,  feel "the  power of the blue and gold breadth/ of day,"  and  realize that  we, human beings, have moved "too far from  ways of weightlessness." Above all, she invites  her  reader  to share  her hunger for the "real  nourishment" of love, to sit and  eat  and feel alive.
Purdy, too, considers love as the only true solution to the human  condition  and he, too, tries to  organize  human  experience  meaningfully  around   this  spiritual centre. He reaches this conclusion also by contemplating  a tree, but  his eyes rest not so much on its branches forking upwards, as on its roots plunging downwards. Indeed, he looks at the dwarf arctic trees of the Baffin Islands and, suddenly aware that  their roots "touch  permafrost j ice that  remains ice for ever," that  they "use death  to remain  alive,"  he,  who  previously thought  life reduced  to  a  "protein formula," is able  to  affirm  "the  dignity  of  any  living  thing,"  no  matter   how humble a form of life it represents. Like Avison, AI Purdy  conceives human  time not as a smooth, horizontal continuum  flowing from the past into the future,  but, symbolically, as a vertical  axis representing  the subjective  dynamic  relation  be­ tween events which have happened,  are happening and will happen. The existence of this axis explains the transcendental unifications of experience which make past and future appear  intensely real and quivering with potency. And if his particular interest lies with the past spiritual  roots of man,  it is because he  believes that  at the  level  of  roots  the  integration   between  the  individual   and   the  general  is achieved, and  death  is conquered  by life in vital and mental form. Therefore,  he wants to descend to the level of mythical roots, equip  himself  with a  new spirit, and  emerge capable  of transcending  the limitations  which the  human  condition imposes on him as an individual.
Indeed, Purdy does not conceive of his ancestors as part of a historical existence
already accomplished  and, hence, deprived of significance. On  the contrary,  he believes that  ancestors long gone to earth come to life again  through  the  present day people, that, like trees, they sprout through their descendants, not in flesh, but in spirit. The  dead are not buried  but "planted," and  the people alive "stem"  in

TIME


the graveyard, Purdy says in  In  Search  of Owen Roblin, in an  attempt to affirm that  death  is a contributor to life that  has  to spring  from  earth. He  himself  feels
"all   dead   men I chanting hymns" tunnelling towards   him   underground and
addressing themselves to  his  "hearing blood." To  ease  their   way  into  his  own being,  to tap  a spiritual heritage that  will enable  him  to  actually encounter the whole  race  of man, he goes to  Roblin's Mill  in search  of Owen, the  founder of
the  village.  There, diving  through time,  going  back  "down the  long  stairway 1
we  all  came  up  when  we  were  born," Purdy acquires  a  sense  of  human  unity underlying individual multiplicity.

Whatever  is underneath a village
and  a one-time  pioneer settlement  goes deeper
rooted  inside the human  character contemporary as well as ancient,

the  poet says, discovering himself  part  of a  universe  to which  no temporal order is given, and  which  opens  to receive him as an integral part. With  men  having  in common both  an  identity of  person  and  of  nature, humanity becomes  a  huge joint account, and  Purdy, who felt his ancestors  speaking  in his blood,  hears him­ self "already whispering in the minds of his descendants."
The sense of the  continuity of human nature and  of the  likeness of the  human plight  makes  possible a deeper  sense of the  brotherhood of man, and  this,  Purdy recognizes with  Avison, gains  man  two things: a better  understanding of his own psyche and  the capacity to reach  out  to his fellows and  participate emotionally in the  world.  "After being  them  I become  myself again/ rooted  in Year  One  of all the directions I am travelling"; Purdy admits  seeing equivalence in the gestures of his predecessors  and  feeling  able to explore  his own self "unafraid of darkness  and failure." At the same  time,  freed  from  the  prison of the self, the  individual over­ comes self-centredness and,  with  the soul rendered supple  and  flexible, merges  in love with other  beings and  gives life the profundity which it otherwise lacks. "Love is an  absolute  as death is," Purdy unequivocally proclaims,  at  once  locating and  assessing the spark  of life, and  his idiot  boy sings:

Stay with me in the same world or I am lost and desolate

that  you are here at all delays my own death
an instant  longer.

This  does not  mean  that  the  poet  conditions man's  capacity to extend  love to others  on  having first  communed with  past  generations. To  find  an  opening in the  past  by  using  the  subjective dimension   of  time  is only  one  of  the   human privileges to which  he calls attention. There are other  ways of reaching the same

TIME

goal. Avison's way is one of them. What is highly significant,  however, is the fact that  both  poets glorify moments  of great and sudden  experience,  at once of  self­ recognition  and self-comprehension,  within the breadth  of which  both  a self  and a  reality  beyond  the instantaneous is discovered. It  is also extremely  important that  to the inadequacy  of objective time, both poets oppose a kind of  time which one  may  call "emotional," and  which consists of setting  up  love as  the  unique point of perspective from which life should be considered. The  point of  perspective itself being outside time, never ceases to exist and  to dictate  individual moments to align not in their rigorous chronological succession, but in  their  relation  to the pivot itself.
Of  course,  apart   from  love, there  are  many  other  subjective   pivots  around which  human  life can  be organized.  Metaphors,  for instance,  may  function  as rallying points in man's struggle against spiritual  regimentation.  To show the way in which such a pivot bears  upon  human  life and  gives it  consistency and  con­ stancy  while preserving  the  integrity  of its individual  moments,  is the  task  that Mordecai  Richler  sets himself in  St. Urbain's  Horseman.  In  truth,  Richler  has timidly attempted  to do the same thing in other  novels; St. Urbain's  Horseman,  however, represents the achievement.




bE MAJOR  PREMISE  OF   RICHLER'S   NOVEL is that  the  con­ cept of the self is inseparable  from the concept of time, that  both  man's organic and his psychological development  are predicated on time. The  author's approach  to his subject is also based on the observation that  the time of human experience is different  from the concept  of time in nature; one major  distinction  being the fact  that  events of real  importance for the  psyche do  not  flow in  a  systematic chronological  order,  but  enjoy  an  unequal  distribution  within  a  span of  time objectively measured.  However,  what might be called the discontinuous  in terms of clocks and calendars is the psychologically continuous, for apparently disparate events converge towards  the  unique  point  of  momentary  experience,  and  what happens to a man at one particular  moment in  his life is in resonance  with what has already  happened  to  him  at  other  different  times. This  is why  a  memory which  is not formed  by  habit  but  consists of significant  events, as  well as the fantasies and  metaphors  which  constitute  the structural landmarks of a person's imagination,  provide  outstandingly   relevant  psychological data.  Referring  to  a pre-eminently  value-charged  aspect of  experience, at  times defying logical inter­  pretation, they disclose a coherent structure of the self which cannot  be recovered if only  present experience is considered. Therefore,  the  author  in  quest  of Jake Hersh's self is in  quest  at  once of his memory  and  of his leading  statement   of identity:  the metaphor  of "the  Horseman."

33

TIME

But how can  this constant  resonance  between memory, imagination   and  mo­ mentary  experience be conveyed? Richler's solution to the  problem  is simple but brilliant: he uses temporal  cubism. The  author  places himself in one  particular  moment  in the life of his protagonist,  that  of his trial, and,  by means of his pro­ tagonist's  recollections, allows the  reader  to view the central  event  from  a large number  of  points  of  temporal   perspective.  Richler,  however,  is  not  imitating Proust. Jake's trial is not Marcel's  biscuit and cup of tea;  having triggered it does not disappear,  and the book does not move backwards. On  the contrary,  the trial is the extensive present of the novel, and into this present the past is summoned  to render  it intelligible.  In  other  words,  what  a  cubist  painter  does  with  space, Mordecai  Richler  does with time. Indeed  he spatializes the present  by making it the  point  of confluence  not  of  events governed  by a  uniform  and  consecutive order,  but  of incidents  which  exhibit  dynamic  association and  interpenetration, precisely the qualities which are significant between time and the self. Accordingly, his hero is not a fixed structure, nor is he a passive recorder, but a constant  inter­ preter, organizer  and  synthesizer. He is a  distinct pattern  of responses and  asso­ ciations called Jake  Hersh,  whose resistance to a meaningless existence and  des­ perate attempt  to establish consistency and significance in life is made explicit by the metaphor  of "the Horseman."
In  order  to  reveal  the  gradual   construction  of the  metaphor, Richler  relies heavily on temporal  cubism,  in terms of which echoes of past  moments  are  dis­ covered not in a process of merely re-living experience, but  of  self-identification in a present act. Three  events seem to be particularly revealing in this respect, for they all  contain  both  the  given object-Joey,  Jake's  cousin-and a  spiritual movement on Jake's  part  to adhere  to it. The  initial impression goes back to the year 1943, when, due to a number  of  circumstances,  Jake  singles out  his cousin as exactly the opposite of what  he considers hateful in the  rest of the  Hershes: success, adventure  and  action,  as  opposed to petty  humbleness, clannish  immo­ bility and passive acceptance. Years later, Jake hears reports that his cousin fought in the Spanish  war  and, subsequently,  in the  battle for Jerusalem.  At  that  mo­ ment, a profound  relationship  establishes itself between Joey as object and Jake's consciousness.  The  latter  recognizes equivalence  in  the  gestures  of  the  former, and,   through  a  mentally  mimetic  operation,   creates  "the   Horseman," Joey's spiritualized equivalent. "The Horseman" is, indeed, everything  that  Jake  would like himself  to  be:  active,  brave,  of undisputable  social and  political  integrity, and, of  course, always on the back of a superb Pleven stallion, for, "when  a Jew gets on a horse, he stops being a Jew."
The  metaphor  grasps Jake fully. Not only does it become his moral editor, but also, potentially,  his supreme  advisor and  revelator. "Oh, Horseman, Horseman, where are you?" Jake, craving answers and certitudes, will often inquire. That eventually,  in a gesture of characteristic  inconsistency, Jake  identifies the object

34

TIME

which originated  the metaphor  with the metaphor  itself and transforms  his cousin from  Joey Hersh  into "St.  Urbain's Horseman," is less important for our  argu­ ment.  What  is important is that  the essence of the cinema-fantasies  which,  with the metaphor, play such an important role in Jake's life is also revealed by Richler through  the use of his temporal  cubism. Outstanding among these fantasies is the one in which Jake  casts his own funeral.  Here, Jake's  painfully  ambivalent atti­ tude on social matters is made explicit by means of three complementary temporal  angles, obviously supplementing another  angle,  far  distanced  in  time,  yet sue­ cindy advancing  Richler's own indirect statement on the issue. Jake and his friend Harry  are drinking. Jake  hopefully suspects himself of social integrity,  but  Harry amicably  reassures him:  "Don't worry, you're rotten."
After the various dislocations of the time sequence throughout the novel, one observes the final actions of the story unrolling in their chronological order, yet, Richler's  temporal  cubism suggests that  what one commonly calls the self can be experienced  solely against  the background  of a biography defined not only as an objective structure  of temporal  movements, but also as a subjective  associative network, a plurality of aspects whose significance consists in its totality.  The  pos­ sibility to experience time subjectively is the central gift of the human  brain, and man's  capacity  to transcend  the limitations  imposed by his  condition  rests pre­ cisely on his biological uniqueness.
A great  humanist  of this century  observed that  "the  richness of human  life is that  we have many lives; we live events that  do not happen  (and  some that  can­ not)  as vividly as those that  do;  and if thereby we die a thousand  deaths, that  is the price we pay for living a thousand  lives."3   Indeed,  understanding that  human time  does not  precede  man,  but  is the  manner  in  which  he  himself  chooses to live, Grove and  Purdy, Avison, Aquin  and  Richler, in their own ways urge their readers  to stop indulging  in thoughtless living and  conformism  which  erases the difference between man and other species, and, through  a spiritual  and  imagina­  tive resurrection,  achieve  the  essential step  of disengaging  themselves  from  the restrictive matrix  of horizontal  duration.  The  key part of man's equipment is no longer his technology, but the spirit in which he answers to the challenge  of the sum total of nature,  and  man's main goal in life is no longer to wrest from space a  habitable  interior,  but  to  give his existence an  experiential  depth   denied  to merely sensory perception. The  individual,  therefore, has the  task to ride on the pulse of time and, by constant effort, re-organize its units and impose on them his personal volition. And, if in order to transcend objective reality, man has to ques­ tion, to challenge and conceive of alternatives to the very life he is leading  at that moment,  he should  have the  courage and  strength  to embark  upon  this course. And, even though success is never completed and  the struggle should  be unremit­  ting,  the  individual   must  strive  to  establish  a   really  authentic  contact   with

35

TIME

existence  and  with  time; one  which  would  permit  him  to  transcend his earthly life while still embracing it.
Able  to do  so, man   becomes  the  creator of  his  own  rhythlllS  and   durations, scores a victory in knowledge and  will at the same  time, and,  as Toynbee phrased it, renders  hilllSelf capable "to hear  the accents  of Jacob's voice, while feeling the hands  of Esau."4  A rich  and  significant  existence is, therefore, the supreme affirm­ ation  of the human spirit, which  in defiance of time and  death, lives in abundance of life.


NOTES

1 For  a succinct  but  expert  presentation  of the  reasons why time  is considered  the most directly and immediately given of the general human  concepts, see Hans Meyerhoff, Time  in Literature   (Berkeley, 1955),  pp. 1-1 I.
2   The  phrase  has  been  borrowed  from  Georges Poulet,  Le  point  de  depart  (Paris,
1 964) , where the same new approach  to time is noticed and studied in the works of
a few French  and  American  writers.
3 Jacob Bronowski, "The Reach  of Imagination" in The  Norton  Reader  (New York,
1973)' p. 74·
4  Arnold Toynbee,  A Study  of History (Norwich, 1972), p. 469.
















CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075  WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T lWS /228-4741

HISTORY IN
THE  SECOND SCROLL


Michael Greenstein





ONE METHOD OF   UNRAVELUNG Th' &cond   Scmll  is to examine the  beginning of "Gloss  Aleph," Klein's  "Autobiographical," for  it  con­ tains some of the  important themes  developed  throughout the  book.

Out  of the ghetto street where a Jewboy Dreamed  pavement  into pleasant Bible-land, Out  of the Yiddish slums where childhood  met The  friendly  beard,  the loutish Sabbath-goy, Or followed, proud,  the Torah-escorting band, Out  of the  jargoning city I regret,
Rise memories.

Like  Milton  in the opening lines of Paradise Lost/  Klein  suspends  the  subject  of the first stanza by preceding it with  the triple  parallelism "Out  of," a phrase  with the three-fold connotations of space, time, or transformation. In  the spatial inter­ pretation the wandering "Jewboy" travels out of the ghetto  to the external world,  between  oriental and  occidental realms as he encompasses the  twain;  temporally, memories  rise out of the  poet's  childhood as he recalls his nonage days in "Time's haze"; and  the  metamorphic interpretation includes  the  imaginative  transforma­ tion of Bibleland out of pavement. Klein interweaves all three themes in the  novel and  although the  temporal is the  most important, it  is  useful  to  begin  with  an investigation of "Space's vapours."
Lacking  the  unities  of time  and  place, The  Second Scroll contains two symbols
which, in addition to Canadian references scattered throughout the  book, serve to unify the various settings. The  first is the "ocean" separating the  New World  from the  Old,  a  vastness  which  man  must  overcome.  Melech,  who  "had  completely weathered the  ocean  of the  Talmud," writes of the  Atlantic, "that futile  bucket" unable  to  extinguish the  fires of  the  holocaust,  and  concludes his  letter   with  a description of the  blue and  white  Israeli  colours of the  Mediterranean where  the Navy of Redemption sails. If the Atlantic is powerless to douse the genocidal fires, it also cannot dissipate  the odour  of Casablanca's mellah: "Not all the  breezes of the Atlantic, less than  a mile away,  have yet effected  a purification."
"Leviticus" begins  with  the  plane  roaring over  the  Atlantic -the  airplane

37

KLEIN & HISTORY

being Klein's second vehicle for combining distant  locales. In addition  to the Daedalus-Icarus associations, the flight is eschatological:  "on the wings of eagles" the narrator is "borne" to his destination.  "My  very levitation seemed a miracle in harmony  with  the wonder  of my time;  through  my mind  there  ran  the High Holiday praise of God for that  He did 'suspend worlds on without-what,' even as my plane  was suspended,  even over the  abyss of recent  history there  had  risen the new bright  shining  microcosm of Israel."  "Levitation" picks up  the  title  of the chapter, "Leviticus," while the miraculous flight is a "re-enactment" or rebirth with the obvious play on "borne." The  chapter  ends with another  flight to Casa­ blanca, and the fourth  chapter,  "Numbers," opens with reference to the Atlantic which acts symbolically as a mirror for the city.
The  opening  of the final chapter  parallels "Leviticus": "Warmed by the sun beating  through  the  porthole,  my mind  was dreamily  in  communion  with  the murmur  of the  motors  humming  through  aluminum.  They  made  me  whatever music my mind willed, ululative, Messianic, annunciatory. It was as if I was part of an ascension, a going forward  in which I was drawn  on and on." This "ascen­ sion,''  like the  earlier  "levitation," is  highly charged  with  meaning  as  are  the leviathans of the Mediterranean covered by "white  horses" which recall  Melech's description of the sea with other leviathans. The  old man from Safed  makes the final connection  between  the  Messianic airplane  and  its ability  to  diminish  dis­ tances, to cross oceans almost instantly. When  the narrator  announces  that  with the airplane  the transatlantic journey "is  not so great a  distance,"  the  venerable sage begins his explication: "It is the Messiah's days because we see his signs and portents  everywhere.  Thus  is it written  that  when  the  Messiah  will come there will be the wonder of kvitzath  ha-derech, the curtailment  of the route. What  does this mean? It means that  a route which but yesterday was long and arduous sud­ denly becomes short and speedy. Is this not the experience of our time? Is it not the  experience  of the  Yemenites who,  located  as if on another  planet,  as if in another  century, are brought  by planes to this our century and to this our planet, our country,  our home, in the space of  but eight hours?" The  plane is for Klein what the train  was to the nineteenth-century writer. How ironic for the old man, "bearded  like antiquity ... not of this world," to refer to "our  century"; yet his remarks  point to the importance of time in the overall historical context of The  Second Scroll.
Klein  incorporates   two  fundamental  theories  of  history  in  the  book -the cyclic, which  he may  have  derived  from Vico, and  the  progressively linear,  in­ herited  from  the  dialectics of Hegel and  Marx  on  the one  hand,  and  the  Tal­  mudic pilpul on the other. Whereas M. W. Steinberg stresses the religious themes in  the  novel and  Miriam  Waddington   focusses on  the  literary,  humanist,  and secular points of view, I believe that  an historical analysis may elucidate  generic, linguistic, and religious difficulties in the book. 2

KLEIN & HISTORY

0N   THE   LITERAL LEVEL  the story  covers  events  between I 9I 7 and I 949, and  it seems that  Klein implies a cyclical view of history from the  Russian  pogroms to  the  establishment  of the State  of  Israel  at  which  time
Melech  is  murdered   during   an  Arabic  "pogrom."  With   the  help  of  Frye's demonic-apocalyptic  polarity,3    one  may  follow  the  plot  conveniently   and   not altogether  arbitrarily,  for  Klein  alludes to the "apocalyptic dream  of a  renewed Zion" at  the opening  of "Exodus." From  the outset  Klein  emphasizes  the  tem­ poral, not only in the first phrase  ("For  many years")  which introduces  the theme of separation  and  reunion  between  brothers-in-law,  but  also in  the  apocalyptic reference  to Eden  which  reminds  the reader  of the  historical  distance  between first and  second scrolls while simultaneously  reviewing the  narrative  context  of childhood. The  apocalyptic  continues at the Feast of  Rejoicing  in the  Law with the father smiling until  Uncle  Melech's letter interrupts  his mood  with  the  news of the demonic  pogrom in Ratno.  The chapter  ends with  a further  descent into the diabolic as the  Nazis invade  Poland; yet the demonic  "cloud" over  Europe changes to the apocalyptic dream of a renewed Zion at the beginning of "Exodus" as the narrator  envisions the battle of Gog and Magog:  "I saw through  my mind's eye a great  black aftermath cloud.... The  cloud then  began  to scatter  ... until revealed there shone the glory of a burnished dome." "Leviticus" begins with an apocalyptic flight followed by the demonic descent into the mellah in "Numbers": "we slid into the mellah  ... descending into the ... centuries."  "Deuteronomy" remains  predominantly  in  the  upward  direction  from  the  opening  flight  to  the transformed  Sephardic  elevator-boys  ("whose  houses but  a year ago must  needs be lower than  the lowest Arab's")  to the Safed scholar  who  expatiates  on  the Messianic resurrection.
But Klein's cyclic view of history goes beyond this vertical  pattern  of the  rise and fall of life. In  Miriam  Waddington's words, "For  Klein, as for Shelley, lan­ guage  itself is a vast  cyclic poem."4   Perhaps  the  most  recurrent image  in  The Second  Scroll, the "circle"  or the cycle is used in the historical sense of the wheel come full circle or in a "mystical" geometry like Yeats's gyre.5  In "A Psalm Touch­  ing Genealogy" which Steinberg  quotes in his "Introduction," Klein  sees  himself as part  of a whole historical  circle complete with the  risings and  failings of his forefathers:

Corpuscular,
They dwell in my veins, they eavesdrop at my ear,
They circle, as with Torahs, round my skull,
In exit and in entrance all day pull
The latches of my heart, descend, and rise-

The same metaphors appear  early in the novel: "A year of the reading of the Law


39

KLEIN & HISTORY

had  been concluded,  a year was beginning anew, the last verses of Deuteronomy joined the  first of Genesis, the  eternal  circle continued.  Circular, too,  was the dance, a scriptural  gaiety, with wine rejoicing the heart,  and  the Torah  exalting it to heights that strong wine could not reach." The annual  cycle and  the circular scroll of the  Pentateuch are  followed by the  Hassidic circle  which,  in  its most extreme  form,  verges on  the  mystical. This  joyous celebration  contrasts  with  its tragic counterpart in Europe  when the Nazis force the Jewish women to strip and circle the synagogue in vulgar imitation  of the hakojos  ritual.  Melech uses the "corpuscular" image  from  Klein's  "Psalm" to express the  cyclical  unity  of the body of Jewry:  "the  numbered  dead  run through  my veins their  plasma, that  I must live their unexpired  six million circuits."
Klein's  interpretation of Christianity  is circular  too, as seen  in  the  dream  of
Melech  as Pope,  a transformation borrowed from  Joyce's  conversion  of Bloom into Leopold  the First:  "he  performed  the annual  cycle of religious rite.... the long round of his encyclicals." Melech confirms his faith in Judaism by including the  thirteen  credos of  Maimonides  at  the  end  of his letter  to  Piersanti: "In   a single circular  sentence,  without  beginning  or end, he described  God  coming to the  rescue of His chosen."  The  mystical circle appears  in  the  theorizing  of the Zionist journalist  beside the narrator on the flight to Israel:  Jewry  "lost itself in the contemplation  of the One;  with commentary hooped upon commentary it constricted  Him  until  from  Circle  He  diminished  to  Dot."  Klein  applies  the mystical circle to the  poets of the  Israeli settlements:  "In  adamic  intimacy  the poets had returned  to nature  ... the marabou,  amorphous,  mystical, circling ever in a round." In the novel's final scene the narrator, "As at the centre of a whirl­ wind,"  prays for  his uncle  and  watches  "the  beacons announcing  new  moons, festivals, and  set  times";   though  not  as circular  as the  beginning   and  end  of Finnegans  Wake, these concluding  words of "Deuteronomy" act  as a  ricorso for the return  to "Genesis."  And  at the end of "Gloss Beth" the  poet  prays to God, "Circled  and  winged in vortex of my kin":

Again renew them as they were of old, And for all time cancel that ashen orbit
In which our days, and hopes, and kin, are rolled.

Thus,  history, literature, and  religion are  part  of a  universal  circle.  Further­ more, the two-fold quest at the core of the novel is cyclical:  nephew  and  uncle, seeker and sought are identical; language  and  poetry reside in a  ubiquitous  mir­ acle, words made  flesh. That the narrator  and his avuncular  double  are the same may  be evidenced  when  the  nephew  repeats, "I was like  one  that  dreamed.  I, surely had not been of the captivity; but when the Lord turned  again the captivity of Zion, I was like one that  dreamed," which is soon echoed in  Melech's letter:  "When  the Lord  turned  again  the captivity, I was like one that  dreamed." The

KLEIN & HISTORY

distance  between  the  two men  diminishes until  in  Israel  the  narrator discovers that  "A  change  in our  relationship  had  ensued;  it was he, I felt,  who  was now pursuing  me." Similarly,  in the  cyclical quest for "the  poetry of the  recaptured time"  the key image is the miracle.
Running counter  to this cyclical view of history is the  progressive philosophy, proceeding  through  dialectic.  Malcolm  Ross summarizes  the stylistic  tension  in Klein's  poetry:  "Kein  has come close to creating  the archetypal  Canadian  pat­ tern -a  dense organic  fusion of traditional  idiom,  ancient  myth  and  cult,  the contrapuntal dialectic of our French-English  relationship, the sophisticated  tech­ nical reach of man alive in this age and in whom all ages are alive."6   The  open­ ing  conflict  between  the  lapsed  uncle  and  the  orthodox  father  commences  the dialectical  view. The  father  maintains  primitive  notions about  the  philosophy  of Marxism; he displays his antipathy to the dialectical mode in the reductio "Hegel­  baigal,"  and  remains unimpressed  by the Russian  pilpul  (a Talmudic equivalent of the dialectical method of  argument). In direct opposition Melech, transformed  into  Comrade  Krul, exploits  his linguistic, polemical, and  Talmudic talents  in a dialectical  essay:  "it  constituted  a  remarkable  instance  of what  happens  when the Talmudic discipline is applied  either  to a belletristic or revolutionary  praxis
... his argumentation was like nothing so much  as like the subtilized  airy  trans­ cendent   pilpul  of  Talmud-commentary  commentators." Indeed,   the  polemical content  of The   Second   Scroll  includes  Melech's  letter  which  occupies  most of "Exodus," the narrator's political argument  with Settano  and  Melech's  religious disagreement  with  Monsignor  Piersanti in "Leviticus," Melech's letter  of protest against  the  treatment of Jews in Casablanca  which  appears  dramatically in  the Gloss to "Numbers," and  the  narrator's encounter  in  "Deuteronomy" with  the Zionist  journalist  who expounds  a theory of history. Thus,  much  of the  book is taken  up by letters, essays, and  philosophic debates which account  for the didac­ ticism within the "novel."
No sooner  does the  nephew  complete  his uncle's essay in  "Genesis"  than  he receives in the next chapter  Melech's letter in which he notes "the  abandonment of the Marxist  jargon. Instead  Uncle Melech had reverted  to the epistolary  style of his Talmudic days." This  letter  denounces "those  two-faced  masters  of thesis and  antithesis": "In  the midst of our anguish  we were regaled  with  a dialectic which  proved that  fascism was but a matter  of taste." The  long letter  concludes with  a  dialectic  game  proceeding  from  Bible  to  Mishna   to  Talmudic  com­ mentary,  but the rational, linear progression is undercut  by the "revolving" circu­ lar "cumuli  of Cabbala" with its creatio ex nihilo and swirling desert anticipating the imaginary  "whirlwind" at  Melech's death.
Klein  collocates the narrator's argument  with Settano  and  Melech's  disagree­ ment  with  Piersanti  to show the  kinship and  unity between  nephew  and  uncle. Although  Klein  treats  his Satan  with  linguistic humour,  the  Italian  begins his

KLEIN & HISTORY

attack  in a manner  which  parodies  Piersanti's  proselytizing:  "he  had  scoffed at me, styled me a typical  emissary of the  new religion, a sound,  orthodox  Coca­ eolian."  In  low imitation  of the Sistine evaluation,  the  narrator  retorts  aesthet­ ically:   "I had  spitefully  accepted  the  compliment  and- pour  l'epater-had expatiated  upon the beauty  of the Coca-Cola bottle, curved and  dusky like some Gauguin  painting of a South Sea maiden, upon the purity of its contents, its ubi­ quity  in  space,  its symbolic  evocations-a little  torchless  Statue  of  Liberty."  While Settano  with his dialectical smile dogmatically  asserts his materialist  inter­ pretation  of history, the narrator presents himself as an example of spirituality and later  imagines  himself  to  be  John  the  Baptist  decapitated in  the  reflection  of a window.
In  comparison  with  his uncle's  epistle to the  Romans,  the  narrator  inquires, "Whither, 0 Romans?"; in comparison with Settano's polylingual autodidacticism, Melech's  letter  is dominated   by a  polyphonous evocation  of Aramaic; and  in comparison   with   longitudinal-latitudinal  directions   during   the   conversation, Melech "was southing; other parts of his letter might be ambiguous, but that  was orient  clear." Stylistically there is little difference between the  "homily"  or  "ser­ mon"  and the narrator's appraisal  of it. The  basic premise is the divinity of hu­ manity in contrast  to the Christian  humanity of divinity;  and  the syllogisms lead to the conclusion that  "Since  man  is created in the image of  God, the killing of man is deicide." At the centre of the novel, Melech's critical interpretation of the Sistine Chapel  is a rejection  of Christian  doctrine;  Klein  seems to be offering a defense of Jewish faith.
The  description combines cyclical, labyrinthine, and dialectical  modes. The passage begins and ends with the outer marble corridors;  Melech circles the chapel gazing at the "whirlwind of forms" which are "circle-racked"; and in place of Michelangelo's  "magic  circles" he substitutes Maimonides's  thirteen  credos in a single circular  sentence.  Like Joyce's "Oxen  of the Sun"  episode, the letter  imi­ tates embryology:  "the  long umbilical  cord of corridors behind  me,  pressed  for­ ward with infant  eagerness to enter this new world."  Like "Gloss Aleph,"  "Gloss Gimel" examines the theme of "ontogeny  recapitulates phylogeny" as the marble corridors  recall  "childhood's ogred  corridors"  from  the  poem  and  the  "ghostly gauntlet" echoes the  journalist's  phrasing of Jewish  history-"a gauntlet  to be run."
The  ceiling is a heaven  which "breaks  even the necks of the proud"  (a literal reference to the stiff-necked  pride of the Jews). Melech's study of the ceiling juxtaposes Classical and Biblical allusion but, unlike Milton who blends these elements  harmoniously,  he  has a  different  purpose  in  mind.  The  Classical list within the  Christian  setting  includes the alexandrine  floor, Euclidean  geometry, the chapel's  empyrean,   januarial,  Atlas-shouldered,  lyre-chested, adonic  figures, a pantheon  of gods, damonandpythias. These Greek and Roman  references deflate

KLEIN & HISTORY

the Christian  content  as Melech substitutes a secular  aesthetic  which somewhat reduces the religious subject.  In addition to Classicism, Klein employs a linguistic dialectic  of wit to  undercut  Christianity:   adonic-adonaic, adamic-seraphic,  da­ monandpythias-davidandjonathan, Michael  Angelo-Archangel   Michael.  Klein's Classical allusions clash with the Christian; the marginal  notes reveal a  Hebraic­ Hellenic dialectic in which the sons of Jerusalem  are victorious. The method  then shifts from  pre-Christian history to Melech's  personal history or  the suffering  of the Jews during  World War II as his reinterpretation replaces the Christian  inter­  pretation  of the Pentateuch. Seen in this light, The  Second  Scroll is an  apologia which, in its support  of the Old  Testament,  rejects the other Second  Scroll, the New Testament.




bE NARRATOR REFLECTS   THIS   POLEMIC  not  only  in  his debate  with Settano,  but  also in  his understanding in Rome  of "the  miracle  of the transformed  stone." The  final words from Melech's letter of affirmation  ring in his ears as he realizes the historical truth: "The  Arch  of Titus,  from  being a taunt,  then,  had  become an irony, an  irony directed  against  itself;  the  candela­ brum, set against  the new light that  had  been kindled across the Great Sea, had turned  into satire;  the trumpets,  symbolic now of jubilee, really  taunted  Titus!" Through the  narrator's "appreciation" of  the  bas-relief and  through   Melech's analysis of the ceiling, Klein celebrates the victory of Israel over its foes.
"Gloss  Dalid"  also presents an  apologia in  dramatic form  in  a  manner   not unlike the most famous medieval defence of Judaism-Yehuda Ha-Levi's  Kazari. The   narrator  refers  to  Rabbi   Yehuda  Ha-Levi,   and  Klein   wrote  the  poem "Yehuda   HaLevi,  His  Pilgrimage."  Desmond  Pacey suggests that  The   Second Scroll is the fulfillment of Klein's partial failure in this earlier  poem, but the con­ nection  may  be more substantial  than  Pacey's evaluative  statement  implies.7    In The  Kazari HaLevi  depicts a mighty king searching  for the true religion;  repre­ sentatives from Islam, Christianity,  and Judaism  try to persuade him of the truths  of their respective religions, and  in the end the Kazar  is convinced  of the merits of Judaism.  In "Gloss Dalid"  the Cadi replaces the Kazar as three  judicial cases are brought  before him;  by the end of the play the  Jew adapts  the moral  from each  case to argue  for freedom,  understanding,  and  brotherhood. The  Jew  sees himself as the "plaintiff" while Hassan, Marouf,  and Ibn Aziz are "but  proxies." The parable of the lamp manufacturer and the light at the end of the play iterate  the image which Klein uses in "Yehuda  HaLevi":

Did he not also in that wondrous script
Of Al-Kazari chronicle that king,
The heathen begging of the godly-lipped

43

KLEIN & HISTORY


Some wisdom for his pious hearkening, - A candle for the dark, -a signet ring
To make the impress of the soul, -that prince Who covenanted with the mightiest King, Abjured false testaments and alcorans,
Accepting only Torah and its puissance.8

In  another  defence  of Judaism  the nameless journalist, like the  nameless  nar­ rator,  presents another  view of Jewish  history. His theory borrows  the  Hegelian "Judaic Idea" and  the Essence-Existence terminology of Existentialism; in place of the  Christian  Incarnation he substitutes  the  miracle of  "Discarnation." Like Joyce, Klein resorts to medical and  physical metaphors  to examine  spiritual,  his­ torical, and metaphysical  theories. In his analysis of the Sistine ceiling Melech dis­ covers the key word for Michelangelo -The Flesh, and then proceeds to give his own  version  of  the  Discarnation  from  the  concentration   camps:   "the   flesh dwindled,  the  bones  showed."  Linguistically  and  ironically  for  this  poet,  the Word-made-Flesh  is the "four-legged  aleph." The  Diaspora  infection  is reduced to  the  lowest  common  denominator  as  Klein  "overdoes"  the  preparations   for Israel:  "Scarified  . . . against  smallpox,  punctured   against  typhus,  pierced  for tetanus, injected for typhoid, and needled with cholera.... they pointillated  upon my arms their  prescribed  prophylactic prayers." Through Melech's  veins run the plasma  of six million souls, and  he is  "inoculated   against  the  world"  with  the Star  of David.  The  camp-manager at  Bari "used  the  word  Monsignor as if it were an injector." And  when  the  narrator  discovers the "miracle" in  Israel, "It was as if I were spectator  to the  healing of torn  flesh, or  heard  a broken  bone come together, set, and grow again.
"Wonderful is the  engrafting   of skin, but  more  wonderful  the  million  busy
hushed  cells, in secret  planning,  stitching, stretching,  until -the  wound  is  van­ ished, the blood courses normal, the cicatrice falls off." The individual  Jew is part of a body politic that  has survived the vicissitudes and cycles of history, unwilling to accept the Christian  "Davidson."
The  difference  between Judaism  and  Christianity  revolves around  concepts of
the  Messiah,  Incarnation, and  the  Word  made  Flesh;  the  difference  between Islam and  Judaism  is the difference  between magic and miracle.  In  "Leviticus" Klein defends Judaism  against Christianity using the Italian  Renaissance as an aesthetic  and  historical  medium;  in "Numbers" Klein reverts to Dante  and  the Middle Ages to support  Judaism  against Moslem persecution. Just as Melech discovers his own  Jewish  reality  behind  Michelangelo's  art,  so his nephew  per­ ceives the truth  behind  Casablanca's false front.  Casablanca,  "arrayed in  all the colours of Islam,  stands  mirroring  itself in the  mirror  of the  Atlantic.  As  upon some Circean  strand  magical  with voices." In  contrast,  Melech  "naturalized the miracle"  and  "had  become a kind of mirror,  an aspaklaria,  of  the events of our

44

KLEIN & HISTORY

time." The mirror of art and the mirror of history reflect analogous events: Casa­ blanca  mirrors  "false  music"  and  "hollow art"  while Israel  reflects  truth. The oxymorons depict the Arabian  deceptions: "unlucky-lucky  Negro," the "possible­ marvellous,"  and  "old-new  affinities." History  becomes  regressive  in  the  Dan­ tesque descent into the labyrinthine mellah which reveals the reality beneath  the appearance of beauty in the city. The Virgilian guide remarks that space deceives the stomach;  the visitor from the West cannot believe it real. "Some  magician out of the Arabian  Nights, I thought,  had cast upon me a spell and conjured  up with sinister open-sesame this melodramatic illusion. Or perhaps it was a desert mirage that  was playing tricks with my vision. Or I was dreaming." Like the "miracle  of the transformed  stone," the magic in  "Numbers" is transformed  into the miracle in "Deuteronomy."
Similar  to the  photograph of Melech Davidson,  history is a  double  exposure
with the present second scroll superimposed on the original past in a cycle of  recur­ rence. Amalgamating  cyclic and  dialectic theories of history, Klein  offers simul­ taneously an apologia  and a linguistic tour  de  force. Followed by an  ambassador on a transatlantic Jamesian  quest,  the wandering  Jew  passes  through  the  laby­ rinths of the holocaust, the Sistine painting, and the mellah to emerge from space into time's eternal cycle.
This  need for  history  to  be complete -whether  through   the  synthesis  of  a
dialectic, the recurrence  within a cycle, or the result of a transformation -paral­ lels the necessity of completion in Klein's aesthetic theory:  "such  is the nature  of art  that  though  the artist  entertain  fixedly but  one intention  and  one  meaning, that  creation once accomplished  beneath his hand,  now no longer merely his own attribute,  but Inspiration's very substance and entity, proliferates with significances by him not conceived nor imagined." This poetry of process which hands  over to the  reader  the  powers  of  creation  appears  in  the  poetics  of  the  underivative  Tiberias  poet:  "a  poem is not a destination, it is a point of  departure. The  des­ tination is determined  by the reader. The poet's function is but to point direction."  Applied to Klein's style in The Second Scroll, this theory accounts for the synethesis of a multiplicity of literary traditions  reflected in the individual  words, the syntax, and  the overall structure of the  book. The  epigraph from  Areopagitica is thus more complex than  Steinberg  suggests:  Milton, advocating  free speech, criticizes the Talmudists who, ironically, use the license to "re-interpret" the Bible, to com­ plete the original text just as Klein does in his own way molding a new scroll out of a variety of traditions.  History  repeats itself; art  repeats  and  completes  itself through  the myths and  archetypes of  a collective unconscious.







45

KLEIN & HISTORY


NOTES

1 Although Joyce's  influence  on  Klein  is far  more  important, one  notes  the  Miltonic adjective-noun-adjective phrasing in "stony stare Semitic" and  other Baroque convolutions.
2   See M. W. Steinberg, "Introduction" to The  Second  Scroll  (Toronto:  McClelland
& Stewart, 1961)   and  Miriam Waddington, A.M. Klein   (Toronto: Copp Clark,
1970)' pp. 92-108.
3  In  his "Conclusion" to the  Literary History  of Canada, ed. Carl  Klinck   (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1965), p. 829, Frye calls The  Second  Scroll  "one  of the most  passionate and  intense  of all Canadian novels."
4   Waddington, p. 100.
5  See  T. A. Marshall, "Theorems Made  Flesh:  Klein's Poetic  Universe," Canadian Literature, No. 25 (Summer 1965), 46-47;  and  for a larger,  phenomenological con­ sideration of the "circle" Georges  Poulet,  La metamorphose du  cercle  (Paris:  Pion,
1961).
6 Malcolm Ross, Review  in Canadian Forum  (January 1952), p. 234·
7  Desmond Pacey,  Ten Canadian Poets  (Toronto: Ryerson,  1958), p. 286.
8 The Collected   Poems  of A. M. Klein, comp.  and  introd. by Miriam Waddington
(Toronto:  McGraw-Hill Ryerson, 1974), p. 245·



TJIURUS
 


Cyril Dabydeen


The  wild hull's
on his way. I do not give myself  too easily.
The  lasso-man
enters  the scene trying  to grapple with  horns.

My  father hammers at  the  portals
of his mistress's womb; the  bull bellows across the fraudulent road.

My mother spins  her machine like
a solitary  queen. I merely  join
with  the  spinning.

PORTRAIT OF THE POET AS JOYCE SCHOLAR
An Approach to A. M. Klein




Lorraine Weir







Q.APS IT  IS A  NAIVE  QUESTION," Klein wrote in 1946, "but who is our  Edmund  Wilson, who our T. S. Eliot?"  ( C]C, I  March  1946)  1 He was responding  to a questionnaire  from Raymond  Souster  which  asked,  among other things, whether he was satisfied with the "standard of reviewing in Canada." Klein's  exemplars  are  carefully  chosen for,  in  one  respect  at  least,  his literary career  after  1946 is analogous to those of Wilson and  Eliot. At a time  when, as Marshall  McLuhan has written, Joyce was still regarded  by many "not  as an immediate  and  relevant source of artistic nutriment  but  as a monster  exhibit  to awe the dim of brain"  (Renascence, IV:   I, 13), Klein ingested what  he needed of Joyce's  work for his own art  and  recycled his findings in three  critical  studies of Ulysses.
Like  Eliot,  Klein  found  nutriment   in  the  Joycean  and  Symbolist  variations upon the doctrine of the Logos as well as in Joyce's lifelong meditation  upon  the modality  of the  visible. Like  Wilson, Klein  was the  first to  publish  a  detailed analysis of a formidable  Joyce text. Wilson's essay, "The  Dream  of H.  C. Ear­ wicker"  (New Republic, 28 June  and  I2 July 1939), was the first effort  by any­ one outside  the  Joyce  circle in  Paris  to elucidate  the  basic outline  of  plot  and structure  in Finnegans  Wake; Klein's on "The  Oxen of the Sun"  (Here and  Now, I: 3, 1949, 28-48)  remains the only full textual analysis of that chapter of Ulysses. Both essays form  part  of the critical  tradition  with which  any serious  reader  of Joyce's works inevitably contends. In the late forties when Klein  began  his work on Ulysses, only Hugh  Kenner's  early essays approached  Joyce in a similarly ana­ lytical spirit,  and  textual  criticism of Joyce's last work did  not  begin  to  appear until David  Hayman  published  his "From  Finnegans  Wake:  A Sentence  in Pro­ gress" in  I958  (PMLA, LXXIII, I36-54). It  is only in  the  last  decade  that Joyce studies have begun to catch  up with Klein's scrupulous  methodology.

47

KLEIN & JOYCE

More  than  any  other  chapter  of Ulysses, the "Oxen  of the Sun"  provides an opportunity for the  exercise upon  difficult ground  of the skill at  disputation, at pilpul, which Klein had cultivated  as lawyer and as editor of the Canadian jewish Chronicle. Beginning  his essay with  the challenge  he will take  up,  Klein  quotes from  the  previously unpublished  letter to Frank  Budgen  in which Joyce set out the basic structure  of the chapter  (now in Joyce's  Letters, 1:  138). Noting first that  the existing commentaries   (those of Stuart  Gilbert,  Harry  Levin, and  Bud­ gen)  are of little help in determining  the detailed structure  of the whole chapter, Klein  proceeds to construct  a  catalogue  raisonne  of all  the  complexities  which Joyce did not advertise to Budgen and  Gilbert, and  performed  what  can now be labelled the first Structuralist analysis of any Joyce text. Embryology  manual  in hand,  Klein followed Joyce's instructions and ferreted out all the stages of human embryonic  growth  as they  are  encoded  in  the  chapter.  In  the  process, he dis­ covered independently that  the nine sections into which the chapter  divides itself correspond  to the nine  preceding  chapters of the book, and  that  the seventh sec­ tion of the "Oxen of the  Sun"  itself consists of mirror  images of the six stages which  precede  it.  Finally,  Klein  demonstrated  the  correspondence  between  the nine sections of the chapter  and  the principal  phases of Darwinian  evolution - again,  an  independent discovery. The  grand  finale is an  elaborate  chart  of the whole "labyrinth."
In  all this there  are some errors, several the result either of a faulty  transcript of Joyce's letter  (provided  by Ellsworth Mason)  or a misreading  of it by Klein, and several the result of Klein's difficulties with recognition of the various authors Joyce  parodies  in  the  chapter   (according  to  the  scheme  which  Joyce  gave  to Stuart  Gilbert). But  Klein  was certainly  not  unique  in  the  latter  difficulty and only now, as a result of a study published by J. S. Atherton  in 1974, is it possible to account  for a  number  of details  which Joyce  derived  not  from  the  originals but from Peacock's anthology  of English  Prose: Mandeville to Ruskin. As Ather­ ton hiinself notes,2   Klein's study was published long before most of the basic tools of contemporary  Joyce scholarship  (including  Ellman's  biography, Joyce's letters, and Phillip Herring's edition of joyce's <Ulysses' Notesheets in the British Museum
-which would greatly have helped Klein)  were available. Nevertheless, the essay remains the locus classicus for any student of the chapter  as well as of Joyce's methodology in general.
And it is equally important for an understanding of Klein's own artistic evolu­ tion. For, as McLuhan's comment  on the state of Joyce criticism at  mid-century indicates, Klein's willingness to take Joyce and  his work seriously, particularly  in a section of Ulysses which has caused as much critical and  popular consternation as Finnegans  Wake itself, was at least unusual  if not  revolutionary.  And  it was precisely the revolutionary  nature  of the  material  itself, Joyce's first experiment in "Putting Allspace in a Notshall"  (FW  455.29), which attracted Klein.  "The

KLEIN & JOYCE

proper  study  of mankind is Man  -not  paysage," Klein  wrote  three  years  before he published this study  (C]C, 22 February 1946); so in Ulysses Joyce  uses every aspect  of Dublin, June 16,  1904  in order  to transcend it,3   and  in  the  "Oxen of the  Sun" every  phase  of the  English  language from  Anglo-Saxon to  192o's  Irish and  American slang  in order  to express not  just the  birth  of Theodore Purefoy's latest  child  but  also the  birth  of language itself. Charting Joyce's  labyrinth, Klein not only demonstrated for subsequent readers  the order  inherent in the  "Oxen of the Sun" chapter but  also traced  for himself the evolution of Joyce's  aesthetic from the Portrait  to Finnegans  Wake.
The  first published evidence  of this study is a brief sketch  entitled  "Towards an Aesthetic," part  of the  "Marginalia" column  of the  Canadian  jewish  Chronicle for  June 1 1, 1 948.  Klein  begins  with  the  first chapter of  Genesis,  "the original blueprint," and  proceeds  to fuse Joyce  with the Pentateuch as he was to do again in The Second  Scroll:

First described is the condition  before Creation: Now the earth  was without  form and  void, and  darkness  was upon  the face of the deep.
Whence  it is to be deduced  that  there  are  three  requisites  to an  artifact:  (a)
form,  (b)   content,   (c)   light.  By the  last one  must  understand internal  light­
radiance; external  light is already assumed in the concept  of form.
It  was from  his God,  therefore,  that  the Angelic Doctor  learned  that  Ad  pul­
chritudinem tria requiruntur: integritas, consonantia, claritas.

From  this Thomist statement Stephen Dedalus  constructs his aesthetic in the  fifth chapter of  the  Portrait, amplifying it  into  what   he  had   called  the  concept of "epiphany" in Stephen Hero. To  perceive an object  in its wholeness, harmony and radiance, to  focus  upon  it  until  finally  the  object  reveals  itself  to  the  "spiritual eye" of the perceiver, is to experience the moment  of epiphany. From  this proceeds Stephen's doctrine of art  as stasis and  the artist  "like the God of creation" remain­ ing "within or behind  or beyond  or above his handiwork, invisible, refined  out  of existence, indifferent, paring his fingernails" (P 2 1g) .
Looking  ahead  to  the  "Proteus" chapter  of Ulysses,  however,  Klein  preserves
what  Joyce  was to retain  for Stephen and  to some extent  for  himself  in  the  later works,  and  discards  stasis  immediately: "Art  dynamic, not  static;  protean,  not uniform; self-multiplying, not  sterile."  At  the  beginning of  "Proteus," epiphany is transformed into: "Ineluctable modality  of the visible:  at least that  if no more, thought through my  eyes. Signatures of all things  I am  here  to  read,  seaspawn and  seawrack, the  nearing tide,  that  rusty  boot"   ( U  45). Klein   writes:    "The making  of man  in God's  image: This  is the  poet's signature. In  his creation, it is He  who must  be seen. The  artist  is a creator  completely  surrounded by mirrors." The  artist's function, then,  is to learn  the  divine  mirror language so that  he may render the world visible, and  thus  create it, for its inhabitants. Walking along Sandymount Strand, Stephen endeavours to read  his world,  first  with  eyes open

49

KLEIN &  JOYCE

and  then  closed. Chased  by the dog-God  (whom  Eliot borrows  in "The Burial of the Dead"), Stephen  attempts  to write a  poem but  tosses away  the scrap  of paper  in  dejection.  He  must  begin  to learn  "Divine  grammar   and  syntax,"  as Klein labels the  division of the waters in Genesis. And before there  can  be any possibility of Stephen's  writing,  he must acquire  "The  world's  vocabulary  which does not live unless it come alive, unless it reproduces itself, unless it connotes." Bloom is the agent of this transformation. In Circe, Stephen  begs the apparition of his mother  to "Tell  me the word, mother, if you know now. The  word known to all men"  ( U  682 ) . But there  is no answer until  Bloom and  Stephen,  gazing together into a mirror, see the face of Shakespeare, father and son at/oned, gazing back. The word and the world at last briefly united, the communion  ceremony featuring   "Epps's  mass-product,  the  creature  cocoa"  ( U  791)   is celebrated  in the "Ithaca" chapter.



LIKE JOYCE,  KLEIN usuALLY   PROVIDES  CLUES   where  the source of an  allusion is significant.  In  this case he adopts  the  mask of Leopold Bloom. Writing  about a line from a poem by Rilke describing leaves falling, Klein
comments "32  ft. per sec. per sec., not more, not less" ( U 87). Immediately the whole motif of Bloom's pseudo-scientific speculations on gravity, parallax,  and so on, is present. Before he encountered  this philosophy of language  in Joyce, Klein had likely been sensitized to it through  his knowledge of Hassidic lore on the same theme. But Joyce was the focus, the hinge between aesthetic and  technique.  And once again Klein's criticism is the arena  where he can be observed acquiring  and moulding  data  for his own artistic  use. "The Black Panther   (A Study  in  Tech­ nique)" exemplifies this even in its title. Published a year after "The Oxen of the Sun,"  this essay has been absorbed  since then  into so many  commentaries  upon Ulysses that  one comes upon  the original almost with shock. In  it Klein  under­ takes to prove that  the "Telemachus" chapter  is structurally an Imitatio Dei with Stephen  as  Christ,  Mulligan   as  John  the  Baptist,  and  Haines  as  Satan.  The mysterious black  panther   associated  with  Stephen  is  shown  to  be  a  symbol  of Christ and the chapter  a Black Mass parodied by Mulligan. Devoting the greater part of his study to a tabulation of correspondences between the parts of the Mass and sections of "Telemachus," Klein provides his readers with ample evidence of his own  knowledge  of Roman  Catholic  ritual  and  dogma.  It  is significant  also that Klein's perspective on Joyce in both "The  Oxen of the Sun" and "The Black Panther" is shaped  by his knowledge of Catholic  theology, or perhaps  his knowl­ edge  of theology  was  initiated   by  Joyce. The  relationship  between  Joyce  and Catholicism is, at any rate, apparently  a symbiotic one for Klein.4

KLEIN  & JOYCE

As early as 1932 in an article  entitled  "If ... ?" ( C]C, 14 October 1932), Klein can  be observed  preparing himself  for subsequent, more  extensive  use of  Joyce. Perhaps attractive initially  because  of its Talmudic overtones,  the  catechetical technique which  Joyce used in the "Ithaca" chapter of Ulysses was the first which Klein  was to practice. A much  more  polished example  of the same  technique was to be found  in the first instalment of the "Notebook of a Journey," and  another in The  Second Scroll. Using  such  headings  as Reportorial, Rhetorical, Sentimental, Ironic, and  so on down  to "The plain  unvarnished fact," Klein  involves  himself in  a series of Joycean stylistic  exercises in order  to convey  the  excitement of  his own  departure for  Israel.  A sample will best convey  the  Joycean flavour:

Reportorial.  On the 31st day of July, 1949, at 7 p.m., subject prepared  to board at La Guardia  Airfield a TWA  plane, destination,  Lydda,  Israel.  He  had  with  him not more than sixty-six pounds avoirdupois of baggage, a coat flung over his arm, and  upon  his person various documents  of importance....
Rhetorical.  Who  can  describe,  what  master  of  language  can  communicate the emotions which most thrill  the heart of a Jew, scion of sixty generations  of exiles, when at last, after two millenia of tribal banishment, he turns again his face in expectation  of a return,  albeit temporary,  to the ancestral soil? ...
Biblic. And it came to pass that  the word was spoken unto  Abraham, saying, Get thee out of thy country, and  from thy kindred, and from thy father's  house, which is in Tur  Malca, that is to say, Montreal.

In  The  Second Scroll, outgrowth of the  "Notebook of a Journey," Klein  fuses his borrowings from  Joycean technique as well as aesthetic  in  one  of the  major turning-points in the  quest  and  in the moment  when  the  object  is attained. Here again, as in "Towards an Aesthetic," he carefully  labels his borrowing. The cate­ chetical  technique is used as the narrator and  his guide are said to "slide" into  the mellah  in  Casablanca "literally:  for  the  narrow laneway  which  gaped  through the  gateway  at  the  clean  world  was  thick  with  offal ... ;  metaphorically:  for  in a  moment we knew  that  the  twentieth century  ... had  forsaken   us ... " (TSS
62). The abrupt disjunction of  worlds  and  the  moment   of  awakening soon  to
follow echo the experience of Stephen Dedalus  in the  Portrait. Just  before  his last conversation with  Cranly  and  his renunciation of religion  and  country, Stephen surveys  from  the  Library steps  the  scene  he  will attempt to  transform into  art. But  at this point  he can  transform in memory  only Nashe's  line,  "Brightness falls from  the  air," as he catches  a louse crawling  over the  nape  of his neck  (P  238). In  the  mellah,  Klein's  narrator  encounters for  the  first  time  conditions akin  to those which  Stephen knows  well. Looking  at  the  garments of the  people  around him,  he comments: "Brightness, however,  fell only from  rags;  if a garment  was whole, it was black,  the sombre  ghetto  gaberdine" (TSS 62).
Like Stephen in Ulysses, Klein's  narrator seeks a surrogate father, an Ahasuerus
whom  he  will  meet  without knowing  it,  whose  invisibility  itself  will  shape   the

KLEIN & JOYCE

quest and finally provoke its unwitting fulfillment. In the absence of a photograph of his uncle, he constructs his own and "as the years went by and I myself changed from year to year, the image of Uncle Melech that  I illegally carried  in my mind also suffered its transformations" (TSS  20).  As Stephen  does in "Proteus" and "Scylla and Charybdis," Klein's narrator  constructs a mirror image of himself and pursues it in vain until,  just before he enters the mellah, he is given a photograph of his Uncle. But Melech  has  just departed  for Israel and  the  photograph  is "a double,  a  multiple  exposure"   (TSS 61). Before Melech's  nephew  can  get  his uncle's image into focus, he must learn to see and  understand  the suffering of the mellah.  Passing  this test, he  must  lose himself again  before  he  can  achieve  his goal. So when  the  narrator arrives  at  last in  Israel,  Bloom's fabled  "Agendath Netaim,"  he gives up hope  of finding Melech and  devotes himself to the search for a "completely  underivative   poet"  (TSS 82). Again like Stephen,  he fancies that  he will finally be liberated  by the written word and  its producers,  the signa­ tures of all things  finally unravelling  themselves before the  intent  perceiver. But Stephen  must  transcend   the  wordy  introspection  of  "Proteus"  until -having missed Bloom through  his own verbosity in "Scylla and  Charybdis" -he at last meets him in silence at the end of the "Circe"  chapter. Approaching that  meet­ ing Stephen,  drunk  and  confused,  murmurs  the  words  which  encode  the lesson of his day:  "In  the beginning  was the word, in the end  the world without  end"
( u 626).
Melech's  nephew  achieves the same epiphany  at  the end of his search  for an
"original" poet. In Tiberias  he discovers a neo-Imagist versifier who combines the formulas of Ezra  Pound  with  the composition of one-liners. But although  this is clearly the last straw,  the  narrator has still not learned  his lesson thoroughly:

And then-it  was after  I  had  returned from Tiberias to Tel  Aviv to attend  a literary soiree-then the creative activity, archetypical, all-embracing, that hither­ to I had sought in vain, at last manifested itself. Not at the soiree. In  the streets, in the shops, everywhere about  me. I  had looked, but had  not seen.  It was all there  all  the  time -the  fashioning folk, anonymous and  unobserved,  creating word by word, phrase by phrase, the total work that when completed would stand as epic revealed!    (TSS 84)

This,  not  Melech's  death,  is the  centre of Klein's  cyclic epic, the  record  of the birth  in a new generation  of the ability to transcend  solipsism and  recognize the world. In  the  "Oxen  of the Sun"  Stephen  calls it the "postcreation" ( U  5 I 1 ) , the mystery of the Logos eternally  recycled. Descending from high-flown specula­ tion, Stephen  summarizes  the  epiphany  shared  by Klein's  narrator:  "Dublin. I have much, much  to learn" ( U  I83).
In their respective epics Melech and Bloom both function  as Messianic figures,
and  Melech's  nephew  and  Stephen  both  strive  to  achieve  what  Joyce  labels
"parallax" with  these  father   figures.  Just  as  Stephen   encounters   Bloom  un-

52

KLEIN & JOYCE

wittingly in Hamlet  and in theological obscurities, so Melech's nephew encounters his uncle first through  his letters and the literary essay published during  Melech's Comrade  Krule  phase. And  just as the quest reverses itself and quester  in pursuit of Ahasuerus  discovers his goal all around  him, so both Ulysses and  The  Second Scroll  refer  the  reader  in search  of denouement   back  to  the  web  of language itself. In  "Ithaca" and  in  "Penelope," Joyce  provides alternate   endings  for  I6
June  I904;  in the five books of his second scroll and in the five glosses attending them,  Klein  does the same thing,  providing endings derived  from  two  different traditions-oral and  print,  Targum and  Torah. Joyce borrows  from  the  same system in Finnegans Wake.5   In  each of these works  (as well as in Ulysses from the "Oxen  of the Sun" on), the reader's  addiction  to character  development  and plot resolution  is deliberately  thwarted,  and  each  attempts  to engage  us actively in a mime of its message as we go about  the task of synthesizing. In  terms of the Mass, this process is transubstantiation.
Near the end of "The Black Panther," Klein writes that "Ulysses was in a sense
intended  ... as the body of Christ,  rendered  literature," and -borrowing from Eugene Jolas-he stresses the significance of Joyce's "jocoserious"  fiftieth birth­ day gesture. Looking at his birthday  cake, a replica of the first edition  of Ulysses, Joyce intoned  the words of the consecration of the bread in the Mass:  "Hoc est enim  corpus meum."  Book and  cake are  both  Word  made  flesh;  both  must  be ingested in literary  communion; both manifest the Logos. Thinking of the same words of consecration  as he looks at  his "limp  father  of thousands" in  the  bath
( U I 07), Bloom attains  the status  of  HCE,  Humphrey   Chimpden   Earwicker, hero  of Finnegans  Wake, whose initials  also encode  this  formula.  And  in  the "Night  Lessons" chapter  of the Wake, as patient Dolph gives confused Kev a tour of the earth  mother's  genitalia, it becomes clear that  the topography  of Dublin  is simply an  extension  of human  physiology, the  Word  in  the  world  once  again. Thus all knowledge sacred and  profane, all languages public and  private,  and  all scraps of tribal lore from advertisements to popular songs must be recycled in this memory book of our  culture.  Parallel  in many  ways to the "Oxen  of the  Sun," the  "Night   Lessons" chapter  extends  itself in  stylistic virtuosity  into  marginal glosses, footnotes and diagrams in order to reveal the mystery quite literally at the centre of the book. Here Klein found a model for the format  and  theme,  though certainly not the style,6  of Gloss Gimel.
It  is not surprising,  then,  that  Klein should  have fused the logos with  topog­
raphy in his great poem, "Portrait of the Poet as Landscape." Just  as the word in all senses is made  flesh in  the "Oxen  of the Sun,"  so Klein's  poet  traverses  the body of language  (which  is HCE  interred  in  the landscape  of the Wake)  and discovers "the  torso verb,  the beautiful  face of the  noun, j and  all those shaped and  warm  auxiliaries!" ( CP 332)  Praising the world  part  by part,  Klein's  poet creates  it just  as  ShemjDolph  creates  the  "geomater" for  ShaunjKev.  And

53

KLEIN & JOYCE

finally  the  artist's "cruel-fiction" ( FW  192.  9)   redounds upon  both  of  them  as the flesh which  is word  is consumed. Shem,  the "first  till last alshemist  wrote  over every square inch  of the only foolscap available, his own  body, till by its corrosive sublimation one  continuous present  tense integument slowly  unfolded  all  marry­ voising  moodmoulded  cyclewheeling history  ... " ( FW I 85.35).  Imparting his own life to the  world  he creates, Shem  is consumed  by it as Klein's poet, "the nth Adam," maps  "not the  world's, but  his own  body's  chart" and  meets  the  fate  of Icarus. But  Icarus at  least  found   death. Klein's  poet,  transfixed  in  a  perpetual state  of drowning, is bound  to his redemptive mission.  Like Shem  "self  exiled  in upon  his own  ego"  ( FW I 84.6), the  poet  has  himself  become  one  of the signa­  tures of the world  he sought  to mirror  and  create.
But  the  poet is also a reflection  of the  worst aspects  of that  world,  as Shem  is. Remembering his youthful passion  for language, he rehearses  the  roles of a  cul­ ture  which   respected  performance,  and   wakens  to  find  his  art  outmoded,  his youth   vanished. Instead  the   conjurers,  of  the  sort   Melech's  nephew   met   in Tiberias, have  assumed  control and  set  aside  the  bard's long  memory, the  epic unrolling around them. In  the same  way, although Shem  is "hardset to mumorise more  than  a word  a week"  (FW  180.29), he is still the  penman who  sets down earthmother Anna Livia's  letter,  eventually the  Wake  itself. Accused  of madness  and  mysticism,  sexual  perversion   and  egotism,  Klein's  poet  and  Shem  triumph over "the ape  mimesis"  and  rise out of "stark infelicity" to sing their  song as best they can. And  both  Klein  and  Joyce sing ironic visions of how their  works in turn  will be received  and  not  read.
Asked  by Raymond Souster  in  1946  whether he had  been  influenced by  Eng­ lish or American writers,  and  which  of the  two  was the  "healthiest  influence  for Canadians," Klein  replied :

There  are  no influences  characterized   by place  of  origin  which  can  be deemed either  healthy  or unhealthy.  In  the final analysis, a writer gets influenced  by those things  which  do  best  harmonize  with  his  own  temperament. For  Milton  even Hebrew  influence was healthy.     (CJC, 22  February  1946)

And  for Klein,  even Joyce.



NOTES

1 Abbreviations   used:   CJC   The  Canadian Jewish   Chronicle;  CP  The  Collected
Poems  of A. M. Klein, ed. Miriam  Waddington   (Toronto:  McGraw-Hill Ryerson,
1974); FW  James  Joyce, Finnegans  Wake (N.Y.:  Viking, 1959); Letters   of James Joyce,  vol. I, ed. Stuart  Gilbert  (London: Faber, 1957); P James Joyce, A Portrait of  the   Artist   as  A   Young Man, ed.  Chester  G.  Anderson  and  Richard   Ellman (London: Jonathan  Cape,  1968); TSS  A.  M.  Klein,  The  Second   Scroll,   New Canadian Library  edition  (Toronto: McClelland  & Stewart, 1969); U James Joyce Ulysses  (London: The  Bodley Head, 1960).

54

KLEIN &  JOYCE


2   J. S. Atherton, "The Oxen  of the Sun," in James Joyce's 'Ulysses'-Critical Essays, ed. Clive Hart and  David  Hayman (Berkeley:  University  of California Press, I974), p. 320.
8 As Klein  indicated: "Note how  Joyce  has  made  a  secular  pattern out  of a  single day, a spatial  universe  out  of the  environs  of Dublin ... " ( CJC,  I March  I946). In  the same  place,  Klein  called  Ulysses "the  masterpiece of our  century"  (Klein's italics).
4   Klein's third  critical study,  "A  Shout  in  the  Street-An  Analysis  of  the  Second Chapter of Joyce's  Ulysses"  (New  Directions, I3  [I95I], 327-45)  should   also  be noted  here.  In  it  Klein  attempts to demonstrate a  number of correspondences  be­ tween  Vico's  New Science  and  the  "Nestor" chapter. While  Joyce's  use of  Vico  in FW is well known, similarly  extensive  usage in U is still to be demonstrated. So while Klein  is meticulous as ever in this study, his case often  seems over  subtle.  It  remains to  be seen  why  the  "Nestor" chapter should  have  been  the  occasion  for  Vico  to enter  U, and  whether his  influence  is equally  apparent throughout the  book.  At­ tempts  by other  critics  to  demonstrate this  have  been  sporadic and  the  hypothesis  has yet to find general  favour.
5   On  Joyce's  knowledge of Targum and  Torah, see my article  "The Choreography of Gesture:  Marcel  Jousse   and   Finnegans   Wake,"   James  Joyce  Quarterly,   XIV (Spring I977),  3I3-25.  Targums were  ritual  oral  responses  in  Aramaic to  the  set text  of  the  Hebrew Torah. Klein's interest  in  oral  culture of  all  kinds  is  demon­ strated frequently throughout his works from  his early  recycling  of  Hassidic  tales to his celebration of the  Montreal badchan Shloime  Schmulevitz  (CJC, I5 May  I942,
p. 4)  and  his article, "Riddle Me This  Riddle" ( C J C, 28 October I 932)  on the evo­
lution  of the  riddle.  The parallel of the  Irish  with  Jewry  was also a favourite with
Klein  in  other contexts. During a  stopover  at  Shannon on  his  return from  Israel,
Klein  wrote: "Irish very much  like Jews. Some day someone  should  write  a volume
of parallels,  not only  the  parallels of psychology, but  also those  of national struggle
... "(CJC, 23 December I949). In  an article  on Bialik, Klein  noted  that  "between
the Hebrew  Renascence and  the Celtic Revival  there  are  many  parallels ... " ( CJC,
IO July  I942).
6  Readers dedicated  to  the  traditional belief  in  Joyce's  destructive influence   upon Klein  might  consult  Anthony Burgess, Joysprick: An Introduction to the  Language of James Joyce (London: Andre  Deutsch, I973)  for a different approach to Joyce.



















55

DAPHNE MARLATT'S POETRY






Robert Lecker









IT rs DIFFICULT ro  READ   Daphne Marlatt's poetry' without seeing the  river. Behind  each  of the  books she has published  to date,  there  is a current  which flows toward  a heightened  perception of an immanent  world. The current   joins each  of her  works, swelling into  the  torrent  of impressions, sensa­ tions, and  images which characterize  Steveston. Linked to this inherent  proclivity for movement is a need for poetic progress: each book can be seen as representing some form of search  for an appropriate language  of relation,  for a  form  of dis­ course which will find a centre and  render in clarity the instantaneous apprehen­ sion of things and thoughts  caught  in flux:

shapes flutter
glide into each other
but the hand wanting to know picks a thing
out from the center

Marlatt  is involved in a quest for words which will give access to the truth  of sight, reflecting not only the moment,  but also the dynamic  nature  of experience and  cognition. She arrives at  a torrent,  but  not overnight.  In  fact,  much  of the power  (and  sometimes  the  weakness)  of  her  earliest  work  lies in  the  tension between a tentative,  frightened  spontaneity,  and an ambitious, robust control. So that  in  her  first book, Frames, we find  her  hesitant  about  the  plunge  into  this river of experience, content  at first to watch  this m5>vement called  Life from the sidelines, as if it were a show:  "I'm j on the sidewalk viewing the procession."
Gradually,  she compromises, slowly immersing herself in the flow, thereby allowing  Frames to become more than  simply a poeticized version of Andersen's "The Snow Queen." Marlatt reinterprets  a number of the tale's motifs, and  uses

MARLATT

these to define and  call into question  her own situation  as a  poet. The  result is an allegorical  prose-poem dealing  with a search for a form  of aesthetic  freedom in the face of limitations imposed by style and personal experience. The  first lines acquaint us with the themes of imprisonment, escape, and search,  while the book at large elaborates upon these themes by examining them in the context of  restric­ tive private  and aesthetic frames.
The  protagonists are  Kay and  Gerda,  two next-door  playmates  living in attic rooms. Through the frames of windows decorated  with boxes of roses they watch each other watch each other. Sometimes Gerda visits Kay, and listens to his grand­ mother's  stories. Clearly,  Kay  and  Gerda  lead  a  life dominated   by  images  of enclosure which limit and structure their experience of the world. Grandmother's stories constitute  the most potent  image of confinement,  for her  words belong to a paralyzed, strictly ordered  past divorced from process and liberty:  "She  hypno­ tizes me with the past fulfilled,/ always filled, as if that should be enough." Until Kay and Gerda and Marlatt herself are "lockt / in the grandmother's stopt voice," and  left with  no alternative  but  to survive through  fleeing into  a story of flow which  endeavours  to obliterate  the  incarcerating  influence  of  dead  words  and frozen time:

(at your grandmother's
time is a glacier, bodies of ancestors keep turning up in
the shadows of afternoon ... But here, if anywhere, is
a way out there

Marlatt has every right  to  join Kay and  Gerda  in flight, for  their  predicament, and  the  development  of their  story, serves as a  metaphor  for  the  problems  of growth encountered  by a poet struggling to break away from the frames imposed by established word patterns  and the falsities implied by a worldview which cate­ gorizes experience, storytelling it in standardized  form, as if the motion  of  living was always the same, always sane. Marlatt  is not opposed to absolutes, but to the belief that  absolutes can exist in isolation. Throughout her works, she insists that experience is a matter  of relation. Hence stasis is validated  by movement,  stability assumes meaning  in the  midst  of chaos, the individual  realizes himself through  others.
Frames  represents Marlatt's initial attempt  to formulate  a poetry which would establish  a  correlation  between  perception  and  articulation. The   task  she  im­ mediately sets for herself is that  of seeing herself seeing the world. She expresses a desire to unite the arts of seeing and telling in a bond so intimate  that  the eye will be interchangeable with the mouth: "as far as the eye can tell.... " Or, she sees herself  as  a  digester  of  word-phrases-as-food,  reorganizing,   assimilating,   and occasionally regurgitating the words, purging herself through the creation  of new pictures which originate in the depths of her system :

57

MARLATT

thrown up
on each other in a
room word pictures be come cru
/shall ...

But she recognizes the difficulty of satisfying her own objectives, and  in Frames we witness the struggle  involved  in achieving  a balance  between  language  and the reality it tries to describe. Because that  balance  never quite  materializes here, language  still manages  to subdue  the expression of reality, resulting in a strange mixture  of fantasy, dream,  and fact.
Significantly, both children are driven and controlled by the implications of language,  and  Kay is immediately  presented as the victim of words which affect him  in the same way as the fragments  from the demon's  distorted  mirror  do in the Andersen tale:
from this we know
two mirror chips divide
love


eyes
 his vision of love

his heart

Kay  suffers from  the  effects  of  a  selective VISion  which  ignores  and  destroys totality. Consequently, he cannot  realize the complete poetic vision which, Marlatt implies, is composed  of  a  blending  of sight  and  emotion,  heart  and  eye. The phrases which  Grandmother casts upon  Kay  hypnotize  him  into  believing that reality is the story itself, and  so he is blinded to process and  the world, stripped of his emotions, becoming  a slave to the "Snow  Queen" heroine  whose tale has overcome him.
Marlatt sympathizes with Kay's plight, for it signifies many of the constrictions that  she herself is trying  to avoid.  More important  is the fact  that  she identifies with Gerda, whose activities assume the form of an aesthetic quest for experience inspired by a thirst for discovery. In the process of her quest for Kay, Gerda reads and interprets  a phenomenological  universe of signs which direct her towards the object of her search. Marlatt seems to admire  Gerda's  ability  to leap into a flow of experience,  and  she emphasizes  the  power of the  child's eyes, which  are like nets capturing the multitude of images which constitute experience:

Can she see her seeing net

sight, light
start out of her eye!

There  is an  obvious envy of Gerda's  camera-like eye, photographic in its ability to objectively capture  the  progression of moments constituting  her search:

MARLATT

tells her tale caught
in camera obscura of her history, an image
of the search

Clearly, one of the  problems in Frames  centres on Marlatt's dependence  upon  a character  called  Gerda: "Gerda, you'd  better  believe it!  I'm  clinging  to  you." Marlatt's reliance upon Gerda signifies a reluctance to assume her own voice, and a fear at the thought  of challenging  the river alone. At the same time, she wants desperately  to discover the child's sense of wonder  and  immediacy,  to move into Gerda's  world of relentless and  varied experience. So like a child she cries:  "Let me  come  too!"  And  she  does go,  but  their  voyage ends  in  failure.  Although Gerda  manages to locate Kay, the poetic release ostensibly to be derived from the movement  towards cognition never materializes. The story ends much as it began, with  Kay  and  Gerda  once  again  depicted  as  prisoners:   "Back  to  back  to  the room. Where/ windowboxes with  roses border  their  image  of the  world."  Any suggestion  of the fairy  tale  is destroyed, and  reality  returns  more  heavily  than ever, accompanied by a sense of defeat. On  one level, the defeat  is an  aesthetic one, engendered  by Marlatt's knowledge of the fact that she has relied upon  the medium  of Kay  and  Gerda  to transmit  her own experience  of the  world.  Like them,  she  has  tried  to  escape  a  frame  imposed  by words,  but  ultimately  she admits  the  impotence  of  her  own  attempt.  This  aspect  of  the  poetry  is  best revealed  through  an  examination  of the  titles describing the seven sections into which  Frames  is divided.  She  is found,  static,  in  (I)    "white  as  of  the  white room,"  moving  cautiously  through   (II)  "shadows  doors  are"  into  colour  and sunlight,  where  she  experiments  with  poetry  as  painting  in   (III)   "primarily colours,"  gradually  employing  (IV)   "light  affects,"  and  realizing  (V)   "visual purple." In  (VI)   "eye  lights,"  the eye is defined  in  a  play  upon  the  painter's word "highlight." But in the last section, "Out  a rose window,"  Marlatt  renun­ ciates all claims to what she herself saw as progress, admitting  that  her art, which depended  largely  upon  a  voice at  second  remove,  never  managed  to  progress beyond a semi-real word encounter  with experience. So the image of  the window and  "containment  (not  content - ) " is  reinstated  as  Marlatt  confesses to  a lingering predilection  for rose-coloured vision.
The story of Kay and  Gerda serves as more than  a metaphor  for an  aesthetic impasse.  It  also describes  the  very  real  personal  crisis of  a  woman   who  has recently abandoned a difficult relationship  which  threatened  to enclose her.  In this sense the children  can  be seen as representing  two lovers who  have  parted. While Kay demonstrated  the cruelty of a man  whose heart  has turned  to stone, Gerda  is the epitome of a woman enslaved to the memory of a man whose visage continues  to haunt  her. The  distinct  note of pain  involved in  the  thought  of a

59

MARLATT

snapshot-captured past is relieved only by the glimpses of freedom and weightless­
ness which are features  of a developing individuality:

But the whole weight of me shifted, changed value in fact. Without  gravity I was absent too. Blown anywhere, clung to any personplace (for  reprieval),  had to begin to be a . . . will

It is this weight of the past which makes the act of seeing in the present so difficult to  realize:  "knotted in  remembrance,  not  ... I seeing." The  poetry  of  Frames may have frustrated its creator  in her search for words and  a style which would accurately reflect the sensation of being a consciousness in the world. But this does not  detract  from  the  fact  that  even in  her  first volume,  Marlatt   provides  the reader with an example of creative brilliance and stylistic innovation.




ONE YEAR    LATER, IN    rg6g,  SHE  RETURNED to  the  public with  Leaf leaf Is, determined  to purify both language  and  image, and  to resolve any discord between perception, voice, and experience. In her second book, Marlatt dispenses with any reliance upon fantasy or assumed voice, and somewhat  resolves the conflict between  stasis and  fluidity  by depicting  consciousness as a series of instants comprising a flow, rather  than as fragments and fluid which cannot  mix. Here, Marlatt  speaks in images as sharp and precise as photographs. Language  no longer  reflects upon  experience,  but is experience-the work is concise, imme­ diate, distilled, demonstrating a variety of instantaneous  responses to surrounding phenomena:

that the
summit of mountains
should be

hot at that  much closer to

ah clouds the sun

Each  poem in the collection can  be seen as an image which expresses an  abrupt combination   of  the  thing  perceived  and  its  effect  upon  the  perceiver.  These imagistic  poems exist as entities, but they act as a leaf amongst  leaves  (leafsIs), or as part  of a larger  totality  (tree  of life?).  The  result is a set of  perceptions which mirror a portion of Marlatt's awareness.
Leaf leaf Is appears almost  as an  exercise originating  in  reaction  to  Frames, and  certainly, the reaction  is complete. Whereas in Frames the syntax was often extended  and  complex,  Leaf leaf Is  presents a streamlined  and  extremely  pure

6o

MARLATT

arrangement  of language.  Frequently,  words stand  alone as poems within  poems, or as precious moments  related  to the  whole through  imagistic  suggestion. The poem bearing the significant  title "Photograph" is a good example:

you sd a stalk I look
like a weed wind blows
thru

singly smokes & fumes
green's
unripe a colour but
elemental, grass
easily hugs ground, that's you

Although Marlatt's second book resolves many of the difficulties connected  with Frames, the feeling remains  that  there is an overreaction  here, that  by immersing herself so completely in the experience of a phenomenological universe she ignores several of the questions of relation  that remained  unanswered  in Frames.  Marlatt is at  her best when she qualifies an experience of the moment  by relating  it to time. A reading of Rings  ( I gI 7)  and Steveston  demonstrates  the intensity she can achieve  by  utilizing  public  and  private  history.  Both  of  these  later  books  are strengthened  by their depiction of a poetic encounter with diverse forms of  process and instantaneity. In comparison,  Leaf leaf/ s suffers, for it is solely concerned with a singular  experience of the moment  abstracted  from  duration.  Nevertheless, its strong images form  a powerful  part of the foundation  upon  which  Marlatt con­ structs the success of her later works.
Rings  immediately  recalls Frames  through  its introductory   metaphors  of  en­ slavement, but here, the  notion  of restraint  is highlighted  by contrasting  images of hope, release, and  birth. In one respect, the birth of her child  reintroduces  the heroine to a whole range  of apprehensions  which had  been  stifled in the silence of a difficult marriage.  The  re-entry of perception  is  accompanied by a shift in language  that  becomes more dynamic as the newborn  child grows. Although  the problems of wedlock are never resolved, there is a  progressive emphasis on move­ ment  and  increased  clarity  of  vision, suggesting  the  development   of  a  healthy state of control derived from  the mastery of  language  in terms of relation.  Now, Marlatt  manages to organize and coherently employ many of the qualities which she sees as essential to the poetic act:  process intermingled  with definition through stability,  self-definition  realized  with  regard  to  an  environment  of  others,  the development of a phenomenological approach  to seeing matched  by an identical approach  to the mode of being.

6I

MARLATT

The  first words of Rings  give voice to the  heroine's  conscious state:   "Like  a stone." The  initial image of weight and stasis gives way to a blending that estab­ lishes a  correlation  between  the  woman's  stifled  condition  and  the  suffocating effects of a silent  landscape  and  a  brooding  husband:   " ... smothered   by the snowy silence, yours. Me?"  This  pervasive silence is quickly  offset by a "jingling of rings," the symbol of an  imprisoning  marriage.  Finally,  a  myriad  of sensory impressions combine,  working  together  to define the  consciousness of a  woman pregnant  not only with child, but with the tensions of a strained  marriage. Charac­  teristically, the fear  of isolation-separation  is linked  to a  problem  of words:

My nerve ends stretch, anticipating hidden dark. I read too much in your words, I read silences where there is nothing to say, to be said, to be read. Afraid of your fear of the sea that surrounds us, Cuts off roads ...

But this vision of being severed from the world  ("disinherited  from your claim to the earth") is relieved by the waves of sun breaking through  the window, and the  ensuing  realization  that  sight  has the  ability  to penetrate  barriers  and  join every object in a multilevelled vision of movement and birth.  AB the sun "pierces glass (cold)  irradiating skin, water, wood," every sense converges in the creation of  a  picture  of  hope,  and   the  unborn   child  "kicks, suddenly   unaccountable unseen."
Rings "ii"  continues  to describe the woman's immersion in a multisensory uni­
verse, but  an  interesting  shift  occurs, for  the  barriers  between  inner  and  outer begin to disintegrate,  making it difficult to distinguish between the seer and what is seen. Marlatt's attempt   to  communicate  the  belief that  we are  what  we see finds its best expression in this section:

Back, back into the room we circle, It rings us. No, grows out of our heads like the fern in carboniferous light, smoke

The  notion of perceptual  and  emotional  intermingling  develops in  the  woman's mind  until every fact of experience, from the past into the  present, intersects in the illustration of the functioning of a complex human state of mind. Marlatt's technical  aims are  also concerned  with  a blending, and  so are  governed  by the belief in "image  to outer" -the conviction that  there is a never ending equival­ ence between landscapes of the world and  mind.
Contained  within the third section of Rings is the kernel of Marlatt's aesthetic. First, the familiar  river image  is evoked, signifying an ever-present  state  of flux and  relativity, followed by a compact  statement  of the poet's concept of her art:

Like a dream. There  is no story only the telling with no end in view or, born headfirst, you start at the beginning & work backwards

The emphasis is upon discourse as a spontaneous act unhampered  by structures of

MARLATT

plot or duration. Yet at  the same  time, creativity and  movement  are  made  pos­ sible only through  a  process of self-discovery which involves an  investigation  of causality. As the woman  meditates  upon the child floating  within  her, a parallel is established  between  birth  and  creativity.  The  poet  survives  in  the stream  of experience  only by continually  relocating  the origins of  flow:

'delivered' is a coming into THIS  stream. You start at the beginning
& it keeps on beginning

Although  fragmented  language  and images continue  to illustrate  the  presence of a multiphasic  consciousness, the fourth section of Rings is primarily  devoted to an examination  of another  relation:  that  between process, purgation, and  birth. The  metaphor is clear:  creation can only be the product of a total release of  con­ sciousness. Spontaneity  as a  diarrhoea  of words. The  woman's  desperate  need for intestinal  release is emphatically  linked to the release provided  by  birth:  "if only/  it  would  all  come  out.  But  what  if I  had  the  baby  in  the  toilet!"  The greatest  potential  for poetry, however, exists in the actual  movement  involved in the process of birth, for only then is restraint destroyed to the extent  that  language cannot  help  but  explode  in  expressing a  tornado  of  sensation.  No  wonder  the "birth" section of Rings is the most intense writing Marlatt  has done yet. Absolute abandonment to flow.
The  rush  of language  is succeeded  by a  placid  language  reflecting  a  calmer
emotional state. Through the birth  of her child, the woman herself is reborn  into a world of innocence. In  her desire to fulfil the infant's  needs, the woman  finds herself imagining  (imaging) and finally becoming his conscious state:

this newborn (reborn)  sensing, child I am with him, with sight, all my senses clear, for the first time, since
I can remember, childlike spinning, dizzy

The  section continues  to evaluate  the surrounding  phenomena  in  a language  as simple as childhood:

This world. Something precious, something out of the course of time marked off by clocks

Reassembling  the infant's  astonishment.  But not for long:

cars whirr by outside, gravel spews. (A certain motor. Gears down, stops. News from outside coming home

Her  husband's re-entry  is matched  by a  return  to more complex  language  and thought.  Yet in the last section of Rings there is a sense of lingering  tranquility, not because the marriage  is better, but because the new child will add softness to experience. The book ends in an unsteady voyage away from the past and beyond familiar  borders, suggesting the possibility of a marital  recreation:

MARLATT

How do you feel about leaving? for good. That  question. (If  it is good. If we can make it so.)

The  book's energy originates  in the overall coherence that  is established  between a variety of conscious states, and  in Marlatt's ability to realize a potent  equation between sight, language,  and  thought.



RINGS ENDS ON  A  NOTE   OF  DEPARTURE, to be followed by a poetry  of return  and  recognition.  Vancouver   Poems  (I 972)   is a  collection  of highly polished sketches of city life, made  vital by Marlatt's knowledge of  Van­ couver,  and  by the  research  she  has done  to enlarge  upon  that  knowledge.  A glimpse at the credits on the final page serves as proof of Marlatt's increasing con­ cern with an "expanded vision" that sees the present with the aid of historical and sociological information. She is trying to discover an underlying myth which binds the poet into a ritualistic identification  with the environment and its history. Con­ sequently,  we find  poems inspired  by the  reading  of such  diverse sources as the Vancouver Historical  journal,  Art  of  the  Kwakiutl  Indians,  Weil-Brecht-Blitz­ stein, and  Vancouver  from Milltown  to Metropolis. The  ritual  is discovered as life itself, and the  poet incarnates the ritual  by becoming the wordjworld mouth which feeds on vision, growing on the nourishment  of phenomena:

We live by (at the mouth of the world, & the ritual. Draws strength. Is not Secret
a woman gives (in taking, Q'ominoqas)  rich within the lockt-up street. Whose heart beats here, taking it
all in ...

In these poems, Marlatt repeats her habitual contention that  the self can be understood only in relation to external phenomena, insisting that "matter inserts relation."  Much  of the  book is devoted  to  the  painstaking  examination   of the objects surrounding the  poet. In  fact, the success of Marlatt's effort is indicated by the  difficulty which  is inevitably  encountered  in  any  attempt   to  describe or classify the inexhaustible  flood of images she incorporates. This phenomenological inundation  forces the reader  to see Vancouver  as a tangible  reality. It  also  pro­ vides a  lesson in  the  way  we  can  visually  restructure   ( re jsee)  our  own  sur­ roundings.
In  many  ways, Vancouver Poems serves as the  testing  ground  for  Marlatt's latest book. Every facet of her skill as a poet is demonstrated  in Steveston.  Here (as the epigraph  from James Agee indicates), she continues her avowed intention of "seeking  to perceive it as it stands,"  creating  word  pictures  which  capture  a set of momentary apprehensions.  At the same time, she manages to blend those incredibly tight images with a flowing style that speaks for a Heraclitean experi-

MARLATT

ence of flux, discovering  the voice which allows her  to unite  the  acts of seeing and  telling.
It seems only natural that  in this volume, her poems are bound  with  (and  to) Robert  Minden's  photographs,  for her poems, as we have seen, always seek the precision, objectivity,  and  instantaneous  image implied  by the  photograph, and her  books  are  progressively  characterized   by  an  application   of  photographic principles. In  Frames, she expressed her recognition of the imagistic power of the photograph, but tended  towards  the more traditional association between  poetry and  painting,   perhaps  because  the  snapshot  then  represented  a  verisimilitude that spoke with frightening  ease about  reality. Leaf leaf j s represented  an attempt to create a group  of imagistic poems possessing a photographic  appeal  to exacti­ tude. Then  in Rings  we witnessed Marlatt's endeavour  to improve  the coherence between several "exposures" of consciousness, and in Vancouver Poems she experi­ mented  with  photographic impressions modulated   by the  introduction of  per­ sonal  recollection  and  historical  data.  Steveston is  composed  of a  photographic poetry of immanence  that  improves upon  the  experiments  of earlier  works. But the book is much  more than  a refined expression of previous vision, for here, the maturation of Marlatt's voice is matched  by a growth of self assurance that  allows her to see herself in relation to a host of external questions. Throughout Steveston, Marlatt  is continually examining the nature of her own poetic discourse, remind­ ing herself of the  need to remain  attentive  to the facts of physical reality:

multiplicity simply there:  the physical matter of the place (what matters) meaning, don't get theoretical now ...

Steveston is the antithesis  of that  reluctant  trickling  which  began  in  Frames. Now Marlatt has unquestionably connected the story with a torrent of visual experience.  For  her,  the  book  represents  a  visual  reinitiation  into  life,  and  its structure  describes an  expanding  rush  towards  a  heightened  understanding.  At first, Marlatt confronts  Steveston in the  role of detached  alien,  capable  only of seeing the town in terms of its exterior characteristics,  or in relation  to the  pub­ licized facts of its history. She knows that  Steveston is the  headquarters of  B.C. Packers, but only in the course of her visit to the town does she realize the extent to which the canning  industry  has relentlessly exploited its resources, both  human and environmental. In  her desire to know Steveston's present, Marlatt  begins by imagining  the past of a town stricken by fire in  I gI 8 :

Imagine:  a town

Imagine a town running
(smoothly?
a town running before a fire ...

Movement begins with this step into Steveston's past. As her perception becomes

MARLATT

more  acute   (and involved), she  works her  way through history  into  the  present, arriving at  a  characteristic  immediacy of  sight.  From   an  investigation  of  the general,  she  moves  to  a  consideration of  the  particular, concerning herself  first with  industrial buildings  and  groups,  and  then  with  individuals, their  jobs, their outlook,  their  home  life:

To live in a place. Immanent. In
place. Yet to feel at sea. To come from elsewhere & then to
discover/  love, has a house & name. Has land. Is landed  ...

As usual,  Marlatt's  perceptions transform her  as she transforms through sight. In  the  end,  the  identification she realizes is so complete  that  she once  again  sees herself as performing the function of a mouth, giving voice to the sight  of  Steves­ ton. Having assumed  this primary role, she then  associates directly  with the mouth of the  Fraser  itself,  indicating her  willingness  to  explicate  spontaneously and   to become  metaphorically the  very  symbol  of Steveston's  lifeblood.  She  is "at   the  mouth, where  the  river  runs,  in to the j immanence of  things."
This   image   of  the   poet-as-mouth-as-river  is  but  another  illustration  of  the repeated connection Marlatt makes between  perception, digestion,  and  purgation. By allowing  the  phenomena which  are Steveston  to  pass through her,  Marlatt is able to "digest" the town,  regurgitating it as a purged  verbalvisual image.  Similar images  of purgation appeared in  Frames  and  Rings.
The   resulting   pictures of  Steveston   may  be  pure,  but   they  are   not   pretty.
Dominated by a disinfected, punctuated industrial routine, a multitude of  immi­ grant   workers  find  themselves  enslaved  and  exploited   by  a  packing  plant that  "packs their  lives, chopping off the  hours." Indeed, these  people  face  the  same  fate  as the  fish which  roll smoothly  towards a mechanical death  on  the  non-stop conveyor  belts of productivity: "the blade  with  teeth  marked: j for  marriage, for birth,  for death." The  mechanical precision associated  with the factory also tyran­ nizes a community suffocated by an overdose of control: "&it all settles down  into an  order  of  orders   ... " Until consciousness  itself  becomes  "silent, impassive," waiting  in  futility   for  an  impossible  release  from  an  existence  where   "nothing moves," where  even dream is shown  to be an enslaved "pounding with  the  pound  of machinery under  mountains of empty  packer/ pens."
The  effects on an industry which  thrives on the exploitation of human  resources
can be seen in an environment that  is ravaged  by pollution  and  destroyed  through abuse.  In  this  "decomposed ground chocked  by refuse,  profit,  & the  concrete  of private  property," the  inhabitants of Steveston  live "as  if the  earth were  dead/
& we within  it  ash, eating ash,  drinking the  lead  fire of our  own  consumption." But it is the  Fraser  River  itself, "swollen  with its filth,"  "sewage," and  "endless waste"  that  reflects  in its stagnant waters  the  most  exact  image  of a  town  gone

66

MARLATT

sour.  Ironically, the  inhabitants must  depend  for  their  living  on  the  very  river whose  pollution   and  decay  symbolizes  a  human   degeneration flowing  sluggishly to  death. Their "lives/ are  inextricably tied  with  the  tide  that   inundates their day," and  so "there's a subhuman, sub/marine aura  to things," with  life seen  as static, drowned. Every  phenomenon in Steveston  points  to an  overwhelming sub­ mergence and  stasis exemplifying the  predominance of impotence. This infertility is manifested in the undeniable absence of any form of material or human growth.
There is only one growth:

This corporate  growth  that  monopolizes the sun. moon & tide, fish-run ...

Like  fish, again,  these  cannery workers  are  involved  in  a futile  cyclicality  which ends  only  in  the  grave.  But  Marlatt discovers  an  heroic  element in  the  lives of these  people  who  demonstrate a Sisyphean  urge  to survive:

Somehow they survive, this people, these fish, survive the refuse bottom, filthy water, their chocked lives, in a singular  dance of survival, each from each....

Actually,  Steveston can  be seen  as an  historical,  sociological, and  geographical study  of a region extending far  beyond  the bounds  of Marlatt's consciousness. She moves outward, progressing beyond  the Fraser  to a vision of the  sea. In  order  to facilitate this outflowing, she  first seizes upon  the  minor  phenomena which  form the  basis of larger  vision, ultimately defining  herself in the light  of others.  Because she  takes  the  time  to  trade stories  with  an  aging  fisherman, he  "connects" ... "when the young woman  from  out there walks in." After speaking with a Japanese sailor  who insists that  she's  a hippy,  Marlatt sees herself anew:

I'm clearly a woman on their float. Too  weak to lift the pole, old enough  to have tastes

From  "out there," she  comes  to  us, too, saying  something radically different, allowing  us to see ourselves anew.  Definition, light  (recognition) sight  ... Marlatt adds  detail  to  detail   ( re) producing an  onrush  of  purified   visual  discourse  that balances  the  moment  in  flow. She  remains  with  the  river,  writing poetry  of  im­ manence at its best.


NOTES

1 Daphne   Marlatt,   Frames  (Toronto: Ryerson,  rg68); Leaf leafls   (Los  Angeles: Black Sparrow,  rg6g)  ; Rings  (Vancouver: Georgia Straight  Writing  Supplement, Vancouver Series No.3, rg7r); Vancouver  Poems (Toronto: Coach  House, 1972); Steveston  (Vancouver: Talonbooks,  1974).

LE PROFESSEUR  ET LA LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



Anne Srabian  de Fabry







LONGTEMPS L'ENSEIGNANT A  Eri ABSENT de ce que  nom appelons  la scene litterataire  canadienne-fran aise,
au  niveau  historique  de la production  litteraire  et au plan fictif. Depuis quelque
temps deja, la situation  s'est renversee. Le professeur et ex-professeur sont entres dans la vie des lettres. lis manifestent  leur presence et leur existence par la publi­ cation d'ouvrages  de valeur: en effet un nombre croissant d'autres contemporains  tels Andre  Berthiaume,  Gerard   Bessette, Jean-Ethier   Blais,  Marie-Claire Blais, Robert   Elie,  Anne  Hebert    (bientot),  Fran ois
Armand  Savard,  Jean  Simard, Yves Theriault, Paul Toupin, Gilles Vigneault  et
d'autres encore  participent  ou ant  participe  a la fonction enseignante.  En outre, le pedagogue est apparu  sur la scene comme entite romanesque,  ce qui d'ailleurs ne devrait  pas surprendre, puisque  la gent enseignante  et  le milieu  dans  lequel celle-d evolue sans doute ce que ces auteurs connaissent le mieux.
Il est a  peine exagere  de  parler  d'envahissement  de la scene litteraire  par  le
professeur. Cependant, ce phenomene a ete peu remarque,  surtout  au niveau romanesque.  Le pedagogue,  il est vrai,  joue souvent un  role de deuxieme  ou de troisieme  plan,  tels  Melle  Cote,  Miss O'Rorke   et  Armand   Dubreuil   dans  La Petite  Paule  dJ Eau  de Gabrielle  Roy. Parfois le professeur n'apparait meme  pas en scene, mais des tiers en parlent: les trois heros de La  Bagarre  de Gerard  Bes­ sette, par exemple, emettent  des jugements a l'egard de leurs maitres. En scene ou en coulisses le professeur est done entre dans le roman. Sa presence n'est sans doute pas  gratuite; elle  a  une  signification  qui  merite  d'etre  degagee  d'autant  plus qu'elle  echappe  a beaucoup  de lecteurs.
Cette  etude  se propose done  de mettre  en relief le professeur dans  le roman
canadien-fran ais:
des anti-heros  nul n'est assez naif pour s'attendre  a trouver  des professeurs sedui­
sants et sympathiques,  saints ou heroiques. Neanmoins vu l'etroite  relation  entre

68

LE PROFESSEUR

le fictif et le reel dans le roman  realiste, on aimerait  penser que les auteurs cana­ diens estiment  leurs confreres, qu'ils  jugent ceux-ci, en majorite,  dignes  de }'in­ signe tache  qui leur est confiee. Preparer  et former  les citoyens d'une  nation  est une responsabilite capitale; pour l'assumer le secteur enseignant  a  besoin d'hom­  mes et de femmes d'elite.  Or,  pour  aussi navrante  que  Ia  constatation   soit, les pedagogues  jouissent, aupres de leurs confreres ecrivains, d'une  mauvaise  reputa­  tion.  Qu'ils  le disent  brutalement et sans equivoque  possible, au  bien  qu'ils  le demontrent indirectement,  Ia plupart  des auteurs  canadiens  partagent }'opinion de Paul  Toupin  au sujet  de ses professeurs et de !'education qu'il  en  re<;ut: "Je  fus refractaire  au genre de discipline qu'on  tenta de m'appliquer ( ...)  Je  re<;US done  mes maitres.  Ils ne de<;urent davantage. Je  les avais crus  parfaits  et  il ne l'etaient  pas. Ils avaient  meme d'humaines imperfections  [...]  Ce qui  me faisait
crever d'ennui, c'etait  le programme.  Je  baillais a n'en  plus finir"  (ACES) .1 Le
professeur et le programme d'etudes font done I'objet de Ia satire des auteurs cana­
diens. On  pourrait  examiner  Ia question  sous les angles  psychologique,  biogra­ phique  et historique.  Nous nous bornerons ici a l'envisager dans  une  perspective thematique, soit  a  denombrer   les  principaux   chefs  d'accusation  emis  par  les
auteurs  canadiens-fran<;ais contre les enseignants.




LE TROISIEME ROMAN  de G. Bessette, intitule  Les Pedagogues, est manifestement  l'ouvrage  le plus riche pour notre analyse. Taus  les personnages importants sont des professeurs, et l'action entiere pivote sur le sujet de Ia nomina­ tion des professeurs aux pastes de l'Ecole de Pedagogic de Montreal. Cet ouvrage
-qui n'est pas le meilleur de Bessette-a l'avantage  d'etre ecrit sans Ia moindre ambiguite.  C'est une diatribe  a l'encontre  des "Pedagogues," c'est-a-dire  pseudo­
pedagogues, car, a !'exception  d'Yves Lambert  et de Sarto  Pellerin  qui sont tour
a tour les porte-parole  de l'auteur, Ia pedagogic est bien le dernier  de leurs soucis.
Certes Bessette vise tout d'abord  les administrateurs de l'Ecole; il revele les dessous
de Ia cuisine academique; il montre  les feintes et les comedies qui s'y  jouent;  il denonce les injustices qui s'y pratiquent. Selon }'auteur les nominations  aux pastes et les avancements  se font d'apres  trois criteres principaux: l'assiduite  aux offices religieux;  Ia non-affiliation  aux  syndicats;  les relations  personnelles entretenues avec ceux qui sont influents. Comme on le voit les connaissances intellectuelles et Ia competence  pedagogique  d'un  postulant  n'entrent   pas en  jeu. A vrai  dire  Ia valeur  personnelle d'un  candidat   peut  jouer en sa defaveur  parce  que  certaines qualites sont souvent  jugees dangereuses par les "bien-pensants." Ainsi, Stanislas Chavinski, qui est titulaire d'un  diplome de l'Universite de Varsovie, d'une  licence et d'un  doctorat  de Ia Sorbonne, serait suspect dans l'exercice de sa  discipline­ les mathematiques-s'il ne pratiquait pas publiquement  Ia  religion  catholique.

6g

LE PROFESSEUR


Paul Marcotte  qui parle un fran<_;ais pur est expulse de l'Ecole Superieure Sainte­ Anasthasie et ne sera pas nomme a l'Ecole de Pedagogie ou ses qualites l'appellent,
car, affirme Pellerin:  "Paul Marcotte  n'est pas bien vu des autorites. Son Associa­
tion des Instituteurs leur  cause des embetements.  C'est  un des seuls a refuser de
plier 1'echine"  ( P) . Le poste de directeur  du departement de fran<_;ais reviendra done a un homme qui parle un dialecte abominable,  mais dont le frere entretient
de bonnes relations avec le ministre de I'education: "Parlons-en  du vieux Miron," fulmine Pellerin, "il sait a peine baragouiner  le fran<_;ais Et l'on  voudrait  lui faire
enseigner la composition, les explications de textes.... Tu  l'as entendu  parler toi Miron  ... c'est du sous-joual"  (P). Et Alexandre  Barre, "qui  n'a  pas la  moin­ dre  notion  de  psychologie," sera  nomme  dans  la  section  de  psychologie  parce qu'il  joue au bridge avec les inspecteurs de la commission" (P).
Mais  l'auteur des Pedagogues sait faire  d'une  pierre  deux  coups. Ses fteches satiriques  n'atteignent  pas  seulement  les administrateurs:  d'ailleurs  ceux-ci  ne sont-ils pas eux-memes des professeurs ou anciens professeurs? Comme le titre du roman  l'indique, les pedagogues-bons ou  mauvais-sont responsables  d'un etat de fait que Bessette trouve deplorable: "Si <_;a s'est passe comme <;a  jusqu'ici, dit  Sarto,  c'est  de  notre  faute" (P). Le probleme  que  Bessette expose dans  ce roman est situe dans la perspective de la politique interieure de l'Ecole. Les scenes importantes ont lieu en Conseil d'Administration et le lecteur  ne voit  jamais les professeurs dans l'exercice  de leur magistere. Mais si un roman suggere bien plus qu'il ne dit expressement, il est permis de penser que ceux qui font preuve d'indi­ gence d'esprit  en Conseil d'Administration ne sauraient  acquerir miraculeusement  du  genie dans  leur salle de classe. Ainsi Hubert  Sigoin  demeure  "un  cretin"  et "un  imbecile" en qualite  d'individu  et de professeur, de meme que Sloper trans­ porte partout  avec lui sa lachete, sa sottise et son ignorance: "Un  joli couard,  ce Sloper, un mollusque illettre"  (P).
L'ignorance  de l'enseignant  est un theme commun  a tousles auteurs  que nous
retenus pour cette etude. Chez Bessette c'est meme un leitmotiv qui se repete dans chacun  de ses romans.  Tantot !'ignorance  provient  d'une  scolarite  reduite;  dans Le Libraire  par exemple il signale que l'ex-institutrice Rose Bouthiller avait "peut­
etre fini sa huitieme  annee" (L). Tantot  elle est   due a la paresse du  professeur
qui, une fois en place, ne se soucie guere de se perfectionner.  Critiquant son  col­
legue qui ne frequente  jamais la bibliotheque de l'Universite  le Pr. Weingerter s'exclame:  "Gordon Blackwell  (entre  nous un  ignorant  de la  pire espece nicht wahr  du  plus scandaleux  acabit)   qu'on  ne voyait  jamais au  grand  jamais dans
ces parages, c'etait  a se demander s'il savait lire, ce pitre, ce cabotin,  ce  profes­
seur d'opera  comique"  (/); "le  denomme  Gordon  Blackwell entre  nous incom­
petence abyssale, <;a  depasse 1'entendement,  entre  nous je vous le dis  a Vienne:
unconcierge  na ! en toute  amitie  meme pas un boueur"  (I) . Que  Bessette raille
le vieil erudit  autrichien cela ne fait  pas de doute;  il n'en  reste pas moins que

LE  PROFESSEUR

le Pr. Weingerter  exprime une opinion fort repandue  parmi les intellectuels euro­ peens, opinion  que  Bessette partage  probablement  puisqu'il  ne cesse  d'invectiver  les enseignants.  Dans  Les Pedagogues par  exemple  il denonce,  sans  le moindre humour  cette fois-ci, Ia niaiserie d'instituteurs beotiens qui s'entichent  des decou­ vertes "psychologiques"  d'Hubert Sigoin:   "Des  instituteurs  plus  ignares  les uns que les autres  ne jurant  plus que par cette nouveaute  a allure scientifique"  (P). Si !'instruction est eternelle, comme le dit Sir Adam Beck, parce qu'elle se retrans­  met a l'infini, alors l'enseignement  est une transmission de sottise. C'est  cela sans doute qui explique le refus de Lebeuf, a Ia fin de La  Bagarre, de s'engager  dans le professorat:  "Un  travail  d'un  mois lui aurait  suffi pour reprendre  ce certificat. Ensuite, il serait licencie [...]  mais a quoi bon? II  ne voulait  pas enseigner dans les colleges du Quebec" (B).
Dans l'enseignement  plus que dans n'importe  quelle autre  profession  l'enthou­ siasme est Ia de  de Ia reussite. Comment  interesser des etudiants, communiquer avec eux, si l'on n'est  pas anime d'une  ftamme interieure  et de !'amour de sa dis­ cipline? Si l'on en croit les auteurs  canadiens ils ont rarement rencontre  le maitre qui inspire. On  a deja  cite Paul  Toupin.  Rejean  Ducharme  pour sa part  fuyait
!'ecole dans sa  jeunesse. Marie-Claire  Blais montre  le double  absenteisme:  celui
de l'institutrice  que son metier ne passionne pas, celui de l'eleve qui n'est pas pas­ sionne par  son institutrice   ( cf.  Un  saison dans la  vie d'Emmanuel). Bessette a developpe ce sujet dans  La Bagarre. Les trois heros principaux  de ce roman  sont des etudiants  de  troisieme  cycle fort  doues.  lis  abandonneront  tous  trois  leurs etudes et n'embrasseront   pas Ia carriere  de l'enseignement  qui  semble  s'offrir  a eux, car  ils sont  degoutes  et deroutes  par  leurs  maitres.  Weston  ne  pourra  pas terminer  sa these par  Ia faute  du  professeur qui lui  avait  indique  un sujet  trop vaste. Avec une ironie  facetieuse, Bessette montre  comment  les jeunes universi­ taires s'en laissent imposer par des professeurs incapables de diriger une these: "Le seul type interessant  a Ia faculte,  d'apres Weston, etait  le professeur d'histoire  et de sociologic. II etait  aile le voir, avait discute avec lui. Le professeur avait  sug­ gere 'les Canadiens  fran(_;ais' comme sujet  de these"  (B). Sillery va "s'enfoncer  rimbaldiquement dans les deserts d'Afrique." Quant a Lebeuf, nous l'avons  deja indique. II ne veut ni enseigner, ni meme obtenir son diplome:  les professeurs sont des "vieux bonzes" et les cours l'ennuient.
Des maitres qui rebutent  les cleves au lieu d'eveiller chez eux Ia curiosite intel­
lectuelle, il  y en a partout  ou il est question d'education et a tous les echelons de l'enseignement  dans  les romans  canadiens. Jean  Simard  raconte  facetieusement Ie fiasco pedagogique  de Melle Boiteau, preceptrice aupres de Felix. II feint d'at­ tribuer  cet  echec  a  Ia  "cancrerie" de  Felix.  Mais  trois  pages  plus  loin,  Jean Simard  nous informe  que le dit "cancre" accomplit  des prodiges:  il  apprend a lire en trois jours, et le reste a l'avenant. Au niveau primaire  Ia Miss O'Rorke de G. Roy est une vieille fille inadaptee qui passe son temps a ce plaindre des enfants,

LE PROFESSEUR

des francophones,  des catholiques,  de son  installation  a  la  Petite  Paule  d'Eau, et  meme  du  belements  des  moutons.  Le  resultat?  "Taus   les matins,  c'etaient des  protestations  et  des larmes.  Les enfants  [qui  etaient  si dociles avec  Melle Cote]  ne voulaient  plus aller  a  l'ecole"  (PPE). Au  niveau  secondaire  le  pro­ fesseur de  mathematiques de  Gisele Lafreniere  est aussi "une  fille  grincheuse, esclave du  manuel,  laquelle  ne lui donnait  guere d'encouragement"  (B). Arrive au college le Felix de Jean  Simard  se trouve en presence de "pedagogues" dont chacun  a  un defaut  plus detestable  que  celui de l'autre.  Comme  les maitres  de Felix sont des ecclesiastiques, il se peut que la critique  de  J. Simard  soit teintee d'anticlericalisme. Quai  qu'il  en soit l'un  est brutal,  l'autre laid,  un  troisieme exhale une mauvaise odeur,  un quatrieme  postillonne, un cinquieme  begaie:  il y a  ceux  qui  cumulent   ces "qualites"; et  taus  sont  fastidieux  et  endorment   les etudiants.  Selon  J. Simard,   pedagogic  et  personnalite  sont  indissociables:   un professeur competent  perd le respect des ses eleves s'il est afHige d'imperfections par trap  irritantes.   La  galerie  pedagogique  des  auteurs  comprend   des  types  d'en­  seignants  fort  differents:   mais  aucun  d'entre  eux  n'est  exempt  de  vices et  de travers.  Bien que  tres ecoute  des ses  jeunes eleves, l'instituteur Dubreuil  de  La Petite Poule d'Eau  est tres fantasque et trap  irregulier dans l'exercice de sa fonc­ tion. Nous reviendrons  plus loin sur le cas de Melle Cote. Quant aux rares peda­ gogues dont les ecrivains  ne nous signalent  pas les defauts, ils abandonnent cette profession, comme Gerard  Goulu, le precepteur de Felix qui obtenait  des resultats impressionnants avec son petit "cancre," mais qui a opte pour la comptabilite, au bien comme le Dr. Chavinski qui, faute d'emploi  dans l'enseignement,  travaillera  dans une compagnie d'assurances  ( cf. P).
Les critiques de Gabrielle  Roy sont generalement  plus nuancees au  plus voilees
que celles de Bessette, de Toupin, et de Baillargeon. Trap discrete et trap gene­ reuse pour incriminer  ses propres maitres, elle n'en  fait  jamais mention  dans ses ouvrages  autobiographiques. Mais  certains  silences ne sont-ils  pas  accusateurs? Le theme  du  professeur qui  n'enseigne  rien est sous-jacent a  une  grande  partie de son oeuvre.  Certes  les enfants  apprennent generalement  a lire,  a  ecrire  et  a compter; mais !'education ne consiste pas seulement en un enseignement  primaire et mecaniste. G. Roy voudrait  qu'on  developpe chez les  jeunes une certaine inde­ pendance  intellectuelle,  une certaine  morale,  une  certaine sagesse. Or,  si l'on  en croit les details exposes dans  Rue  Deschambault  et dans  La  Route  d'Altamont, Christine  w;oit  cette education  non de ses maitres mais dans la frequentation de personnes agees et de son entourage:  son  pere, sa mere, sa tante,  sa grand-mere et le voisin octogenaire,  le bon M. Saint-Hilaire. Un vieux dicton anglais affirme que si l'on  veut reussir dans la vie il faut  consulter quelques vieillards:  est-ce la le precepte  que  Christine,  alias G.  Roy, a suivi? Quai  qu'il  en soit, expliquant  pourquoi  son  heros  Jean   Levesque  a  besoin de  prendre  des cours  par  corres­ pondance,  l'auteur de  Bonheur  d'Occasion  lache  ce pave  dans  la  mare:  "Son

72

LE PROFESSEUR

instruction  etait insuffisante;  il y suppleait. D'ailleurs  qui done a appris  quai  que ce soit des professeurs?" (EO).




RRADOXALEMENT LE   PROFESSEUR  QUI   N'ENSEIGNE  RIEN n'est pas  le  pire  des  pedagogues.  Celui  qui  enseigne si  peu  au  si  mal  qu'il  borne l'horizon  des enfants et leur inculque de fausses conceptions est bien  plus nefaste. Ce  type de  professeur, Rejean  Ducharme  le qualifie  de  "retrecisseur  de  tetes." Dans  le domaine  des sciences exactes, le retrecissage de  tetes n'a  que  des  con­ sequences limitees; en revanche, il est tres dangereux  dans le domaine  des sciences humaines,  particulierement en histoire. De toutes les matieres l'histoire est la plus
delicate  a enseigner, parce  que,  estime G. Roy, le professeur, pour  etre  objectif
et  honnete,  devrait  avoir  connaissance  de taus  les faits  qui  sont  relatifs  a une
donnee  historique.  Cela etant  impossible, G. Roy preferait,  lorsqu'elle  etait  elle­
meme institutrice, negliger 1'enseignement de l'histoire, et ce dans le seul souci de ne  pas induire  ses eleves en erreur: "J'ai commence  par  la  geographie.  11 me semble que cela va tout seulla geographie, qu'il n'y a pas moyen de se tramper en enseignant cette matiere si interessante  [ ...]  Et puis ce n'est pas comme l'histoire.
Dans la geographie on n'a  pas a juger les peuples; il n'est pas question de guerres;
on n'a pas a prendre parti"  (RD). Combien de professeurs ant les scrupules de G. Roy? Bien peu si l'on encroit J. Simard qui prete a George Roundabout les senti­
ments suivants:  "Retrospectivement G. G. accuse ses pauvres  maitres  ignorants de lui avoir  enseigne l'Histoire  a la loupe,  par  petits fragments   myopes et  dis­
joints" (SN). Pour G. Roy les professeurs d'histoire et les manuels  d'histoire  sont des instruments  de propagande nationaliste, laquelle perpetue  les haines entre  les peuples. Au Canada  c'est un probleme d'autant plus grave que cette haine divise inutilement  deux  peuples d'une  meme nation. Le bon Alexandre  Chenevert,  qui reve de  paix et d'harmonie universelles, est lui-meme-0  ironie-victime  de prejuges absurdes, mais, comme G. Royle  souligne, ses prejuges lui ant  ete incul­ ques:  "D'ailleurs  1'Anglais pour  Alexandre,  c'etait  l'ennemi  hereditaire,  propose par l'histoire, l'ecole, !'entourage," et, ajoute  l'auteur  avec autant  d'humour que
de psychologie, "celui  dont  il pourrait  a peine se passer, tant,  en les perdant, ses
griefs manqueraient d'emploi" ( AC).
Le meilleur  pedagogue  en  matiere  d'histoire  est de fa<;on paradoxale le  plus dangereux  puisque, jouissant de la confiance de ses etudiants, il s'en fait ecouter. Les jeunes sont credules lorqu'ils aiment et respectent leur maitres. G. Roy met en garde contre le tort qu'on  professeur d'histoire trap sympathique pourrait  causer: "Avee moi ils etaient  dociles. 11 y avait dans leurs yeux fixes sur  les miens, une confiance parfaite.  Je suppose qu'ils m'auraient crue si je leur  avais dit  la terre est peuplee d'ennemis, et qu'il faudrait  hair beaucoup de gens, des peuples" (RD).

73

LE  PROFESSEUR

Si l'on relit attentivement La Petite Poule d'Eau on s'apen;oit  que Miss O'Rorke, qui  ne parle  pas un  mot  de fran<_;ais, n'est  pas la seule a cultiver  la  division au Canada. L'excellente  pedagogue,  Melle Cote, n'enseigne pas I'anglais a ses cleves, ce qui  est impardonnable au  Manitoba. Son  cours d'histoire  glorifie les colons fran<_;ais et ignore totalement  les Anglais. Elle lance les noms des pionniers fran<_;ais comme  jadis les chefs  militaires  exaltaient  leurs  combattants avec  des  cris  de guerre:  Maisonneuve,  lberville,  Champlain.... Et son lyrisme marque  le coeur des enfants Tousignant et celui de Luzina  comme les mythes chevaleresques im­ primaient  I'imagination  de  Don  Quichotte:  "Ravie,  elle  [Luzina]  ecoutait la belle, vieille, vieille histoire.... C'etait  beau plus beau encore que dans les livres a !'entendre raconter  par la maitresse avec tant  de talent, cette  jeunesse fervente qu'elle y mettait.  Luzina avait envie de rire, de pleurer"  (PPE). Ainsi en flattant le chauvinisme  emotif des Tousignant, Melle Cote avait prepare, a son insu, tout ce qui se passerait le  jour ou quelqu'un leur revelerait la  deuxieme  partie  de la meme epopee:  la deception  immense des enfants Tousignant  et la friction  inevit­ able entre  la prochaine  institutrice  anglaise et ses petits cleves. Elle avait  ranime et nourri  une vieille querelle, bref elle avait  jete la pomme de discorde. Dans un passage qui meriterait  d'etre  etudie  et  analyse dans toutes les classes d'histoire  et dans toutes les ecoles du Canada, G. Roy denonce la propagande  chauviniste  qui entretient  la  vieille haine  entre  les  communautes  d'origine  differente.  Elle rap­ proche  et  juxtapose  les methodes  d'enseignement  de Miss O'Rorke et  celles de Melle Cote moins pour les opposer, croyons-nous, que pour les comparer  et mon­ trer en quoi elles sont semblables. Le fanatisme  de 1'Anglaise n'a  en effet rien a envier a celui de la  Fran<_;aise: "Le  coeur de Miss O'Rorke [...]  battait  d'une  excessive loyaute   envers  l'Empire  britannique  et,  particulierement  envers  le Royaume   Uni  sauf  l'lrlande catholique,  ou  elle n'avait   jamais  mis  les pieds. Animee d'une passion tout aussi deraisonnable,  Melle Cote en avait fait  rayonner la  folie [c'est  nous qui soulignons]  autour  d'elle, Melle Cote  avait  laisse derriere elle des noms de personnages aussi loin des Tousignant  que la lune. Cavelier de la Salle,  La  Verendrye, Radisson,  Frontenac,  le  mauvais  intendant  Bigot;  tous, meme les mechants,  avaient  droit a un souvenir fidele" (PPE). En outre  G. Roy signale !'importance de !'instruction primaire, cette demiere expression devant etre entendue  dans  toutes  ses acceptions,  car !'impregnation   premiere,  surtout  lors­ qu'elle  flatte  les emotions,  est indelebile:  "Peut..etre  Melle  Cote  conservait-elle l'avantage d'etre   venue  la  premiere  dans  l'lle"  (PPE), ajoute  l'auteur  pour expliquer la reticence des enfants Tousignant  devant certains faits historiques. En somme tout se passe comme si les avantages  de Melle Cote -son  anteriorite,  sa jeunesse, sa  ferveur,  ses  pouvoirs  seducteurs-ne servaient  qu'a  tramper   les enfants,  leur  apprendre a  croire  lorsqu'il  faudrait   douter  et  a  douter  lorsqu'il faudrait  se rendre  a !'evidence.  C'est le propre de ce l'on appelle communement: le lavage de cerveau.

74

LE PROFESSEUR

Presenter  aux etudiants  des opinions toutes faites, des idees r ues,
absolues et leur faire apprendre par coeur est precisement ce que Claude  Jasmin reproche  aux  "maitres a penser" qui enseignent tout sauf a  penser:  "Comment avait-elle  pu echapper  aux influences nefastes", s'etonne-t-il  au sujet de Mariette, "d'une education   accomplie  par  des professeurs, machines  a  memoriser,  a  en­ doctriner  comme tous ceux que  j'avais connus moi-meme"  (S). Et  Paul Toupin  rencherit: "Memoriser ce que des generations avaient  memorise, marquer le pas, ne pas sortir des rangs, approuver, admirer,  ne pas critiquer,  le college enseignait cela"  (ACELS).
La  "machine a memoriser"  dure  ce que durent  les machines:  l'espace  d'une quinzaine d'annees,  apres quoi rienne va plus. C'est du moins !'opinion  d'Andre Berthiaume qui  affirme par Ia voix de son protagoniste  ]olivet: "II  faut  que  je te dise Sylvie, un professeur a
Cette  formule de Berthiaume  parait si juste qu'elle  meriterait  de figurer dans  un dictionnaire; elle  resume  le  role  du  pedagogue  a  Ia fois comme  espece  socio­ logique  et  comme  espece metaphysique.  Meme  s'il  exprime  des reserves  sur  Ia "machine enseignante" Berthiaume ale merite d'etre l'un des rares ecrivains cana­  diens a situer le professeur au niveau philosophique:  l'homme qui repete le meme
cours pendant  quinze  ou vingt ans est comparable  a Sisyphe. C'est  parce  qu'elle
refuse-entre autres  raisons-de rouler  le meme  rocher  que !'heroine de  La
Fugue se suicide.




MorNs PHILOSIPHE QUE  BERTHIAUNE, Jean Simard  accuse le professeur qui n'evolue pas:  "L'evolution  n'attend pas les eclopes" ecrit-il dans Les Sentiers de la Nuit.  Le professeur de musicologie Auguste  Labranche est un "eclope" en ce sens qu'il est incapable d'evoluer au rythme de ses etudiants. Ceux­ ci se passionnent  pour Bartok et Webem  tandis que le maitre  aux gouts scleroses en est encore a Bach et a Mozart.  Un mur invisible s'eleve entre  eux; toute  com­ munication est  devenue  impossible et  les cours  d'Auguste  Labranche sont  un supplice  pour les etudiants  autant  que pour le maitre.
Mais le cas ou les etudiants  depassent le maitre  n'est-il pas assez exceptionnel?
II est regrettable  qu'aucun des auteurs  que nous ayons Ius n'aient  traite  du  pro­ bleme oppose. N'importe quel  professeur qui est intellectuellement  curieux  aime faire de Ia recherche  et renouveler Ia matiere  et les perspectives de son  enseigne­ ment.  II souffre s'il doit constamment  s'abaisser au  niveau du  "repetiteur." Tels Ia Seine et le Pont  Mirabeau les etudiants  coulent et le  professeur demeure  sou­ vent contre son gre, car celui-ci ne peut toujours choisir ses cours ni ses disciples.
Tant qu'un   professeur aura  chaque  annee  un  groupe  d'etudiant qui  !'oblige  a
recommencer  la-meme ou i1 avait commence les annees precedentes, sa tache sera


75

LE PROFESSEUR

sisyphienne. Et malheur  a celui qui planerait  dans des spheres trap  Clevees: il se retrouverait  devant  une salle vide comme Paul  Valery au  College de France  ou comme Samuel Beckett a Ia Sorbonne.
La question d'age  est un autre  element "absurde" inherent  a Ia condition enseignante.  Socrate   disait  qu'on   ne  devrait  pas  etudier  Ia  philosophic  avant l'age  de cinquante ans;  Malraux a ecrit qu'il  faut  soixante ans  pour former  un homme. Si Ia sagesse, Ia connaissance et !'experience sont necessaires au bon pedagogue,  il ne saurait  en exister a mains de soixante  ans. C'est  l'idee  qui  se degage de plusieurs ouvrages  de G. Roy. Mais les personnes agees n'ont  plus Ia force physique,  le dynamisme  imdispensables a  Ia profession. Tout  au  plus,  un vieillard est-il capable  de s'occuper d'un enfant  a Ia fois, tel M. Saint-Hilaire transmettant un  peu de ses lumieres a Ia petite Christine. D'ailleurs  seul un etre aussi exceptionnel  que  Christine  sent intuitivement  le profit qu'elle  peut  tirer  de Ia frequentation des personnes agees, car ces dernieres ne  jouissent pas de  credi­ bilite au pres de Ia plupart  des jeunes:  les petits-enfants de M. Saint-Hilaire trou­ vent leur grand-pere senile et Ie dedaignent  completement. Toujours  trap  jeune ou trap  vieux le pedagogue  est ainsi place devant I'alternative suivante:  ou bien il consentira  a  repeter  ses cours ad nauseam et  ce  faisant  s'abrutira; ou  bien il avancera sans attendre les novices ni les retardataires. Dans ce cas-ci on lui repro­ chera d'avoir  perdu  le contact  avec ses etudiants.
Pierre Baillargeon a releve l'incompatibilite des qualites qu'on  attend  generale­
ment  du  professeur;  cette  inequation  entre  "repetiteur" et  penseur,  ce  divorce entre homme robot et homme de genie. Par Ia voix de son heros Claude  Perrin, il brosse le portrait  des "repetiteurs" typiques:  "Je  ne voyais pas bien ce que  mes anciens  maitres  auraient pu faire  dans le monde.  A quelques  exceptions  pres ils etaient sots, laids, tristes. Sans doute etaient-ce Ia des titres a I'enseignement  [ ....] On leur demandait de nous apprendre a lire, a ecrire, a penser par nous-memes, toutes chases dont  Ia plupart  d'entre  eux, faute  de preparation, faute  de loisirs, etaient  incapables" ( M CP, cite par Bessette, Geslin et Parent). Baillargeon admet bien  quelques  circonstances   attenuantes  ( cf.  "faute   de  preparation, faute   de loisirs").  Neanmoins,  que le professeur soit lui-meme victime du systeme ou qu'il soit coupable  de  paresse cerebrale,  les consequences demeurent  les memes pour l'etudiant et futur  citoyen. Pour  Claude  Perrin-alias  Baillargeon-de  meme que  pour  Lebeuf-alias  Bessette -le professeur est un  transmetteur   d'erreur; sa bonne foi, ni aucune  autre  circonstance  attenuante ne rachetent  le mal qu'il fait:  "A  dCfaut de science, ils se fiaient a leur conscience. L'intention droite  leur tenait lieu de jugement eclaire [ ....]  Non seulement ils nous induisaient en erreur mais encore ils se trompaient eux-memes" (LMCP, cite par BGP).
Si Ia sottise et l'incapacite a penser sont des "titres  a l'enseignement", il va de
soi que !'intelligence  et Ia faculte  de penser constituent  des obstacles serieux au professorat:  c'est  du  mains  le  raisonnement  que  fait  Baillargeon  qui  poursuit

LE  PROFESSEUR

rigoureusement son idee:  "Mais s'ils avaient pense, ils n'auraient pas souffert d'en etre empeches par  les eleves, et plutot que de leur apprendre a lire, ils auraient fait des livres" (LMCP, cite par BGP). Les professeurs canadiens sauront  gre aux Antonine  Maillet et aux Gerard  Bessette d'avoir  en quelque  sorte infirme !'asser­ tion de Pierre Baillargeon:   ne relevent-ils pas l'honneur   des  pedagogues?  Mais, en tout  sincerite,  ceux  qui  sont  restes dans  les rangs  ne  representent-ils  pas  les quelques   exceptions  deja   concedees  par  l'auteur   des  Medisances   de  Claude Perrin? Quitter  l'enseignement  pour ecrire des livres, c'est ce qu'ont  fait en France les Simone de Beauvoir et les Regine Pernoud, les Achard et les Pagnol, les Butor, les Sartre  et les Camus.  Au Canada  leur exemple a ete suivi par  Gabrielle  Roy, Gilles Vigneault  et d'autres sans doute.
La tragedie  de l'enseignement  n'est  pas le fait  du  seul Quebec,  ni meme  du Canada; c'est une tragedie  universelle. Mais cette constatation  n'est guere recon­ fortante. Taine, Renan, Flaubert  de concert avec d'autres  grands  penseurs croyai­ ent  que  bien des maux  sociaux-ceux  qui sont  evitables -resultaient  de  I'in­ struction  erronee  dispensee  par  des maitres  ignares. Saint-Exupery  deplorait  le nombre de petits "Mozart assassines." Comme leurs aines d'outre Atlantique, les ecrivains canadiens se lamentent  en choeur sur le gachis intellectuel qui se poursuit au pays, faute de revelateurs de genie, faute de bons pedagogues.


NOTES

1 Oeuvres cit·ees dans  l'ordre des citations du  texte:  Paul  Toupin, Au Commencement etait  le  souvenir   ( abrege:  ACES),  Montreal, Fides,  I 973;   Gerard  Bessette,  Les Pedagogues  (P),  Montreal, Le  Cercle  du  livre  de  France, 1961;  Le  Libraire   (L), Montreal, Le  Cercle  du  livre  de  France   Ltee,  1968;  L'incubation (I),  Montreal, Deom,  1965;  La Bagarre  (B), Montreal. Le Cercle  du  Livre  de  France Ltee,  1969; Jean  Simard, Felix  (F), Montreal, Editions  Varietes,  1947; Gabrielle Roy, La Petite Paule  d'Eau    (PPE),   Montreal, Beauchemin, 1960;   Bonheur  d'Occasion  (BO), Flammarion, 1945;  Rue  Deschambault (RD),  Montreal, Beauchemin, 196o;  Jean Simard, Les Sentiers  de la nuit  (SN), Ottawa, Le Cercle  du  livre  de  France Ltee,
1959;  Gabrielle Roy,  Alexandre Chenevert  (AC),  Montreal,  Beauchemin,  1954; Claude Jasmin, Et  puis tout  est silence  (S), Montreal, Les  Editions de  l'Homme,
1965;  Andre   Berthiaume, La  Fugue   (F), Ottawa, Le  Cercle   du  livre  de  France Ltee,  1966;  Jean  Simard, Treize Rfkits, "Un   Professeur," Montreal, Collection de l'Arbre, Editions HMH, 1964;  Pierre  Baillargeon,  Les Medisances de Claude  Perrin (MCP), cite  dans   Histoire   de  la  Litterature  Canadienne-Franfaise  de  Bessette,
Geslin et  Parent, Canada, Centre Educatif  et Culture!, 1968.










77

QUEBEC ON THE EVE OF THE
15 NOVEMBER 1976 ELECTION




Max Dorsinville




In  1959, Maurice  LeNoblet  Duplessis died. The  death  of this politician  who had dominated   Quebec's  political  life for  three  decades  signaled  the  end  of  an  era. Duplessis was the sour incarnation of a long standing  tradition,  that of the alliance between  the  Church   and  the  State  which  led  him  to  brag  that  he  had  bishops eating  out  of  his  hand.  Duplessis  was a  politician  who  clung  to  quasi-mystical beliefs in the virtues of the past while he conceded  the present of industrialization and  technology to the American  trusts and  corporations  that  owned  the economy of  his  province.  So  that  when  Duplessis died  in  Quebec's   northern   wilderness, while visiting the installations  of one of those combines whose rights for  exploita­ tion of iron ore were obtained  for a pittance,  his death  was the ironical death  of a king:  [in  the  words of the late  journalist  Andre  Laurendeau] a  "negro  king."
Knowing  his record,  intellectuals  and  artists  of Quebec  who  had  formulated their dissent throughout Duplessis' rule in the pages of Le Devoir and  Cite  Libre did  not  cry "Hail   to  the  King"  but  they thought  joyfully nonetheless  that  their fight  against  obscurantism  had  been  rewarded.  Now it  was  felt,  Quebec   would open its windows to the world.1



DURmG THE  SEVENTEEN YEARS that  followed the end of
the Duplessis era, it was a commonplace in the thinking  in and  about  Quebec that
the  evolution of Quebec society  was best characterized as a quest  inspired by the need  to  open  a  society  that   had  been  traditionally closed  and   kept  isolated.  A nation  which  for better  or for worse had  been forced  to live closed in, conditioned by conservative ideologies,  had  no alternative but  that  of destroying  the  frontiers which  had  been  historically established for its protection  and  survival. The evolu­ tion of Quebec over the last seventeen years is thus characterized in a notion that is agreed  upon  by schools  of thought as opposed  as that  of the  Federalists (which  believes in Quebec's future within  Confederation) and the lndependentists (which  believes  that   Quebec's future is best  understood within  the  framework of  self­ determination). It  is precisely  on  the  political  dimension  of  this  opening to  the world  that  these two schools of thought disagree.

QUEBEC

The  problematical  frame of this opening to the world is etched by an historical phenomenon  during the last decade, in the context of the literature  of that  period. By means of a singular image in the poetry and fiction of the Sixties, the Quebec writer demonstrated  a keen interest in if not a fascination for a diversified and com­ plex cultural  experience symbolized in the concept of Negritude. Negritude is an ideology, a  literary  movement,  some  would  say a  mythology  that  grew  in  the Thirties  and  Forties first in Europe  and  later in Africa and  the West  Indies:  a concept argued by intellectuals of the Third  World to assert their identity  and, by extrapolation, the identity of their native culture. Negritude identified  the forms, the characteristics of the cultural  experience of  black people subjected  to colonial­ ism in Africa, in the West Indies as well as in the Americas. It is with this search for identity,  this quest for self-understanding  by Third  World  intellectuals,  that certain writers and intellectuals of Quebec associated their vision of a new Quebec. But before analyzing the terms of this new vision we have to consider the ideologi­ cal conflict which gives it sustenance.
Duplessis' death was accompanied  by a crisis within the intelligentsia in Quebec. The  intellectual  elite revolving around  the  review Cite Libre  ( 1950-I965)  had led a fight based on a liberal concept of the state and  on humanism  as an  indi­ vidual code of ethics. Claiming the right to personal fulfillment freed of  conserva­ tive,  religious and  other  dogmatic  impositions,  Pierre  Elliott  Trudeau, Gerard Pelletier  and  other  thinkers  perceived the disappearance  of  the  Duplessis era  as the symbolic sign of the  birth  of a society which  by  discarding  a  state-of-siege mentality  would henceforth  relate  to the mainstream of modernity:

around 1960 it seemed  that  freedom  was going  to triumph in  the  end.  From  1945 on,  a  series  of  events  and   movements had  combined   to  relegate the  traditional concepts of  authority in  Quebec to  the  scrap-heap; . . . . So  much   so  that   the generation entering its twenties  in 1960 was the first in our history  to receive  fairly complete freedom  as its lot. The dogmatism of Church and State, of tradition, of the nation  had  been defeated.2

But this elite, nourished by the ideas of the English liberal tradition, the think­ ing of the  French  Christian  humanists  and  the social doctrine  of  the  Catholic Church,  found itself overtaken  by a series of events. On the outside, these events were the accession of former colonies in Africa and  the West Indies to self-deter­ mination.  On  the inside, this elite was outflanked  by upheavals  in  the  political, labour,  religious and  educational   fields. The  past  was opposed  to  the  present, conservatism to radicalism,  resignation to defiance, tradition  to innovation. Two world outlooks, two conceptions of the new Quebecois, were brought  to light. So much  so that  Pierre Elliott Trudeau bemusedly notes that  "In 1g6o, everything was becoming possible in Quebec,  even revolution."3
The  precepts of liberalism and  of humanism  advocated  by the Cite Libre elite


79

QUEBEC

gave rise to a new social conscience determined to effect a total overhaul of Quebec society. The  generation  following Cite  Libre, organized  around  Liberte   ( I958-), Parti  Pris  (I963-I968), Socialisme  64  (I964-I966) and  a publishing  house like Hexagone, left free to draw parallels and establish ideological links between the decolonization movement  in Africa and in Asia and  the "Quiet Revolution"  that was occurring in Quebec.  For the European liberal and humanist  model, the intel­ lectuals of Parti Pris substituted a Third  World model inscribed in the perspective of colonialism, declaring  the right of people to control their political destiny. The theorists of Parti Pris, far from perceiving Duplessis' rule as an aberation, or as the cause of Quebec's  problems, characterized  it as the reflection of an historical im­ balance consequent to theI 760 Conquest. Accordingly, it was felt that a feeling of dispossession deeply embedded  in consciences explained the century-long influence of the Church and the traditional reliance on one form of dogmatism or another in social and individual  relations. Taking  a long look at the history of Quebec since
I 760, these theorists assigned to dispossession the significance of a dramtic  shock which traditionally  had never been confronted. The young intellectuals of Pari Pris committed  themselves to the task of bringing about  this resolution.
Basically, the ideological  model  provided by Parti  Pris can  be thus  described. Like the former  colonies of the Third  World,  Quebec  had  to liberate,  repossess and  recreate itself by means of political sovereignty. The  equation  was as follows. Like the Third  World colonies, Quebec had been subjected  to a foreign power. A local administration had been put in place, controlled by means of indirect rule by the foreign power. Any attempt  at questioning  the status quo  was cancelled out from the beginning  insofar as a conservative ideology obsessed with the past and a denial  of the  present  dominated  in all spheres of activity,  and  directly  or  in­ directly sustained  a colonial type of subjugation.  Individual  success was achieved by means  of assimilation,  acculturation to the  dominant   power  group.  On  the one hand  was a mass of people resigned and  kept ignorant  of the real  causes of its sense of defeat;  on the other, an elite that was convinced of the need to main­ tain  the status quo  as a guarantee of social mobility. Many  other  parallels were drawn with the aim of re-enforcing this new equation of Quebec sharing the Third  World experience of colonialism, disenfranchisement  and  alienation.  Not surpris­ ingly, we find  underlying  the  thinking  of Paul  Chamberland, Pierre  Vallieres, Pierre Maheu  and others, some of the key ideas of  the revolutionary  Martiniquan Doctor  Frantz   Fanon.   It is  these  same  ideas,  especially  Fanon's   theories  on colonial  violence, which  in  practice  inspired  the  action  of the  first cells of the FLQ in the early Sixties. Read  and  analyzed further  by Pierre  Elliott Trudeau, Gerard  Pelletier  and  other  intellectuals  of both  Cite  Libre  and  Parti  Pris, the work of Fanon  and  later  that  of Albert  Memmi  and  Jacques  Berque,  Gramsci and Ernesto Guevara, were perceived as the cornerstone of a debate on the future form of Quebec society. Thus,  it is with this crisis between two generations in the

So

QUEBEC

intelligentsia  in the  background  that  we can  approach  the image  centrally  used in the literature  of Quebec  in the Sixties, the image of Negritude  as co-opted  by Quebec  writers.




ADMITTEDLY, this identification with a Third  World experi­ ence did not take place on the popular  level; it was the concern  of an  educated  middle-class. This movement in its extreme form was characterized  by the violence or the rhetoric of violence of the FLQ members or sympathizers during the period rg6g-1970. Inasmuch  as this violence was not supported  by the general population  that the terrorists claimed to represent, their action was that  of  marginal  elements in Quebec society. One could even add that insofar as identification with the Third  World was essentially a theoretical problem debated by intellectuals in little maga­ zines that  reach a restricted  readership,  the Fanonian  model is perhaps  doubtful  as an empirical base for the analysis of the cultural effervescence of Quebec during the decade of the Sixties. But on the literary level, in the mythical  perspective of the imagination  in Quebec,  the image provided by the Quebec  writer  articulates  at length a new vision of the Quebecois.
The esthetic of the Parti  Pris movement celebrated  a native land;  it called for an exploration,  an inventory  of landscape  which had  to be given proper  expres­ sion. This esthetic established  the particularities  of a concept of art  which rested on the power of the word, on the spoken effectiveness of language in its more vital concrete and direct form. It was a concept of art that aimed at describing in realis­ tic fashion the Quebecois' everyday life of alienation and general uneasiness. To be sure this vision produced an art that was violent in language, in imagery, since this art was coupled with a design that was vital and existential according  to its practi­ tioners. This design was that of a struggle for liberation. It was in this context that the mythology of Negritude  and the image of  the black man  as the symbol of the Quebecois were put to use: "I am the evil that  you have created.  I am what  you have created  Dorchester,  Colburn,  Durham.  I  am  the  heap  of blackness in  the gallows of America."4  The  influence  of the  poet, politician  and  playright  from Martinique, Aime Cesaire, was dominant  in this literature  of "decolonization."
This perception of the black man did not differ from certain stereotyped images since it indicated  what the onlooker aims at finding in what is looked at. To that extent,  the  perception  revealed  a  psychological truth  far  more  germane  to  the onlooker than  to the one that  was looked at. And  perhaps  that  is what  needs to be underlined: how the Quebecois "engage" writer painted a reverse image which he claimed as his own. This process of identification is fairly simple:  the Quebecois was perceived as alienated,  uprooted, assimilated, oppressed, and divorced from himself; somebody who existed for others rather  than  for himself was therefore

81

QUEBEC

associated  with the image of the black, the stereotyped image of the alienated being. The  writers  expressing  with  the greatest  anguish  their sense of unease  went  to the extent  of co-opting even the  blackness  of pigmentation to express  their  alienation, if not  the  precise  historical  experiences meted  out  to the  black  man: "When I'll go to New York it is to Harlem that  I will head  for and  not  because  of exoticism. I am  much  too concerned with  precise familial  links. I know  the  feeling  of  night­ sticks in Alabama. There are  fraternities in sorrows  that  your  civil rights  cannot  hide."5 If the  black  man  represented in his concrete  physical self the embodiment of dispossession, the Quebec writer  of the Sixties affirmed that  the Quebecois was a "white  nigger" because   he   displayed   all  the   psychological   characteristics  of Negritude.6
The   metaphor of  Negritude was  omnipresent. In   rg62,  the  novelist  Jacques
Godbout, fresh  from  a two-year  stay in  Ethiopia, used in his novel,  L'Aquarium, a tropical colonial  setting  in the  periphery of which  a motley  crew  of expatriates survived. Clearly  this novel was symbolic of Godbout's perception of Quebec as a hot-house environment  for  which   fresh  air  was  needed.  Another  writer,   Real Benoit,  in a long short  story  entitled   Rhum Soda, had  used  Haiti as a setting  to evoke a sense of personal  freedom sorely lacking  in the Quebec experience. But it was particularly in the  writings  of Hubert Aquin   (in  his novels Prochai Episode, Trou  de Memoire), Paul  Chamberland (in his poetry, Terre Quebec,  L'Afficheur H urle), Jacques Renaud (in  his novel Le C asse), Jacques Brault, Gaston  Miron, Gerald  Godin  and  Michele  Lalonde, to name  just the major  writers  of the Sixties, that  we can see the diverse  uses made  of this new-found  mythology. In  her  poem Speak White, published in  r g68, Michele  Lalonde  addressed  herself in the follow­ ing manner to this  new  preoccupation:

Speak  white/  Tell  us again  about  freedom  and  democracy/  We know  that  liberty is a black word/  as misery is black/  as blood is muddied  with  the dust  of Algiers or  of  Little  Rock/  Speak  white  from  Westminster  to  Washington,   take  turns/ Speak  white  as on  Wall  Street/ white  as in  Watts/  Be civilized/ and  understand our conventional  answer/ when you ask us politely/  how do you do/  and  we mean to  reply/  we're  doing  all  right/  we're  doing  fine/ wej are  not  alone/  We  know that  we are not alone.7

What we see in this  passage  is a summary of the  equation drawn by most  of the writers  of the Sixties, an equation between  what  is said to have been  the  historical experience of the  Quebecois and  that  of other  minority  groups  throughout  the world,  particularly the black experience.
In  more  general terms,  this  new  mythology  appeared in  the  following  fashion.
In one instance, it was the lyrical  and  aggresive  call for revolution, for armed  up­ rising. It was the  picture of the  revolutionary whose archetype was the  Fanonian colonized  who  finds  liberation by  means  of cathartic violence.  In  the  words  of Paul  Chamberland: "The foundries are  erupting in the  veins of  a  people/ the

QUEBEC

majestic  soil grows  and  carves  in  its flesh/  the  hammer and  the/ sickle  and  the cannon powder j its face expands in the  primordial lights  of bombs."8   Elsewhere, it was the clinical description of a quotidian life style bared  of any artifice, where an individual dispossessed of self-of  identity,  language, culture -sought a precise object  to vent his rage against. That was the substance of Jacques Renaud's short novelLe Casse. Further, it was a psychological  climate  where  the  Quebecois was described   as  a  member   of  the  international fraternity of  the  "wretched  of  the earth." That was the  design  at  work in Hubert Aquin's novel  Prochain  Episode.




BASICALLY THERE ARE  TWO ASPECTS to the Negritude arche­ type. First, is the inventory of a sense of uneasiness and  of pain,  the quest through myriad  events for the causes of a state  of despair.  Second,  following  the identifica­ tion of unease and anguish, there  was a desire to act upon and  perhaps correct  this state  of despair. In Quebec literature of the Sixties, we find therefore  by means  of characterization, symbolism and  themes, the commitment of the writer to a refusal of traditional acceptance and  resignation; his commitment was  to  revolt  and  to the depiction of acts as augurs of the birth  of a new revolutionary  being.  A novel that  captured those  two  attitudes is Jacques Godbout's  Le  Couteau  sur la table
( I g65). In the poetry of Paul Chamberland, revolt was dramatized in a symbolism of blood and  fire suggestive of a ritual  of destruction accompanied  by creation. In Chamberland as  well  as  Miron, the  theme  was  the  cry  of  pain  preceding the ultimate release of anger.
But  around I g68  the  movement of  revolt  and  identification  with  the  Third
World  had  spent  itself. The  magazine Parti Pris folded.  The  principal  theoreti­ cians of the movement had  other  concerns.  Chamberland left for  Paris to  pursue his studies.  Upon  his return, and  with  the collaboration of Pierre  Maheu, he got involved  in  mysticism  and  in  research  on language and  communication. Cham­ berland   and  the  former   revolutionaries found  themselves  in  sympathy with  the counterculture and  other  popular movements coming  from  the  U.S.  which  were proclaiming by the end of the Sixties that social change  could  best be achieved  by means  of psychic  change. Hubert Aquin,  who  in  his first novel  was  already en­ gaged  in  extending the  boundaries of  experimental fiction,  went  on  to  further mystify  his  readers   with  a  display  of   arcane  erudition  and   a  probing  of  the mysteries  of identity.  The  rhetoric of  disguise,  metamorphosis, bewildering tem­  poral and spatial  schemes, demonstrated Aquin's affiliation with the baroque tradi­ tion.  Other  writers  cultivated an  interest  in  the  visual  arts,  in  the  cinema   for instance.  Or  they simply stopped  writing.  By the Fall of I970,  as in a final  resur­ gence of life, the FLQ was again  in the news, but  it was more  or less of a death

QUEBEC

throe: two years before,  the visionaries and  the celebrants of a revolutionary Que­
bec had  revealed  that  they were tired  or defeated.
Why?  Perhaps, in  one  way,  it  was the  revenge  of history; a  revenge  not  alto­ gether  different from  the one that  the Parti Pris generation had  taken against their elders of Cite  Libre. Towards the end of the Sixties a new generation had  come to be no longer  conditioned by the  negative  impositions  which  had  been  at  the  root of the revolt of Parti Pris. In  an  urban  Quebec, where  the  birth  rate  had  reached  the  degree  zero,  the  traditional family  no  longer  existed.  The  Church had  lost its former  power; the secondary and  college school systems had  been  secularized; a breath of fresh  air  blowing  all over Quebec sinceI g6o had  brought in its wake the  sequels  of the  decolonization movement in Africa.  The  process of self-deter­  mination in  most  of the  former colonies  had  suffered  from  false  starts  or  it  had been  aborted by fratricidal struggles  and  coups  d'etat. Also  those  newly-indepen­ dent   nations   had  discovered  that   they  were  still  very  much   dependent on  the resources  of the  former colonizing  powers.  But  mainly,  the  rebellion  against  the established order  in Quebec had  found  a substitute to Fanon in the  youth  move­ ment, rock music and  "flower power": a youth movement or counterculture which proclaimed the  need  for  change by  means  of  inner  quest  and  experimentation with  drugs.  The  stress was on  personal  vision as opposed  to collective  vision.
In  Quebec, as  well  as  in  the  United   States,  England and   France, this  new
generation that  appeared in the late Sixties replaced  the  hardline political  models for social change with  so-called  alternative models  (albeit  provided  by the culture of affiuence and  consumerism) . Pop culture characterized the era. The  new heroes were the  Beatles, the  Rolling  Stones and  other  creatures of the  media. The  Third World  model  for  revolt  had  been  discarded and  a  revolt  more  germane to  the North  American experience was in place, the  product of the  contradictions of the consumer society. Violence or the  rhetoric  of violence  was no longer  fashionable,
but  "dropping out" of the  system  was. The  talk  was no longer  about  removal   of
the  system  but  removal from the  system.  Hence   a  whole  generation turned  to
utopias: it  was back  to  nature, getting  close to the  earth, indulgence in  Eastern philosophies,  recourse  to communal life style; in short,  "getting high," "tripping." An  anarchic wind  blew  over  the  European and  American youth  of that  period and  Quebec youth -the very same generation which  presumably should  have continued the  fight  begun  by Parti Pris- participated in the  process. There was a  general  lack  of  interest   in  Society.  Instead   of  Fanon, the  taste  was  for  Jimi Hendrix; Janice Joplin was deemed  more significant  than  Angela  Davis.  Quebec perhaps had finally made its entry  into the modern  world when  the  post-Parti Pris counterculturists,  grouped  around  the   avant-garde  little   magazine  M ainmise
(founded in  1970), identified Quebec's problems  with  the  general  malaise  pre­
vailing  in  most  industrialized Western  societies. The  malaise  was  the  same  and the remedy  provided  in Quebec, as in the U.S. and  elsewhere,  was the  recourse to

QUEBEC

hallucinatory  solutions. The  sentiment  of dispossession which  for  the  Parti  Pris generation had been a root motivation for the need for social change was now identified with  an overwhelming  sense of despair  and  cultural  decadence  preva­ lent  throughout the  Western  world. The  polarization  came  to  be thus :  on  the one hand,  the youth  and  avant-garde  intellectuals  of Quebec  were  claiming  the counterculture  and  denouncing   the  Establishment;   on  the  other,  the  Quebec Establishment  rejoiced in finding itself sketched in a general frame alongside most Western  Establishments: i.e. acquisitive, profit-oriented,  committed to the  bene­ fits of technology. The  era of the great clerics and of the rural  notables in Quebec was gone. The  new era of the Seventies was to be ruled by technocrats.  This tech­ nocratic  vision of  Quebec  society  was  provided  by  the  Liberal   party  led  by Premier  Robert  Bourassa, starting  with  his election  to  office in  1970  with  the promise of 1oo,ooo jobs within the first months of his term.
A "brains  trust"  along the  Ford  Company  "whizzkids"  pattern  envisaged  for Quebec  an  essentially American  model for growth  and  affluence. An  uncritical welcome was then  extended  to  the  multinationals  and  to  theories  of  unlimited growth.  If Jean  Lesage led  Quebec  in  1 g6o  on  a  "Quiet   Revolution," in  the direction of a goal which logically forced the Parti Pris intellectuals to call for an unconditional   and  unquiet   revolution,  Robert  Bourassa  lay  claim  in   1970  to the model of the affluent society as defined by J. K. Galbraith: a society based no longer on national  values or on historical demands,  but one that  recognized only the imperatives of the mass world-wide market  economy. Room  was to be made for the multinationals and  other  international conglomerates. In  the span  of ten years, from 1g6o to 1970, the evolution of Quebec had come full circle. Maurice Duplessis died  in  1959  while  visiting the  installations  of an  American   mining company in Northern  Quebec;  in 1970, Bourassa celebrated the opening of  Que­ bec to the world by dining  with David  Rockefeller.




INDEED,  QUEBEC wAs DiscovERING ITS AMERICANNEss. The popular arts were replacing the cultural constructs and concepts of previous generations, whether of the Cite  Libre of the Parti Pris stamp,  who were found to be  elitists and  in  any  case  "irrelevant." The   post-Parti   Pris  creative   writers sought  to explore further  the  premises of art  rooted  in the spoken form  of  lan­ guage, by making full use of the vernacular,  particularly  the street  vernacular  of the Montreal  East end, "joual." The new populist art triumphed not in the tradi­  tional literary  genres such  as fiction and  poetry but  in the  songs and  the  plays that  were produced  in the early 197o's. The  premise of the  need to describe the Quebecois in as realistic a mode as possible led to the  celebration  (in  the  plays of Michel  Tremblay   for  instance)   of individuals  from  the  working  class. The

ss

QUEBEC

accent  was on  the  environment, the  language, the  values,  the  outlook  of  urban street  culture judged  now  to  be symptomatic of the  true  Quebec reality  beyond ideology  and  political  aspiration. The  native  land  was no longer  claimed  in  the lyrical  and  transcendent fashion  of the  Sixties, but  was presented, in drama and in the  new film industry, in its quotidian form  void of any  theory.  It was as if at the  end  of Parti Pris ideology  was the  discovery  of an  everyday  life style  which beyond  language did  not  differentiate Quebec  reality  from   the  general   North American reality.  Which was precisely the theme  of a well-known  song of Robert Charlebois (who  emerged as the  epitome  of the  new "hip,"  urban, young  Que­ becois  image) . The   thinking of  the  Seventies  reflected  a  consciousness  of  the decisive  influence   of  the  media   on  society.  So  that, in  Quebec  as  elsewhere  in North   America  and   Europe,  the   perception  involved   the   "generation gap", the  rebellion  against middle   class  ethics,  the  refusal  of  the  culture of  the  aca­ demies,  the  desire  for  an  alternative life style  that   no  political   doctrine  could
circumscribe; briefly,  the  ambivalence of a well-fed  younger  generation vis a vis
the  values  of  the  affluent  society.  Unsurprisingly, the  bible  of  American youth, Charles  Reich's  The  Greening  of  America,  was  widely  read  in  Quebec;  some­ thing  like "California Dreamin' " became  the  common  dream  of many an  urban young  Quebecois.
From   I 960  to  I 970,  a  new  middle  class  reigned  in  Quebec, the  product  of urbanization and  technology. The  values  of this  middle  class became  endemic: there  was little inclination for traditional nationalist debates  but there was a strong  desire to correspond to the image  of the middle  class in all industrial societies. The  taste  was for  prosperity, comfort, tourism,  "the sweet life."  At  a  time  when  the Quebecois could   afford   to  travel   extensively;   when  Quebec  industry, whether in the  book  trade, in  cinema, or in hostelry,  was expanding,  necessitating wider,  outside,  markets; at  a time  when  Quebec society  was  discovering  a  vocation  for leadership of  the  francophone world; when  Quebec  had  disenfranchised  itself both  of  the  state  of  seige  of  the  Duplessis  era  and  of  a  Third  World-inspired ideology,  the  opening of Quebec to the  world  meant  a  new image  of self, or  the need  for  a new image  of self. But  which  one?  The image  of the  Quebecois as a "white nigger" had  lost its shock  value.
Quebec literature of the Seventies indicated, if anything, the end of movements and   ideologies.  Writers were  involved   in  projects   where  the  imagination  was deemed  to be self-sufficient. Godbout's novel, D'Amour, P.Q. (I 972), for example, was a reflection  on the impact of the media  on modern  life;  Aquin's N eige Noire (I974) was a mixture of media, time  and  space; Langevin's L'Elan  d'Amhique
( I972)  dramatized the Americanness of the modern Quebec ethos;  Carrier's ll est
par la la solei[ (I 970)' Le 2000e etage (I 973)  presented  a mythology based on the Rabelaisian grotesque. Poets found  themselves taking  a back seat. Since  I 968, in a state  of uncertainty and  ambiguity, a society which  used to be closed found  itself

86

QUEBEC

now opened  to all currents  and  to all winds. A society characterized by intense homogeneity had moved to pluralist openness informed by the spirit of individual pursuit  of happiness of most consumer societies.
Ironically,  Quebec  and  the Third  World mirrored  each other  once more. The
images reflected were those of a new middle class satisfied with itself and  bent on maintaining newly-acquired  privileges. The landscape was one of sharp  contrasts. In  Quebec  the  traditional elite was replaced  by an  elite  which  was indifferent to the  national  question.  If that  elite demonstrated  a  national  preoccupation, it was to the extent that  the national  interest did not detract from the new economic order  the elite benefited from.  Therein  lay the  paradox  of the  Parti  Quebecois whose clientele up to the  November  elections was essentially to be found  within the ranks of this new urban  elite. And there still lies the crucial question faced by the P.Q.  now that  it is in power:  how to reconcile the benefits of affluence with political sovereignty? How to bring to fruition aspirations to self-determination without  rocking the economic  boat? But these are questions no one has answers for at the moment. To  get back to the pre-November  1976  cultural  climate  and the  vision of the new elite, we find the  vocation of this  new  elite illustrated  in various forms. It was the vision of the mayor of Montreal to inscribe his city in the lineage of the major urban  centres of North America. It was the vision of Premier Robert Bourassa, continuing  in the footsteps of Premier Duplessis, when he handed over large chunks of Quebec territory to I.T.T. Or it was Premier Bourassa hasten­ ing the  coming of a  "brave  new  world"  when  in disregard  of ecology  and  the rights of the native populations  he launched the billion-dollar hydroelectric James Bay project on Quebec's  north shore. No doubt, the guiding principle was growth at  all cost, at  a  time  when  limits  were being  placed  on  such  a  notion  in  the United  States, where this concept  had showed its worst  excesses. It  is ironic  that at a time when American  cultural  influences were rampant in Quebec  no one in government  seemed to be paying much attention to the findings of a Barry Com­ moner or a Paul Erlich.
Social inequities meanwhile worsened. Citizens' groups made a dent in the municipal  political structure  of Montreal,  but not to the extent  of preventing  the wastage that  went into making  Montreal  the host for the 1976  Olympics. Agita­ tion on the labour scene came to a head when labour leaders in 1972  threatened  to bring down the state:  they were consequently locked up.  Junior  colleges and universities jumped on the bandwagon  of prolonged strikes. When the November
1976 elections took place, two large  universities, one in Montreal  and  the  other in  Quebec  city, were on strike. But all in all, the consensus was that  these  tur­ moils were at best mere reflections of  the fact that  Quebec  had  become an  open society no different  from American  and  other  mass societies. Quebec  was in  the mainstream of a world order where technology and industrialization were allowed

QUEBEC

to chart  their own course, while, on the other  hand, social needs were left attended by rhetorical agitation.
The  Third World  reflected  a similar  ambivalence. The state  of things  in general in Black  Africa  in  the  post-independence era  was that  of societies  for  which  the need for a new order  had  been  proclaimed, but  which, shortly  after  independence had  been achieved, repeated the mistakes, the errors and  the  built-in  inequities bequeathed by  the  former   colonizing   nations.  These  nominally "independent" societies found  themselves still subjected to the markets  of Western  nations, depen­ dent  on their  technical assistance,  accepting the  principle  of foreign investment as a sine qua non condition for progress.  In  brief, the acceptance of  the maintenance of foreign  social and  cultural structures explained the existence of an  elite  whose values,  outlook  and  interests  were  in  most  cases merely  the  mirror image  of the former  colonizer's. Frantz Fanon had,  in The  Wretched  of  the Earth  (written in
1961), foreseen  the  ravages  of  neo-colonialism when  political  independence  was
not  paralleled by a revamping of the  economic  structures of the  former  colonies:

The  national  middle  class which  takes over  power at  the  end  of  the  colonial regime is an  underdeveloped middle  class. It has practically  no economic  power, and  in any case it is in no way commensurate  with the bourgeoisie of the mother country  which  it  hopes  to replace.  In  its narcissism, the  national  middle  class is easily convinced  that  it can advantageously  replace the middle  class of the mother country.  But  the  same  independence which  literally  drives  it  into  a  corner  will give rise within  its ranks  to catastrophic reactions, and  will oblige it  to send out frenzied appeals  for help  to the former mother  country ... Neither  financiers nor industrial  magnates  are to be found within this national middle class. The  national bourgeoisie  of  underdeveloped  countries  is  not  engaged  in  production,   nor  in invention,  nor building,  nor labor;  it is completely canalized  into  activities of the intermediary type. Its innermost  vocation seems to be to keep in the running  and to be part of the racket.9

In the Third World, as in Quebec, the population was left waiting for promised rewards like the  characters in Samuel Beckett's  play Waiting   for Godot. The  gap was wide and growing increasingly wider between  the standard of living shared  by a  westernized  elite  and  the  traditional life style of the  population. In  the  Third World, as in Quebec, one finds that  the cornerstone of the social order  was not so much   national as  a-national, and   that   "culture" simply  meant   the  vagaries  of everyday  living subjected to the  rise and  fall of the  Dow-Jones average.
Such  was the  general  picture in Quebec on  the  eve of the  15th  of  November
1976 elections. A society had  during the relatively short  time span  of two decades been  tested  by its  ruling  intellectual and  cultural elite  against   three  models.  In the  Fifties, the  Cite Libre group called  for a European liberal  and  humanist view of man  whose  primary concern was the  preservation of individual rights.  In  the Sixties,  the  Parti Pris people  looked  to the Third World  for  inspiration and  pro­ posed an  ideology  for  political  liberation with  the accent  put  on  nationalism  and

88

QUEBEC

group consciousness.  In  the  Seventies,  the  Quebec counterculture as  well  as the Establishment completed the  journey  where  it  had  begun  it,  by  effecting   a  re­ discovery of America.
Hence the central  question  faced  by Quebec on the eve of the I sth of November elections  was precisely whether the  future lay in the continued  acceptance of and indulgence in  the  "brave new  world" of consumerism or  whether the  quest  for affluence  was worth  the  price of relinquishing Quebec's indigenous historical and cultural character. Differently put,  the challenge  was whether consumerism could be compatible with  nationalism. A positive answer  to this last  question had  been badly  thought out  by  Duplessis.  Reformulated by  the  P.Q., the  answer   agreed  upon by a plurality of the Quebec electorate suggested that  Quebec might  be in the unique  position  of integrating the  apparently incompatible values  of nationalism and  consumerism in the making  of  a new society. And that  has yet to be seen.


NOTES

1 Max Dorsinville, Caliban Without Prospera: Essay on Quebec  and Black Literature
(Erin,  Ont.: Press Porcepic, 1974),  p. 27.
2  Pierre  Elliott  Trudeau, Federalism  and  the  French  Canadians   (Toronto:   Mac­
millan,  1 968) , p. 206.
3 Ibid.
4  Paul  Chamberland, L'Afficheur   Hurle  (Montreal:  Parti  Pris,  1964),   p.  18.  My translation.
6  See Pierre  Vallieres, Negres Blancs d'Amerique   (Montreal,  Parti  Pris, 1968).
7  Michele Lalonde, "Speak  White,"  Ellipse, 3 (Spring  1970),  p. 29, p. 31.
8  Paul Chamberland, "Deuil4  juin 1963" in Terre Quebec  (Montreal: Deom, 1964), p. 33·
9 Frantz  Fanon,  The  Wretched  of the  Earth  (New  York:  Grove  Press, 1968),  pp.
149-50·


















8g

LA POESIE QUEBECOISE




Edwin Hamblet







LA roEsm  QUEBECOISE SEMBLE  AVOIR  ATTEINT le 'ang  de
l'universalite  tout  en  retrouvant sa  particularite   et  en  annon ant
classicisme par sa purete  et par  son authenticite.  Ayant  passe par  les differentes etapes de la passion, de la purification, de la mort, de la resurrection et de la regene­ ration,  cette poesie, resultat  d'un  long pelerinage  spirituel  plein  d'angoisse  mais source de creativite artistique, a trouve sa place legitime parmi les litteratures  na­ tionales. Optimiste  dans son etat  actuel, elle celebre les souffrances et les joies de l'homme  quebecois  tandis  qu'il  assume son destin et  ose nommer  sa patrie  dans
son passage des tenebres d'un  jansenisme morbide a la conquete  de la vie et a la
decouverte  de l'amour. C'est  une  poesie a la  fois chretienne  ou seculaire  selon
l'optique  du poete individuel  qui annonce sa foi en l'homme  libre et en la collec­ tivite dont il fait  partie.  C'est aussi un chant  liturgique  qui  proclame la  redemp­ tion de l'homme  libere  d'une  fatalite  ecrasante  et de tout  complexe  d'inferiorite  qui accepte le risque de vivre et l'aventure que cela comporte.
Les caracteristiques "classiques" de la poesie contemporaine  du Quebec devien­ nent beaucoup  plus frappantes quand  on lit la description du drame antique  dans les Cahiers du Festival d'Avignon-]ean Vilar (Numero  10, mai 1973): La messe primitive se jouait dans un theatre. 11 y avait Passion, Mort et Resurrection.  Cette passion etait un Sparagmos-un sacrifice par dechirement, par demembrement, suivi d'un  repas collectif de chair  crue, d'une  communion  sacree.  Par  ce rituel, l'homme  cree Dieu. Ce Dieu de la vegetation, un dieu  adolescent, meurt  tous les
ans, a chaque ceremonie,  pour renaitre -comme le grain, comme la nature  tout
entiere.  C'est  le rituel  meme-ce  rituel  de la  nouvelle naissance-qui le fait
naitre.  La ceremonie  imite  done  le cycle de la  nature  dans  son  mouvement  de montee-descente -montee  avec un but  magique:  la fertilite,  le regeneration de la vie.
L'Eglise a conserve l'idee de sacrifice et de regeneration  dans la celebration  de la messe, acte dramatique charge de textes bibliques et poetiques. Le Christ s'offre
a Dieu le Pere, comme victime pour tous les hommes, par le ministere des pretres.
Ce sacrifice de pain et de vin de la Nouvelle Loi n'est pas sanglant  mais continue

go

LA POESIE QUEBECOISE

!'oeuvre de Ia Croix,  symbole  de Ia redemption de l'homme et de son  passage  de Ia  mort  a Ia  vie eternelle. Saint-Paul  dans  sa  premiere epitre   aux   Corinthiens ( 5: 7-8, La Bible de ]erusalem)  decrit  aux  premiers  chretiens Ia joie de Ia messe
pascale,  agape  rappelant le repas  collectif des peuples  antiques:  "Ne savez-vous qu'un peu  de levain  fait  lever  toute  Ia pate?  Purifiez-vous du  vieux  levain  pour etre  une  pate  nouvelle,  puisque  vous etes des azymes.  Car  notre  paque, le Christ, a ete immolee. Ceiebrons done  Ia fete, non  pas avec du vieux  levain,  ni un  levain de malice  et de perversite, mais avec des azymes de purete  et de verite."
Dans le Quebec seculaire et pluraliste  d'aujourd'hui il a fallu  l'odysee  angoissee de  plusieurs  generations de  poetes  avant   que  !'acceptation  de  Ia  vie  avec  ses douleurs  et ses joies et Ia conception cyclique de !'existence, seculaire ou religieuse, prennent racine.  Pendant pres  de  deux  cents  ans  l'homme quebecois demeura essentiellement  pessimiste   de  mentalite  en  refusant  Ia  participation  active   et
pleniere  a Ia vie. La  poesie  ref"!eta ce  pessimisme  profond d'une  religiosite  jan­
seniste  qui  deforma Ia  bonne  nouvelle  du  Christ  en  accentuant le  peche  et  un defaitisme   morbide. Plusieurs   poetes  furent   victimes  de  ce  milieu   culture! qui
rendit  les hommes  excessivement  passifs et les fit mourir  a petit  feu.  Frustres dans
leurs  tentatives poetiques de  s'evader de  ce  monde   clos, beaucoup d'entre  eux finir par devenir  des alienes d'interieur.
Tel fut  le cas d'Emile Nelligan  ( 1879-194I), un des premiers  grands poetes du Quebec. Jeune adolescent impetueux, il ne put  jamais  sortir  du  cycle vicieux  de ses souffrances et de sa passion et sombra  dans Ia folie avant  l'age  de vingt  ans. Sa belle  poesie  tourmentee ressemble  aux   psaumes   penitentiaux  chantes  dans   les offices catholiques de Ia Semaine sainte.  Nelligan  fut  un  "vaisseau d'or" dont  les "mats touchaient l'azur sur les mers inconnues." Mais  le "solei!excessif" ne dura pas longtemps car  Ia vie, cette  valUe
trompeur" selon  le  poete,  causa  son  naufrage. Victime   de  "Degout,  Raine  et Nevrose,"  Nelligan  finit  ses jours  "aux   profondeurs du  Gouffre, immuable  cer­ ceuil." Son coeur,  "navire deserte," sombra  dans  "l'abime du  Reve." Utilisant les couleurs  de Ia liturgie  dans  ses vers pour exprimer les hauts  et les bas de son voy­
age dans Ia vie, Nelligan  ne put supprimer lenoir de vendredi saint  pour  celebrer des Paques  don es.                                                                                                    a Ia vie
car  "le monde  est pour  moi  comme  quelque Iinceul."  Apres  avoir  murmure tout bas "des  musiques  aux  Anges," le poete s'en  alia  "mourir dans  son trou.m
Hector  de Saint-Denys-Garneau prit courageusement Ia releve de  Nelligan  une generation plus tard. Garneau, catholique sincere,  voulait   a tout  prix  connaitre
Ia joie liberatrice du christianisme en vainquant Ia dualite deformeee entre  Ia chair et !'esprit  qui  existait  dans  son milieu suffocant. Son  pelerinage poetique fut  une tentative vaillante pour  trouver une  identite  mais  finit  malheureusement par  un echec.  "Accompagnement," dernier   poeme  de  ]eux  et  Regards  dans  l'Espace, resuma  cette  incapacite de connaitre le bonheur humain :

91

LA  POESIE QUEBECOISE

Je marche  a cote d'une  joie
D'une  joie qui n'est pas a moi
D'une  joie a moi que  je ne puis pas prendre.2

Toutefois, les poetes  quebecois ant  refuse de rester enlises dans  le marecage de souffrance et  de  degradation ou  Nelligan  et  Garneau se  trouvaient.  L'obsession opprimante de  Ia mort  a  cesse de  les vaincre  et  de  les maintenir dans   un  etat perpetuel de  masochisme. Alain  Grandbois (Igoo-1975),  maitre des  poetes  con­ temporains, a carrement refuse Ia mort: "Ma mort  je Ia repousse  jusqu'a demain." Sa vision cosmique a ete I'aggiornamento  de Ia poesie quebecoise  car  elle a aide  a chasser  les tenebres  et  les troubles de !'horizon. La  mort  a  finalement trouve  sa place appropriee dans  Ia vie parce  qu'elle  "n'est qu'une toute petite  chose qui  n'a  aucune sorte  d'importance."  Grandbois affrontera Ia  mort  mais  "demain seule­ ment  les mains  pleines d'une extraordinaire douceur."3
Anne  Hebert, cousine  de Garneau, a pu se liberer, elle aussi, de Ia hantise  de Ia mort  en !'acceptant comme  une  partie  integrale de  Ia vie mais  non  dominante. Elle a eprouve le besoin  de Ia confronter et son "Le  Tombeau des rois"  a ete sa descente  aux limbes dans  un processus de purification necessaire avant de remonter a Ia vie. "Livide et repue  de songe horrible," le poete a "les membres denoues" et les "morts hors  de moi,  assassines."  Ce  n'est  plus "l'abime" de  Nelligan  car  deja dans  sa descente  Anne  Hebert voit Ia breche  pas ou Ia grace  va  penetrer: "Quel reflet d'aube s'egare ici"?4
L'emprise  janseniste   a  ete  vaincue mais  non  sans  souffrance et  destruction.
Roland Giguere a  pu  avec  Hebert et  Grandbois depasser  !'impasse de  Nelligan et  Garneau. II s'agit   pour  Giguere d'un simple  refus:   "je  detournai de  moi  les palmes  noires que I'on m'offrait." II opte  pour les voies de Ia lumiere: "je  quittai pour  toujours les routes  jalonnees  de feux  morts." Tout  de meme  Giguere trouve le besoin d'extirper ce mal  herite du passe. Une guerison, une purification s'impose:

Le temps est venu de passer par le feu doubler la flamme a !'instant fatal
pour n'avoir  des cha.teaux que l'essentiel

Giguere doit  absolument rompre avec  ce passe ou  tous  etaient obsedes  par  Ia mort  et ranges  par  un sentiment de culpabilite deplace.  C'est  surtout un  passe ou
!'amour et le pardon furent rejetes.  Mais  un sacrifice est necessaire  pour  atteindre le nouvel  etat  de purete  voulu: "il faut  arriver  a tout faire  Sauter  a feu  et a sang puis enjamber." Dans  l'etat anterieur "chaque nous nous arrachait un  cri et nous grandissions dans  l'agonie." La  vie, "le  paysage  etait  a refaire." Tout repli,  toute retraite est definitivement "coupe." "Dans Ia liberte  des cris,  un  decret  de  bon­ heur" annonce Ia fin des tenebres: "au jourd'hui Ia nuit  est humiliee";  "tout est devant"; "je  tourne le dos a l'ombre." Les chaines de Ia prison de Ia fatalite acca­  blante  soot  rompues. Cette  fatalite desastreuse  est le bourreau  dont   "Ia  grande

92

LA POESIE QUEBECOISE

main  finit  par  pourrir"; c'est  le grolier  "qui se meurt   d'ennui devant la  cendre des  fontaines steriles."  Le  grand sacrifice,  cet  acte  de  purification, annonce la nouvelle  vie:  "Et  les animaux de la peste renaitront tous sous le signe  du  mouton blanc  offert  en holocauste." Le vieux monde  perime  cede laplace au  nouveau, ou selon  Giguere l'homme libere  des  monstruosites  du  passe est  libre  de  construire une existence  deja  revee. Le feu de !'Apocalypse purifie tout  en reduisant a !'essen­ tiel necessaire  pour  un avenir  meilleur.5




LE THEME DE  RUPTURE, de destruction et  de  purification se trouve  aussi chez Paul-Marie Lapointe. Lui, refuse un monde  clos pour  vivre dans un  univers  penetre   d'espoir qui  se  dresse  contre  le  mal.   En  contraste avec  un Nelligan  qui  succomba prisonnier de son  passe, Lapointe exprime la  volonte  de transformer le monde  dans  lequel  il y a "tant de murs  d'en  arriere a demolir" et ou "toutes les routes sont ouvertes" et "les troupeaux de buffies embauches pour  la conquete." 11 parle  des "cadavres purifies par le feu et le fracassement des cranes dans  le beton." Les couleurs de  Ia liturgic    (vert:  esperance; noir:   mort; blanc: vie; rouge:  passion)  s'affrontent dans cette lutte feroce de destruction et de libera­ tion. L'amour est !'element catalyseur dans ce rite de passage au monde  de demain: "!'horizon que  je vois libere  par  l'amour et pour l'amour."6
La  poesie  est  un  instrument de  liberation pour  le  poete  quebecois comme  le
signale  Fernand Ouellette en  parlant de sa naissance  spirituelle. La  redemption entraine  forcement une  lutte   acharnee contre   le  dualisme  et  le  manicheisme, heritages  douteux de  la  culture occidentale. Ouellette decrit  ce  periple  poetique au  cours duquel  il a reussi a depasser  cette  phase  preliminaire pour  s'elever  a une conscience  de salut  ala fois collective et individuelle. Lui, considere le poeme  dans sa  nature meme  comme  un  acte  de solidarite  fraternelle car  la  parole  est  libera­ trice et franchit les murs du silence et de la solitude.  La parole  est aussi communi­ cation  avec  autrui. Lamarche vers un monde  meilleur,  vers le  bonheur s'accom­ plit done  dans  la collectivite: "Or la parole  tres neuve  qui fut  amere delie  l'hu­ main,  vivifie le vegetal." La lumiere de la parole  a toujours existe.  C'est  l'homme qui  l'a  refusee en l'avilissant. Dans  Le Soleil sous la mort  Ouellette chante la  vie retrouvee a travers  la  parole: "Aujourd'hui nous sortons  d'un bain  de  memoire pour  habiter blanc  la  matiere vegetale  et  vaste."  11  salue  avec   joie  l'eveil  du peuple  quebecois  qui  decouvre enfin, apres un sommeil de deux  cents  ans, la cha­ leur  du  soleil, 1'amour  humain et  divin. 11 exhorte ses  freres: "Debout! race  de I'amour, la  paix est vivante"! Ouellette devient  le  porte-parole de  ces Quebecois de I'age atomique convertis  du  jansenisme au christianisme liberateur: "Le  Christ  en  fusion  s'adosse  a l'amour ... Tout  lumiere il abrase  la  mort." Le  Christ  re­ tourne s'enraciner dans  un  Quebec ou  il fut  pendant longtemps mal  compris  et

93

LA  POESIE QUEBECOISE


"la  paix  ouvre  ses paupieres et longtemps fixe la  mort."7  Pour  ce poete  chret1en convaincu, la mort  est vaincue et l'homme quebecois,  ainsi  purifie  et sauve,  peut prendre possession de son  pays.
La  majorite des  poetes  contemporains du  Quebec, croyants ou  non-croyants, abordent dans  leurs  oeuvres  ces themes  de vie, de mort  et de  resurrection. Ils ant essaye de donner une nouvelle  formule  de vie et une identite  a leur  peuple.  Ils ant preconise  non  seulement une  rupture avec  le  passe mais  aussi  une  recuperation des valeurs  perdues  pendant les annees  d'exil.  Ainsi, la purification et la recupera­ tion  representent des etapes  necessaires  dans  le lent  acheminement  vers la societe nouvelle.  Jean-Guy Pilon  recommande aux  siens de  "se  rebatir  avec  un  visage neuf sur la cendre  bientot froide." La terre se liberera  des que l'homme quebecois
aura chasse  "le  visage  de ses incertitudes." Pilon  loue  dans  Les Cloitres de l'ete,
ouvrage preface  par  Rene  Char, ce "recommencement multiplie" ou  "il  faut reapprendre les espoirs necessaires" pour "la recouvrance d'une vie tant  attendue." 8
Le salut  dans  la poesie quebecoise s'accomplit au  niveau  de l'individu et de la collectivite.  Or salut individuel implique naissance et salut collectif, identite. Gatien Lapointe dans  Ode  au Saint-Laurent exprime  intensement ce  desir  de  connais­ sance de soi-meme  et de naissance:

J'avance et  j'interroge  en pleine nuit
Mon  mal m'accorde  une patrie
J'ai  vecu dans l'eau  je nais sur la terre.

Lapointe est  pret  a accepter les contradictions de son  etat  d'homme quebecois: "Je  scelle la contradiction, rna langue est celle d'un homme  qui  nait''; "j'accepte la tres brulante contradiction." C'est la precisement  ou les poetes alienes d'interieur tels Nelligan  et Garneau ant  echoue.  L'homme nouveau  nait  en meme  temps  que la terre  nouvelle et assume ses responsabilites  en "informant l'avenir d'une caresse" et en "ouvrant a la chair  un  jour  nouveau." Lapointe exhorte  l'homme quebecois a s'affirmer, a s'accepter et a construire en se depassant et en se transformant. Le poete  prend   pied  sur  une  terre   qu'il   aime:  "L'Amerique est  rna  langue,   rna patrie."9
La  poesie quebecoise a atteint le stade  de la revolte et  de la  reconquete. Dans les rites de l'Antiquite classique  et de la messe catholique le rachat s'accomplit par le sacrifice  d'une victime. Pour  Jacques Brault  cette  victime  est son  frere  Gilles mort  en guerre en Sicile. "Suite fraternelle" rend  hommage a ce frere  victime qui a rachete son peuple: si "ce  pays n'a  pas de nom," celui du frere  est connu.  C'est la fraternite meme  qui  precede la naissance.  Ainsi, la mort  du  frere  aurait donne une  identite   au  peuple   du  Quebec "race de  bucherons   et  de  crucifies."   En  se revoltant contre  le sort  impose  aux  Quebecois, Brault  denonce leur  apathie de "demi-revoltes confortables." "Ces  croises criards  du  Nord" seraient des colonises de mentalite. Neanmoins, il ose affirmer  l'eveil de cette  collectivite: "Voici qu'un

94

LA POESIE QUEBECOISE

peuple  apprend a se mettre debout." Ce  peuple  est debout  "face aux  chacals  de l'histoire, face aux  pygmes de Ia peur." C'est  un peuple  qui a deja subi sa passion, un  peuple  "aux genoux  cagneux aux  mains  noueuses  tant   il  a  rampe dans  Ia honte." Mais  Brault  observe  toutefois  qu'un peuple  "ivre  de  vents  et  de femmes s'essaie a sa nouveaute.mo
Yves Prefontaine, tout  comme  Brault,  exige Ia destruction du  mal  en l'homme et  une  image   nouvelle.  Malgre les souffrances infligees  au  peuple,   Prefontaine observe  "le  germe  ici fragile  qui  persiste a croitre  contre  l'hiver."11  C'est  le germe d'ou  jaillira Ia nouvelle  vie, le printemps nouveau. C'est  le retour  de Ia chute dont parle  Paul  Chamberland dans Terre-Quebec:

je fus descendu  aux lieux de l'Innomme
Un  grand  cheval  d'ombre  flambla !'instant de rna chute  Un  million  d'annees­
lumiere  et les arbres  de Ia base au sommet s'eteignirent  sur  toute  l'etendue  de la
montagne  ala mer.12

Remontes de cette  chute,  de cette  descente,  retournes de l'exil,  gueris  de !'aliena­
tion, les poetes celebrent Ia naissance  du  pays et l'eclosion  a Ia vie.
Gaston  Miron, doyen  de  I'Hexagone, chante "l'homme rapaille," cet  homme rachete  et metamorphose: "Je  ne suis pas revenu  pour  revenir,  je suis arrive a ce qui  commence." "L'homme de  ce  temps  qui  porte  le visage  de  Ia  flagellation" returne a Ia Terre de Quebec. Ronge  de Ia "morsure de  naissance," du  peche,  il demande pardon a taus les hommes car le nous collectif etait  responsable de "!'humiliation de !'intelligence des peres"  et  de  "l'avilissement de  Ia lumiere du verbe." Miron  reconnait Ia communion des saints, Ia fraternite de tousles hommes: "je  vais rejoindre les brulants compagnons dont  Ia lutte  partage et rompt le pain du  sort  commun." Tout en  denon<_;ant l'apathie, Ia lachete, tout  en  refusant  Ia mort,  il reconnait Ia necessite  de Ia souffrance, de Ia passion  et de Ia purification afin de pouvoir  acceder enfin a Ia vie de l'avenir. Dans  "Octobre" Miron  resume les aspirations et les promesses des poetes de Ia generation actuelle  dans  leur  cele­ bration  de Ia vie:

nous te ferons, Terre  de Quebec lit des resurrections
et des mille fulgurances  de nos metamorphoses
de nos levains ou leve le futur.13

C'est  le mois d'octobre, c'est l'ete indien  precurseur du long  hiver  canadien;  mais deja !'humus contient  le grain,  symbole de Ia vie, de Ia fertilite  et de Ia  regenera­ tion  du  peuple  francophone du  Canada dans  Ia  magic  poetique du  printemps nouveau.





95

LA  POESIE QUEBECOISE


NOTES

1 Emile  Nelligan, Poesies completes, Luc  Lacoursiere, ed.  (Montreal: Fides,  I gs2), pp. 44> 254·
2   Hector de  Saint-Denys-Garneau, Oeuvres,  Jacques Brault  et  Benoit  Lacroix, ed. (Montreal: Les Presses  de  l'Universite de  Montreal, I g7 I), p. 34·
3 Alain  Grandbois, Poesies (Montreal: Les Editions de  l'Hexagone, Ig6g), pp.  125,
128.
4  Anne  Hebert, Le  Tombeau des Rois  (Quebec: L'Institut Litteraire de  Quebec, rgs3), p. 73·
5  Roland  Giguere, L' Age  de  la  Parole  (Montreal:  Les  Editions   de  l'Hexagone, rg65), pp.  11,  J7, 24, 48, go, gi, gs,  IOI,  III.
6  Paul-Marie  Lapointe,  Le  Reel  absolu  (Montreal:  Les  Editions   de  l'Hexagone,
1g71), pp.  16,  IJ7, 121.
7   Fernand Ouellette, Le S oleil sous la mort  ( Montr,eal: Les Editions  de l'Hexagone, Ig6s), pp.  r6, 45, 64.
8  Jean-Guy  Pilon,   Les  Clo!tres  de  l'ete  (Montreal:  Les  Editions   de  l'Hexagone, rg65), pp.  rg, 22, 24, 47·
9  Gatien Lapointe, Ode  au Saint-Laurent (Montreal:  Les Editions  du  Jour, I g63), pp. 15, r6, 27, 43, 78, go.
10 Jacques Brault, Memoire  (Paris: Grasset,  Ig68), pp.  50, 53, 54, 56.
11 Yves Prefontaine, Pays sans parole (Montreal: Les Editions  de l'Hexagone, Ig68), p. 70.
12 Paul  Chamberland, Terre-Quebec (Montreal:  Deom,  rg64), p. 74·
13 Gaston  Miron, L'Homme rapaille (Mont11eal: Les Presses de l'Universite de Mont­
real,  Ig7o), pp. 5, 72.























g6



]I TIME P]IST
 POEM




Cyril Dabydeen


A potted plant's conspiracy, leaf-curled.

I bend  down,  rise up in duty like a worshipper

in dwindling mist where  plants and  humans

follow a breathing zest. Then a sudden hiss -

a moment's careful withdrawal in  the  almost  disaster.

The  snake  lifts a venomous  head. Recoiling,

I imagine a dozen  bend-downs, rise-ups in a flash

before  the  pitchfork boys descend like stalwart angels

in  the  kill. Snake-curled, potted  head chlorophyll and  ichor-

our  senses blessed.


















97


review articles




TO IMPROVE WITHOUT PROGRESS
 





James Bacque


CHARLES  TAYLOR, Six  Journeys: A Canadian Pattern. Anansi, $7·95·


GEORGE  GRANT GAVE US  the theory   in  his  Technology  and  Empire; now  Charles Taylor gives  us the  lives of six people  to whom  it happened. He develops skillfully an important theme largely   ignored    by   English    Canadians, who seem destined, like the Greeks  before Herodotus, to accomplish everything and remember nothing. The  theme  is, after Grant, that  our own  indigenous traditions and  values exist, are  worthwhile to others as  well  as  to  ourselves,  are  rooted   in  a past never  marked  by revolution, and  will survive  if honoured.
In  the fly-leaf of Charles Taylor's  per­ sonal   copy  of  Technology  and   Empire,  Taylor has written "all  my six characters oppose ... [Grant's]  definition of liberal­ ism."  Grant's definition:  liberalism is "a set   of   beliefs   which   proceed   from   the central assumption  that  man's  essence  is his   freedom  and   therefore  that    what  chiefly   concerns   men   in   this   life  is  to shape  the world as we want  it."  Those  six characters  experienced a  difficulty  pecu­  liar   to   Canadians  in   their   times,   and continuing, if abated, even  today.  Taylor accepts   Grant's view  that   "The  impossi­ bility  of  conservatism  in  our  era   is  the impossibility of Canada." That's because of   the   belief   in   technological  progress, which  implies  constant change, and  also a certain  philistinism, because  the need  to produce   and    cope   with    technological

g8
 
change   preoccupies  society   through   to basic  education, making people  indiffer­ ent  to most art  that  is not,  like  television, film,  photography and  rock  music,  liter­  ally  conveyed  by  the  current of  techno­ logical society. Thus all  the  Canadians in Taylor's   book   exemplify    the   disastrous  results of  opposing  the majority of people who abide by and  believe  in that  form  of "progress through change."
"Since  Canada became a nation  in the Victorian era,"  Taylor says in  the  Intro­ duction, "it  is perhaps more  than  coinci­ dental    that    [the]  sort   of   energy   and style" displayed  by Bishop William  White  collecting    Chinese   artifacts  and   doing  missionary   work   while   gradually  being converted  to  a  love  of  Chinese   art  and philosophy,   "has   continued   to   prevail  among    the   best   of   us."   Taylor's  bio­ graphical   detail   and   anecdotes  demon­ strate    this    point     throughout:    James Houston, remote in his Arctic  outpost  like some  frontier  hero  in  a  Chums  annual, fights off Ottawa's distant imperialism, risking his  job to  bring  a  new  livelihood, art,  to  his  native   (Innuit)  friends;  Her­ bert  Norman writes  poetry  in  Greek and  Latin   to   the   girl   he   loves,  or,  full  of brandy,   sings loudly  down  the  streets  of Cambridge; Emily  Carr, Victorian eccen­  tric  in  an  old  fishboat,  putt-putts  up  a British  Columbia  fjord   sketching  totem poles;  Colonel   James   "Buster"  Brown,

REVIEW ARTICLES



dressed  up in a dark  business-suit,  crosses the  border   into  New  England and  spies out   the  land   for  the  Canadian  Army's planned   invasion    of   the    U.S.A.    And finally, Scott  Symons,  the author's close friend,  dines in Rideau Hall  in  I g62  with the Queen Mother:  "After dinner, the Queen Mother asks him  when  his people came  to  Canada, and  from  where.  'Two centuries ago, Ma'am, from  the Thirteen Colonies, as Loyalists to your Crown,' Symons replies. 'We are still loyal to your Crown,   Ma'am. We  are  your   Majesty's Royal   Americans.' As  he  bows,  his  eyes fill with  tears,  and  so do the  Queen Mother's."
Like Grant, Taylor listens for lessons in the  voices of the  past. Before we obey the modern urge  to get  on  with  the  business of the future, we have  to pay attention to the  qualities  of  Taylor's  people.   If we don't, we're  doomed  and  not because Santayana  was  right   about  repeating a past  one  can't  remember, but  because  in the knowledge of technology is a profound ignorance of  people.  Science   (and  tech­ nology)    today   is  like  a   madman   con­ vinced  that  the  best way  to heat  a house is to burn  it  (total-destruction bombs  for war; poisonous  products for  peace). The problem  with  accepting the  thesis as ad-
 vanced   by  Taylor and   his  characters is that,   like  its  antithesis,  it  goes  too  far. Standing against  progress-through-homo­ genizing-technology equates  to  opposing the  latest  masters  of that  technology, the Americans.  Norman   killed   himself   be­ cause of the McCarthy witch-hunt; Buster Brown  spent   most  of  his  life  preparing for war against  Canada's only enemy,  the U.S.A.;  Symons'   Americanism  remains Royal.  But  the  U.S.A. didn't invent  pro­ gress   through   technology,  it   was   the eighteenth and  nineteenth century British and  French -our very own  ancestors - who did  that. Nor are  Americans the sole sinners: the  Germans and  Japanese and Swedes are  at  least their  equal. And most Canadians  have  long  held   that   view  of society. We often  boast  of our C.P.R. and that  was a  triumph of  nineteeth century homogenizing technology.
"To flourish  as Canadians," Taylor advises us, "we need to be more  than contemporary  Canadians,  good   techno­ crats   and   complacent   taxpayers."  Cer­  tainly   none  of  his  characters  was  that. Together, spirited  visionaries in  Taylor's admirable version,  they  make  a  book  of the  past,  which  if  we  read  it  right,  will help  us figure  out  how  to improve with­  out progress.



SHIKATA-NA-GAI
AND OTHER OFFENCES

Silver Donald Cameron

BARRY  BROADFOOT,   Years  of Sorrow, Years  of Shame: The   Story  of the  Japanese
Canadians  in World  War  II. Doubleday, $12.50.


"SHIKATA-GA-NAI," said the old   Japanese   gentleman.   It    can't    be helped.
"Shit on your shikata-ga-nai," said  the
fourteen-year-old boy, who  promptly got cuffed in the head.
 
The  scene was Sandon, B.C., a deserted mining town stuffed into a crack in the Kootenay mountains,  and  serving  in World  War   II as an  enforced home  for some of the  22,000 Japanese Canadians who had  been expelled from  the coast by


99

REVIEW ARTICLES



the War  Measures Act. They  were settled in  ghost  towns,  or  sent  to  labour on  Al­ berta  sugar-beet farms,  road  crews in  the Interior, work  camps   north   of  Superior. Not   one   act   of  sabotage,  espionage  or terrorism was ever  proven  against them, and  the  majority were Canadian citizens, most  of  them  born  here.  In  the  evacua­ tion  they  lost  everything-fishing boats, homes,  berry farms,  stores.  Economically, many  never recovered.
Shikata-ga-nai, they  said,  as  they  were herded into  the  staging  area  at  Hastings Park,  in  east  Vancouver. Shikata-ga-nai, as the  trains  sprayed them  across the country. In   1957,  when   I  was  a  school teacher in  New Denver, B.C.,  the Japan­ ese  still  made   up  a  third   of   the  town's  population. Shikata-ga-nai.
"We   were  not  cattle," said   that  self­ described "tough  little   bird" from  San­  don,   talking   to  Barry   Broadfoot   thirty  years   later,    "We   were   human   beings, Canadians, and   I  still  say  shit  on  their shikata-ga-nai. All  I was  was a  fourteen­ year-old   kid  who  didn't  know  what  was happening  to   me,   and    I   had   enough  sense to know  that  if this was shikata-ga­ nai, then  there  was something wrong  with all of us."
The strange feature of Broadfoot's book is  its  calm.   For  every  tough   little   bird, twenty   doves  tell  their   mournful  stories and  almost  visibly shrug   their  shoulders. What can you do? Shikata-ga-nai. What's done  is done.  It  wasn't  all bad. Life  went on. The camp  was okay, in  a way.
Physically,  the  Japanese evacuees  were evidently treated fairly well. Broadfoot records  no  beatings, no murders, no epi­ demics  or  malnutrition,  though  he  does offer   moving    accounts  of   two   lonely, desperate  girls   who   committed   suicide. Even  in Canada, the Metis,  the Beothuks  and   the  Acadians can  easily  match  the Japanese horror  stories.  Once away  from the   vicious   racism   of   the   West   Coast, most   of  the  Japanese  Canadians  found

roo
 their fellow-citizens open, friendly and remarkably free of prejudice. Only  the faceless bureaucrats of Ottawa remained intransigent and  hostile.
The  calmness  of Broadfoot's book  is a tribute to ordinary Canadians, both Japanese Canadians and  others. Yet the evacuation was no less an  outrage for  all that,   and   at   times   the  calmness   seems more  stated   than   felt.  Beneath it  lies  a deep melancholy and  a profound sense of betrayal  which emerges  only occasionally. In  the detention camp  at Tashme, near Hope,   B.C.,   the   children  decided   that they would  begin  their  days in  the make­ shift,  ill-equipped school   by  singing  "0
Canada."
"They   were    very    bitter   about    it, really,"  remembers one  of their  teachers. "But  they had  been  born  in Canada and they   knew   nothing  but   Canada.  They spoke English. They  were Canadians and there  they  were, in  a camp  with  guards. "And  so  on  that   first  day,  when   they stood  and  sang,  there  were  tears  running down  many of their  faces. Because Cana­
da  had  failed  them  pretty badly." Broadfoot's method has its failings. He
records  scores of interviews, and publishes
short,  pointed   excerpts without  identify­ ing  the speakers.  But  how  do you  evalu­  ate what's  said without knowing who said it?  Sometimes  it  isn't  even  certain whe­ ther   the  speaker   is  Japanese or  not.  At other  points,  the anonymity is a thin  veil indeed.  I  was  able  to  identify   Buck  Su­ zuki,   the   late   welfare    director  of   the United   Fishermen  and   Allied   Workers' Union-one   of   the  few  organizations, incidentally, which   can   be  proud   of  its deportment towards   the  Japanese  Cana­ dians.  But  where  the  anonymity  can  be so  easily  pierced,   why   bother   with   it? Why  not  tell us that  the  speaker  is Buck Suzuki?
The  short excerpts  also cause problems, striking  the mind  like a random patter of raindrops. By the  time  we have  begun  to

REVIEW ARTICLES



assess a  speaker's outlook,  perceptiveness or even  his command of English,  his moment has  passed  and  we  begin  again with  another voice  from   the  void.  The reader is not  immersed  and  compelled to continue. He  remains  a  passive  observer. You  don't have  to  swim  in  a  shower  of ram.
But   these   are  small   misgivings  about what  is fundamentally a fine, humane enterprise. And  the issues of racism  and panic,   civil  liberties   and   the  tyranny of the  majority, are  no  less pressing  today than  they  were  in  I942.  For  me, the sad­ dest   and   most   hopeful  passage  in   this provocative,  valuable  book   comes   near
 the end, when one Japanese Canadian suggests that  his people's experience gives them a special responsibility:

We  are  the  major group against whom   the War   Measures  Act   was  invoked, and   as  a group that  was  clearly wronged under  con­ ditions  of  panic,  we   the   Japanese   have   a special  responsibility to remind people when­ ever  that   happens and  it  is  directed  against anybody else.  I feel   that ... in   1970 every goddamned Japanese in  the  country should  have  been  up  in  arms  and  on  to  Trudeau's back-and  nobody did.
I think  this  is the  ultimate tragedy of  the Japanese  evacuation in   1942.  It has  made us  so  terrified  of  standing out, of  running the  risk of being  incarcerated again. We've become  bigots  like  everybody else.



THE LONG AND THE SHORT OF IT

Ann P. Messenger

MARIE-CLAIRE BLAIS,  The Execution. Talonbooks. MICHAEL COOK, Tiln & Other Plays. Talonbooks. DAVID  FENNARIO, On  the  fob. Talonbooks.
JOHN  HERBERT, Some Angry  Summer Songs. Talonbooks.
THEATRE PASSE MURAILLE, I  Love  You, Baby  Blue.  Press  Porcepic,  $4.95. MICHEL TREMBLAY, La  Duchesse de Langeais & Other Plays. Talonbooks.


PLAYS FOR THE LIVE theatre usually  come  in  one  of  two  sizes -long or short. The  full-length play, running between  two and  three  hours,  is standard fare  for  an  evening's entertainment, though  occasionally   a  series   of  related short   plays  will  fill  the  bill.  Short   plays, about  an hour  long, are in increasing demand:  commercial downtown "lunch hour" theatres and   university   classroom or  noonhour shows  can  rarely  afford  to run  over  sixty minutes. Both  sizes present particular opportunities and  traps,  which Canadian dramatists are  busy  both  seiz­ ing and  falling  into.
Michael  Cook's   short   play,   Tiln,  in
Tiln and  Other Plays, is warmed-over Endgame. Beckett  had   time  in  his  full­ length  play  to build  a world  of  symbol, a
 
twisted interdependence between  the  two main  characters, a terrifying sense of the void.  Cook's  attempt  to  pack   the  same ingredients into a small format leaves  the symbols   creaking  and    the   interdepen­ dence  sketchy,  while  the  void  is  full  of sea  gulls  and   love.  But  in   Quiller  and  Teresa's  Creed,  Cook  is at his  best;  each play absorbs  us in the speech,  the life, the heartbeat of a  single  character. Teresa's  Creed  is literally  kitchen  sink drama, but at  the  same  time it  is an  elegy for  a way of life in  the  outports that  is passing,  an anxious anticipation of a new  way of life to  come, and  a tribute to the  strength of a  woman  caught   between   them.   Quiller  is  even   better,   as  a  half-mad  old  man hops  about   his  front   porch   in  his  long­ johns, talking  to God  and  shouting at  his


101

REVIEW ARTICLES



neighbours,  wrestling  with   the  shadows and   the  realities   that   make   up  his  life, and  painfully, comically, working  his way towards the ultimate wisdom.
Tremblay's five short  plays use the opportunities  of   the   genre   in   various ways. Berthe,  Johnny Mangano and His Astonishing Dogs, and  Gloria  Star  are all set   in  a  sleazy  nightclub,  the  Coconut Inn. The   plays  work  well  together,  dis­ playing  the pathetic needs and dreams of the  employees,  from  ticket-taker  to star.  The lengthy  exposition in  Johnny Man­ gano    is   awkward,  but    the    threesome  (suitably  clean   in  language and   hetero­ sexual   in   relationships  for   performance on   television)    suggests   much   about   sex and  ego  and  power  in  the  world  of  the theatre and   the  world  of  us all.  Homo­ sexual   and    profane,   La    Duchesse    de Langeais    has   all   the   brilliance  of  the second   act   monologue  in   Hosanna. La Duchesse  talks and drinks and  talks some more,  revealing the  facts  of  her  life as a queen  and  the  talents-linguistic, thea­ trical,  and  sexual-that made  her  such
a success. We see what  she was and  what she is, a man  of sixty  heartbroken over a faithless  boy,  wrecked  but  still  strong.  It is a first-rate dramatic portrait. Surprise, Surprise  is equally  successful  and  totally
different. Tremblay  has  taken   the  form
of classic farce,  substituting for  the slam­ ming  doors  of  hotel  bedrooms  the  mix­ ups in  technical and  human communica­ tion  possible over  the telephone, as Laur­ ette  and   Jeannine  try  to  arrange a  sur­ prise  party  for  one  Madeleine while  an­  other  Madeleine  (whom they  dislike)   is called  by mistake. The  telephone device would  grow  tedious  in  a  full-length play but  makes  good  fun  in  a short  one.  The narrow, sad lives of the  Montreal women Tremblay knows so well are still poignant in the  midst  of the maddest hilarity.
John   Herbert's  plays   are   not   in  the same league at all. While much of the virtuosity of  Tremblay's speech   survives

102
 translation, Herbert's original  English language  is  an   insufficient    vehicle   for what  he wants  to say. Some  Angry Sum­ mer   Songs   consists   of  three   very   thin  slices  of  homosexual  life   (Pearl  Divers,  Beer  Room, and   Close   Friends)    and   a dialogue between  a  critic  and  an  actress  (The   Dinosaurs)   about  the   deplorable state  of  the  theatre  in  Canada. The  lan­ guage of all these plays alternates between  the  colloquial  and   profane  on  the  one hand,  and   the   stilted,   pretentious, and pseudo-poetic on  the  other. Occasionally the  mixture works  for  the  actress,   who can   be  expected    to  speak   in  a  stagey manner. Most  often,  it doesn't. The  four plays  are  undated, but  cover  a  period  of two decades,  according to Peter  Hay's introduction, and  have been performed together. Despite  his many  services to Canadian   drama,   Herbert   is  not    the writer   the   theatre  needs,   nor   will  this volume   lead   to  his  "discovery," despite Hay's  hopes.
David  Fennario is new to the job of playwrighting,  but   his  full-length  play, On   the   Job,  is  promising.  Like   David Storey   in  The  Contractor, he  puts   the business  of  work  on  stage,  with  a  group of  men  talking  as  they  staple  boxes  and pack  dresses and  goof off in the  shipping
room of a dress factory. The reader  would
have   been   grateful  for   brief   character descriptions, because   the  age  and  back­ ground (French or English) of each  man are   important  and   not   always   readily  apparent   from    the    text.	(Everybody swears  in  both   languages.)  The   time  is Christmas Eve, and  management is  hav­ ing an  office party  off stage  while labour does  a  lot  of  surreptitious  drinking and  makes  a  pretense   of   working   on  stage. The  men  want  their  usual  afternoon off but  management has  promised  Eaton's a large  order  that  day. Fennario builds  his conflict  well as the  tough  kids  (English) from  Point  Saint Charles get drunker and  more   violent  about   the  time   off,  while

REVIEW ARTICLES


management (also English, apparently) distributes Christmas bonuses and  ill-will. Rene  the foreman (French) is caught between   the   two.  The   pecking   order   is sharply  presented, with  Rene  getting pecked   most   viciously   from   both   sides. The play  is never  static; there  is a splen­ did  bacchanalian climax  with dresses and fists  flying.  The   conclusion   is  a  disap­  pointment,  however:   sliding  into   senti­ mentality, Fennario  makes  Rene   choose the  side  of the  underdogs and  remain  in the  shipping room  alone  to face the music when   the   cops   come.   The    supposedly tough  kids, and  even  the  supposedly wise old  man,  have  been  shooed  away  like so many  chickens   by  the  Heroic   Foreman. But  the  speech  is  exactly   right  and   the social and  political  implications fascinat­ ing,  though  Fennario  could   have   done even  more  in  this  full-length  work  with the complexities arising  from the French/ English   and   management/labour  struc­  tures. Yet, for a first play, it is remarkably good.
The  Execution is  Marie-Claire  Blais's
first  play  for  the  stage,   though she  has written radio  plays besides  her  many novels. First performed in  1g68 but not translated until  1976, The Execution gradually draws  one into an improbable world  populated by schoolboys  who mur­ der  one  of  their  fellows,  the  one  whose name  happens to  be  drawn   from  a  hat. Guilt   and   innocence,  evil  and  responsi­ bility and  manipulation and servitude and Nietzsche  and  Catholicism and  a curious­  ly adult, formal  speech are all part  of this brew,  the  mixture  as  before  for  readers  of  Blais's  novels.  The  full  length   of  the play gives her time  to build  that  world so that   the  curtain  line,  "How many  more victims  will  there   be  after   you,  Eric?", cannot be dismissed  as  mere  rhetoric but produces a genuine chill.
This  volume, and  indeed  all those pub­ lished   by  Talonbooks,   is   handsome  to look   at   but   flawed   by   errors  that  a

REVIEW ARTICLES



sharper eye in  the  editorial department should   have   caught.  Besides   the   usual typos,  there  are  illiteracies such  as  "its" for   "it's," and   even   the  classic  howler, "The dye is cast!" This should  not  be.
There is nothing classic  about I  Love You, Baby Blue, Theatre Passe Muraille's latest   "docu-drama,"  but   it   may   cause the reader to howl -from boredom. The
subject is sex, in almost  but  not  quite  all of its manifestations on Yonge  Street and in  the  bedrooms of Toronto. It is a long play,  but  is it  a  play?  It claims  to  be a satire,  but  it sounds  like a sermon,  espe­ cially  the  final  speech.  The cover  blurbs say  it  is  "lighthearted" and  "hilarious,"
 but  it  has  very  few  funny  lines.  It filled the  theatre in Toronto until  the Morality Squad  closed  it  down,   but   its  director, Paul  Thompson, claims  in  the  introduc­ tion that  for much  of the audience it was therapeutic. It is an  extreme case of  the difference between seeing a play on stage and  reading it  in  the  study: actual flesh has  a stronger  impact than  printed stage directions.  Clearly,  Baby  Blue  has  made  theatre  history,  and  one  is glad  to  have  the lavishly illustrated document in hand. But,  like  all  "docu-drama" and  perhaps like all  "collective  creations," it  is  essen­ tially  a  document, shapeless  and  earnest and  far too long.




STAYING TRUE
 


C. H. Gervais


DAVID NORMAN BRENNER,  Positions  and  Senses. Alive Press, $r.oo.
KEN  STANGE, Wolf  Cycle. Nebula  Press, $1.oo.
DAN DOUGHERTY,  The National Hen. Pulp Press, $r.so.
KEN  EISLER,  Inch Man. Pulp  Press, $r.so.
STEPHANIE J.  NYNYCH, By  Death Neuer  Leave  Me.  Fiddlehead Poetry  Books.
CHARLES NOBLE, J. 0.  THOMPSON and  JON WHYTE, Three. Summerthought.


ELI MANDEL sets the  shape  of this  review.  His  introduction to Three, a selection  of  Banff  poets,  defines  the  pre­ occupation of these writers  as an explora­ tion  involving phenomenology,  "a game of  surfaces,  with  the  poem  as  a  framing device.... " In   the   broadest  sense,  he's pinning it down  as the search of all poets. It's   the  success  of  other  arts  as  well­ photography  as   an   example,  moulding shapes,  nuances into  frames,  meaningful borders,    pictures.   Something  recogniz­  able, familiar and "occasional."
Before   I  go  further,  the  British   poet Thorn   Gunn  throws   some  light   on  this subject  of framing in  an  introduction  to Ben   ]anson    (Penguin) .   He    declares "occasional" to  be the  fact  of all  poetry, not  in the  usual  trivial  or insincere  sense, but as "the starting point  ... to which the


I04
 
poet  must  in some sense stay  true." That effort  is framing or boxing.  Both  Mandel and   Gunn   would   argue   that   it's  some­ thing   far  more  complex   and  intangible than   editorial   technique. It's  basic  and  instinctual ... like the photographer who immediately crops  off  his  picture before  pushing   the  shutter  release.  Within that  four-sided  chamber is all  he wants  in the photograph. It's  accomplished  easily  as breathing. For  the  poet  it's  similar. The danger  in   writing   poetry,   according  to Gunn, is  the ability  of "staying true." In other   words   the   framing  device   must crop  not  just simply  what  is representa­ tive,  but  the  very  essence  of  the  subject probed.
On   that   basis  I've   approached  these books for review.
Positions and Senses by David  Norman

REVIEW ARTICLES



Brenner  appears  to   have    sprung  into significance  merely  because   of   the author's background rather than   ability. A review  of his first  book slugs  him  as a curious   blend   between   a  Rimbaud and Artaud ... Ex-con,  on  day  parole  at  the Clarke  Institute ... murderer  of  a  man
13 years ago and  today ... writing poetry. One   expects   something revelatory  and
hard. Instead the verses are  rudimentary, sentimental, over-stated, directionless, and the syntax  is sloppy and  confusing.
The   poet  here  in  every  sense  has vio­ lated   the  maxim   of  "staying  true."  He lacks  technique. He  doesn't  frame off his picture. He  argues   that  raw  detail   and the fact  of living  are enough  for  a poem. He's  right;  however  the  honesty  and  the glaring  reality   of   prison   existence   falls short  because "surfaces" of the  poems are cluttered and disrupt a reader's focus.
Ken  Stange's Wolf Cycle suffers from similar   naivete. Instead  of  allowing the inherent impact  of his subject to develop, this  writer  attempts to direct  it  with  the result   of  coming  up  with  a  highly  sim­ plistic   view   of  survival   which    at   first seems  awfully  elaborate. The  book,  de­ scribed  as a "mixed-genre ... long  poem in progress," employs generally a narrative style.  I  would  agree  that   this  is perhaps the   best  mode,   but   its  effectiveness,   as demonstrated  by  such  writers   as  Purdy,  Zieroth   and  Suknaski,  is  to  let  the  tale unwind  on its own. The  result  is to cap­ ture  a sense of  place and  time,  a peculiar  language and  way  of  approaching one's surroundings. Wolf  Cycle  has  this  poten­  tial,  but  Stange  tends  toward categoriza­ tion  and  documentation. Mandel's  idea of  framing surfaces  is constructive  com­ ment  here,  for  this  writer  tends  to  want to  take   the  poem  further. He  not  only strives  to provide  a tale, but  an  explana­ tion  as well.
Stephanie J. Nynych's  By Death  Never Leave  Me is by contrast an extremely elaborate  work,   both   in   language  and
 style.  A  tapestry of  images,  long,  ramb­ ling, ambitious lines and distinct visionary tone,  places  this  book  among  the  others as something unique.
But what  of the tale here?
It's  an  elegy for  John V.  Nguyen  and as such,  the  diction is suitable. However one  learns  very little  of his character. In the first poem,  "Quick Portrait of John," the  poet,  for  example, introduces her character thus :

he had  youth in  the core  of his being tangled muscles, supple fibrous rna tter sheating long  tubular bones.

That says very little  when  the  rest  of the poem  (and  book)   continues in  the  same vein. One  imagines  a Charles Atlas or a Goliath, or in other words  someone lack­ ing  authenticity. At  the   same   time  the poet isn't even invoking this character for strength  or  whatever; and   Nguyen   fur­  thermore doesn't even  qualify  as an  ade­  quate   persona. One  suspects   Nynych   is attempting to portray someone  who actu­ ally  existed,  but  a blood  and  soul  man  is simply lacking here.
To  say this  is the  problem of any  elegy is escaping  the matter, for  it's  not  simply a situation of employing highly elaborate, textual and  mythological imagery  for an ordinary man-it's the choice of words which  coerces  the   poem  from   its  capa­ bility of "staying true." The suggestion  of richness  and  turmoil in  existence  doesn't come  through with  the  banal, tired  and somewhat  archaic  diction  used.
Thus,  Nynych    has   given   us   only   a glimpse   (and   an   extremely inadequate one)  of her figure, John V. Nguyen.  Two other books from Pulp Press are equally obscure,  but  for different reasons.  Here  it is not  an  elaborateness in  diction which gets in the way, but  an eccentricity which prevents  the works  from  reaching beyond the  covers in which  they are enclosed.
The National   Hen  by Dan  Dougherty and  Inch  Man  by Ken  Eisler  are  written

105

REVIEW ARTICLES



strangely enough in the  same vem. Dougherty's  prologue  inadvertently   ex­ plains:

I'll steal,from now,  for  you, A taste  of untouched things, The unsubstantial substances Articulation brings.

The two writers  lack the "instinctual" qualities spoken  of earlier in the first part of  this  review.  There's  evidence of  con­ trived,  circumlocutive style  and  content. The objective to  write  of  "unsubstantial substances"  (or  "untouched  things")  is far  from  being achieved  when  both  books present   obscure,  insignificant  trivial poetry.
Dougherty is perhaps more experimen­
tal by incorporating voice and  dialogue, much  like Gertrude Stein,  but somehow that's a poor  parallel. In  any case the difference is significant enough  to  men­ tion.  It is not  simply  in  intensity  but  in "tact" -Stein relied  upon   the  position­ ing  and  timing  of words,  like  a  musician composer   with  notes.  Dougherty on  the other   hand   works  by  coincidence allow­ ing words  to collide.
Stein  wrote  in  The   Autobiography  of
Alice B. Toklas:

I  don't hear   a  language, I  hear tones   of voices  and   rhythms, but  with   my  eyes  I see words  and  sentences ...

This quotation is definitely out  of  con­ text,  but  it says something of style. Stein wrote  into  her  work  the  tones  of   voice, and    rhythms  of   her   descriptions   were created  not   by  adjectives  but   by  verbs. There is  no  question of  "staying  true." Form  becomes subject and  when  Mandel speaks  of framing surfaces  he is speaking of form-the most apparent idiosyncrasy of   writing.  Staying  true   is   a   natural result.   In   The   National   Hen   or   Inch Man   such   a   disparity   exists   between  modes  and  subject  matter,  that   the  idea of   staying    true   becomes   virtually  im­ possible.

106
 Mandel's anthology of three  western poets is probably the  best of this selection for  review, but many  questions arise over the poems within  because  of his assertions in  the  brief  introduction. For  example, he borrows  from  W. H.  New's  Articulat­ ing West, claiming what  his  three  writers  articulate is "not  an  artistic  language of
... real  landscape but  the  landscape that is  language  itself."  He  attempts to  link Noble, Thompson and  Whyte  to both  the contemporary tradition of  experimental­ istand	to   the   older   more   formalized tradition. He  terms  their  approach as "a controlled and  measured formalism." The  game  of  surfaces   he  speaks  of,  coupled  with  Gunn's  philosophy of  staying  true, which   I   contend  is  one   and   the  same thing,  is  a  hefty statement to make.  The  choice  of   modes  by  the   three   is  where theory breaks down. For example, Noble's persona    "Arby,"   somewhat   contrived, permeates the poem  to the point  that  one suspects  its  intent. The  work   begins  to echo   back   not   with   revelation hitting home   but   with   banality.  One   is  obvi­ ously coerced  to  feel  resentment-that's part   of  Noble's  objective-but the  ex­ ploration into  the nature of mankind or whatever becomes tiring.
The  most ironic  thing,  too, is that  most
of the  poems  really  don't  require a  per­ sona,  but  can  stand   independently  fash­ ioned.  The nagging   presence   of  "Arby" (over   and   over   again) ,   however,   per­  vades  the  entire  selection.  This  is where Mandel's   theory   breaks   down.   Staying  true  becomes impossible  with  the  obvious gap   dividing  Noble's   message  from   the tale's  structure.
Thompson,  by  contrast,  has  a  much
more  vital  control  over  his language. His success is with images  through metaphor and  simile  which   really  drive  home  his stories. I say "stories" because  Thompson is concerned with telling the reader some­ thing,  not  in  the  way  of  a lesson,  but  in basic  narrative. His  imagery  is  the struc-

REVIEW ARTICLES



tural   element which   really  characterizes his work.  As an example look at "Gover­ nor   George   Wallace   Visits   Strathcona County":
Midwinter grins like a sharp  dog
as in the wind the bare trees fly -
each  branch  a pinched  dishonored  flag -
and smog confederates the sky
The  approaches to  writing, as  outlined earlier, actually fit here,  for Thompson delivers the poem to the reader in cold sensitivity,  often  reiterating the  same images as in a refrain.
Whyte's  work  I find  is difficult  to  fol­ low  with  the  rambling lines and  twisted turns  in theme  and  subject, coupled  with mixed   metaphors. The   long   narrative "Paley" is perhaps his best and  does sug­
gest  as  Mandel points  out  a  comparison to Earle  Birney's "David." The  poem centres upon  Raymond Edward Alan Christopher Paley who died April  7, 1933 at  the  age  of  26  in  an  avalanche near Skoki in the  Canadian Rockies.  Much  of the mood  and  grandeur of the mountains is caught  by Whyte  in the very beginning of the  poem  as he relates  impending dis­ aster  and   the  feel  of death  by  repetitive imagery   with   a  slightly   onomatopoetic tendency.
The  enjambment of lines  (as is charac­
teristic  generally  in contemporary poetry) is  in   fact   used   effectively   here   for   a change, but even noting these elements of Whyte's work, there are faults which need elaborating as well. Staying true  requires a measure  of formalism, no matter how experimental. With  Whyte  this can be applied  most specifically  with  "Paley".
Although there  is an obvious  similarity to   Birney,   the   style   of   the   narrative more closely resembles the work of French poet   Blaise   Cendrars.  The   comparison with   some   of   his   longer   works   leads me  to  believe   that   Whyte   might   have drawn his influence  there.  Even  if he did not, this style brings up a good point. The French  poet   trimmed  his  lines   to   the
 point  there  was  very  little  run-on to  the next. To effect this, it was necessary for Cendrars to tighten images.
Whyte  fails  to  control his, by contrast. Instead of utilizing  the  best elements of imagery,  he  elaborates and  repeats  him­ self  and   therefore enjambment  becomes inevitable.
Capturing disaster  as  a  result  loses its effectiveness.   It's   like   taking    a   photo­ graph of a man drowning Boo yards  away with  a  normal  lens  on  a  camera instead  of  a  telephoto  which   would   bring   the picture as  close  as  a  head-and-shoulder shot.  In  other  words,  Whyte  crowds  the narrative with  a lot  of  detail which  only distracts the reader. Even  so, the  poem  is good  and   in  some  instances  provides a much  more interesting tale  than those  of Thompson's.

Unnamed  Country
The Struggle  for a  Canadian Prairie  Fiction
by  Dick Harrison
Offers  new  insights  into the ways  in which the  prairies   have   been   perceived   and   the kinds  of  fiction which  have   resulted,  from the    early    recurring     motifs    of    derelict house, failing  patriarch and fallen wife indicative  of  people  living  in a  hostile landscape, to  the  "coming to  terms" work of  contemporary writers.
250  pages, 9 x 6,  illustrated, cloth.
$12.50.
ISBN 0-88864-019-6

Western  Canadian Dictionary  and  Phrase  Book Picturesque Language of the  Cowboy  and  the Broncho-buster
by John  Sandilands
Facsimile   of   the   1913  edition    with   an
Introduction  by John  Orrell
This  modestly-priced  work   contains a wealth    of   keen   observation  and    humor, but  also   has  a  value   in  supplying  words and   phrases   that   were   in  current   use  in
1913 and   the  meaning  of  which   has,   in
many  cases,  became  obscure.
64  pages, 9 x 6,  cloth.  $5.00
ISBN 0-88864-021 -8
Available from
The University of Alberta   Press
450  Athabasca  Hall
Edmonton,  Alberta   T6G 2E8


107







CONVERSATIONAL CRAFTSMAN

ALDEN  NOWLAN,   Smoked Glass.  Clarke Irwin,
$7-95·
WRITING REVIEWS reminds  me   of   the time  I got  dobbed   in  to  be the  judge  at the  Poochera sheep   dog  trials.   It's  easy they  said,  sinking   beers  in  the  shade  of the lean-to, just watch the dog. If the dog gets  the  sheep   through  the  course   and into  the  pen  you  won't even  notice  the joker  out  in  the  paddock running things. A bit shaky  as an analogy maybe,  but it'll do.  Think  of  the  dog  as  the  craft,  the sheep  as the language and  the  pen  as the form   of  the   poem.   Where's  the   poet? He's   the  shepherd, standing still  out  in the  middle  of the  paddock, whistling and moving  his arms,  doing  his damndest not to get in the way.
And   that's what   Alden   Nowlan   does very  well  in  Smoked Glass.  He  gets  the job done.  You  could  say he was a simple poet but that's nonsense. He gives the appearance of simplicity only  because  his craft    is  trained  and    functioning  in   a
highly  effective  fashion. It's  obvious  he's
absorbed   a  lot  of  technique from  other poets-Pound, 	Williams, and    so   on, without  the  cultural  bellyache   that   has given   many  other poets.  But  the  domi­ nant  force is his own observation. Nowlan reports. He  makes  no  great  show  of  his poetic   ability   yet  for  the  most  part   the sheep  go  in  the  pen,  the  poem  is com­ plete,  the  reader  feels satisfied,  as if some encounter  with   mindless   experience has been  set  down  this  time.  To   my  mind,

108
 
Smoked Glass is no  more  remarkable  as a   book  than   the  couple   of  others   I've read,  Bread  Wine and  Salt,  and  The Mysterious Naked  Man. Smoked Glass probably contains  a  bit more  social  com­ ment  but  there  is a consistent  quality to each   of  them,   readable,   unpretentious, conversational, as  if  the  man   has  found  his  style  and  continues  to use  it  in  the best  way  he  knows.  Nowlan   flirts  with cliche  yet  gets away  with  it  most  of  the time. The  suggestion is in "A certain kind of  holiday  man,"  that with  some  excep­ tions,  we  all  look  at  the  world   through smoked  glass;  a  simple  image  suited   to the  material Nowlan  deals  with,  the  un­ familiar entering the  ordinary, a sleeping bag   inexplicably  left   on   a   back   lawn, noises in a house, a car stuck  in the snow, violence in suburbia, perhaps summed up in these lines,

Until then  it had  been  such  an ordinary day
poached eggs on  toast, a morning newspaper
that contained no surprises
(and it's
the  unexpected that disturbs us most....

This sense of everyday  affairs being momentarily penetrated by the  bizarre  is reminiscent of the  torturer's horse scratching its behind  in  Auden's "Musee des Beaux Arts." Like the man  going deaf in  "Not   fingers  or  wool"  the  world  ap­ pears to be playing  games with humanity, and   the  poem  emerges  as  a  reaction  to that. The   struggle   is to  get  the  percep­ tions  straight, to  put  down  as clearly  as possibly what  is happening. This  Nowlan does very well. But  the  poems  themselves move into  dimensions larger  than  this, as in "Here lies," about Timothy Foley, "the  only casualty  ofjthe  Battle  of Schofield's Farm," where  the callousness of the guide towards  the absurdity of this unimportant battle  and this ridiculous individual death  is condemned in the last lines,

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Damn the  guide
for  grinning when  he
tells the  tourists this

Finishing poems is another thing  that Nowlan   does  well;  a  sign  of  a  poet  in charge   of  his  material. The  gate   shuts with  a firm snap  on the sheep  in the  pen. Often   Nowlan   relies  on   the   ending  to keep the poem  together; a dangerous business, but one in which he usually succeeds. The  poem  "The red  wool shirt" ends  with  a cliche,  "And  that  was that." You could  argue  that  it could  be left out of the poem, but it is just the right  phrase for  the placid  acceptance of the death by drowning of the  menfolk  of the  speaker. The woman  reminisces about the event, remembers as  well,  convincing little  de­ tails,    like   the    old    fashioned    wooden clothespins she's   using   to  hang  out   the washing, a button missing and  the salmon flies  on  Charlie Sullivan's hat  when  he comes  to  tell  her.  The  same  poem  also reveals  aspects  of Nowlan's sense of line. It  is not  an  oratorical line,  nor  is it par­  ticularly  dramatic. At times it's a bit dull, or  a  bit  flat,  as  if  the  poet  is muttering thoughts to himself. But when it's  needed it's there.

Poor  old  Charlie

Its  bad,  Mary, he said. I finished
hanging up  the  red  wool
shirt

and  then  I said, Charlie, its not
both  of them, and  he  said,
Mary, I'm  afraid it is.

And  that  was  that.

There is a  certain   energy   to  other   lines though  it is not the general rule. In "Knowledge and  Power" for example the movement and  visual are  incorporated in the rhythm  created  by the lines

They're cats,  of course. But  I've  got  to stop  it
-not  the  fight,
 but  the  sound of it. Got  to.
I hiss from  my bedroom window  and they scatter, one
through the  tall grass,  one into  the  bushes

In   "The  apology," a   similar   effect   IS
achieved,

Look!
I'll kneel at  your  feet,
like so,
and  beg. But you must  be quick. You  mustn't hesitate. You must  lift  me up
now

But  with  a  poem  you  feel  there's  got  to be a bit of a struggle,  a maverick   ram,  a bit of tension  before  its done.  You need a break out from  the mob of sheep, some difficulty   or   else  you  feel  cheated,  the mob  boos, the sheep  go straight, dull  and quiet  into the pen.  It's  fixed, they yell, the sheep have  been on the course  before, it's a cliche,  give us our  dough  back.
With  Nowlan   this  happens rarely,  but poems like "Under Surveillance" or "En­ tertained by the  chairman of the depart­ ment," of "The rules  of the game" show a weakening of that capacity for  incisive comment  which   the   rest   of   the   book exhibits.
Asking for something else is like saying
to Ben Jonson, listen  Ben, you're  as smart as that  Jack  Donne, why don't you write up  a storm  like he  does.  Nowlan   reports what  he  observes  going  on  in  the  world, what  he  sees, what  people   tell  him.  Yet this  is  not   as  limited  as  it  might   first appear. The poems  are  inventive in  that they speculate upon what  is happening behind  the surface  level. There are no explosive associations of one image  with another, no hanging of one line against another in excited  rhythm. The poems move in orderly  fashion.

109

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Perhaps  the  other important  thing   is that   people  other than  academics or  fel­ low poets can read,  understand and enjoy Smoked Glass. What the geographers call "river  capture"  is  happening to  poetry.  All   the   vital   small   streams  are   being grabbed by  a  huge  meandering monster  called  academic poetry.  Nowlan  is a poet with  the  capacity  to  appeal  to  a  much  wider  readership. The poet(academic is a  two-headed monster   who  often   writes out of  the  wrong   head   by  mistake   and reads   with   the   wrong   set  of  eyes  with malice  aforethought.
To   write   so  that    many   people   can
understand, as Nowlan  does, is not the academic sin we have been  led to believe. Canadian poetry  needs it.

KEVIN ROBERTS


THE OTHER GALT

a. B.  TIMOTHY,  The  Galts:  A Canadian  Odys­ sey  John   Galt   1779-1839.   McClelland  & Stewart.

THERE HAS  BEEN  A great  revival  of  inter­ est  in  recent   years  in  John Galt.  There have been scholarly  editions, a biography, critical  articles   in   the  learned   and   the literary  journals. The  pioneering studies of R. K. Gordon  (Toronto, 1920)  and  of Jennie  Aberdein   (Oxford,  1936)   have finally   begun   to  pay   off.  The  interest, however,   has  been  confined   to  one  side only  of Galt:  Galt  the  novelist,  and  the Scottish  novelist at  that-my  own  biog­ raphy of  I972  was deliberately sub-titled "The Life of a Writer."
But there always have been two Gaits, carefully kept  apart by Galt  himself.  He even went to the extent  of writing two separate  autobiographies,  the    Literary Life  (recounting his life as a writer) and the   Autobiography   (the   record    of  his public  achievements, notably  his involve­ ment  with Canadian affairs). This  "other

I I 0
 Galt" has  been played  down  by the liter­ ary  critics.  But,  to  the  end   of   his  life, Galt's  "philanthropic dream" (which  was also a dream of personal power) mattered more  to  him  than  his  novels. The Auto­ biography    is  twice   the   length  of   the Literary  Life.
It is good  to  see  that   this  other Galt, first revealed  by R. K. Gordon of the University   of   Toronto,  has   begun    to attract the  attention of  other  Canadian­ based    scholars.    Galt's   novel    of   I 83 I, Bogle  Corbet   (which  the  Scottish-based scholar  is inclined  to neglect  because  it is not  Annals   of the   Parish)    has  recently  been given a new look, in the  New Cana­ dian  Library edition, by  Professor  Eliza­ beth   Waterston   of   the    University  of Guelph:  Bogle Corbet as  "the first  and still  typical   Canadian  hero,"  the   novel not  a  spin-off  from   the   novel   of  rural Scotland  but  a  new  beginning, an  early piece  of  Canadian writing. It  is  clearly time  that  Galt,  not  the  Scottish  novelist, but  the Canadian founding father, Cana­ da Company superintendent for two years in  Upper Canada, should  receive  proper attention.
Professor  Timothy's book,  the  first of a two-part  study   of   the   Galt    family   in Canada, does the  job excellently. He  has already   put  Galt   enthuiasts in  his  debt with  his  1969 annotated edition of the poems. In  The  Galts  he has  made  excel­ lent  use  not  only  of  the  Autobiography but   also   of   the   vast   accumulation  of documentation that  lies  widely  dispersed in   the   Record   Offices   in   London  and Edinburgh,   in   the   Canada   Company papers,   and   in   the   Public   Archives   in Toronto  and   Ottawa.   In   spite   of  this massive underpinning of documents, Pro­ fessor   Timothy's  narrative  moves   with economy  and  compression, resulting in  a well-written book  that  gets  all  the  essen­ tials into  I 50 pages.
I have only one complaint. I wish Pro­
fessor  Timothy had  given  full  references

BOOKS IN REVIEW



to the  documents held  in Canada (as he has for those in the Public Record Office e.g.). It  would  have saved  a lot  of  hunt­ ing  on   the  part   of   post-graduates  who may  well  be  stimulated by his  book  into parallel   or   complementary  researches.  But  this  is a  very minor  grumble. Profes­ sor Timothy's researches reveal that  Galt's Autobiography   (which    has    sometimes been  written off as the  diary  of a  disap­ pointed man)  is essentially  accurate. He was  disappointed. His  schemes  for  colo­ nization   outran  the   plans   of  the   local oligarchy   and    the    Canada   Company (which   wanted  to  keep  at  all  times  on side   with   "the   Government")  recalled  him.  Others  were  to  reap  where  he  had sowed. He was a founding father, even if it were to be in absentia. Professor  Timo­ thy tells  the  story with  balance,  and  with a  tact  that  Galt  (alas!) lacked.  His book is a notable addition to the growing  body of    work    on   this   still   underestimated writer.
IAN A. GORDON



CALCUTTA CHRONICLE

CLARK  BLAISE  and  BHARATI MUKHERJEE, Days and  Nights in  Calcutta. Doubleday, $8.gs.

IN ONE OF SATYAJIT RAY'S FILMS,  called Days  and  Nights  in  Calcutta, a car  load of men from  Calcutta pursue  their attrac­ tion   for   both   tribal   and   elite   Bengali women,  in  the  forests  far  from  the  city. Clark  Blaise and Bharati Mukherjee have written a kind  of travel memoir, in which they  want  to  understand  their  attraction to  Calcutta.  Clark   had   visited   the  city briefly  three   years  before; Bharati  was born and lived there.
This  is an ambitious and intimate book,
chronicling a year these Montreal authors spent  in  Bombay  and  Calcutta in  1973-
 74· For a reader  like me who has lived in Calcutta, Bombay  and  Montreal, it  rings bells on  many  levels of  memory   and  ex­ perience.    It  is  ambitious   because   two writers  of different styles and background try   to  capture  the  complexity  of  their involvement with disparate aspects  of life in India. The larger  contribution is from Clark  but  Bharati's is better written and better  pruned, and  to me,  more  interest­ ing. It  is an  intimate book  because  these two   writers   are   also   married  to   each other, and  each  describes  what  the  other is experiencing; there  are  spousely  asides about   the  other's  reactions, moods,  pre­ conceptions, or cultural  background.
While   in   India,  Bharati  wrote   her recent    novel    Wife,  and    Clark    wrote articles including one on ice hockey. They gave  lectures,   and   organized  workshops for  the  United  States   Information  Ser­ vice. We learn  a great  deal about Bharati, who  is  from   a  prosperous East  Bengali brahmin   family   turned   wealthy   by   a pharmaceutical venture  in   Calcutta. Little   is  said   about   Clark's  origins   in North   Dakota  and   Florida.  They   were married while attending the  Iowa  Writers  Workshop,   and   went   to   live,   perhaps temporarily, in Montreal.
The   book  is  organized  in   two  parts, and   each   writer   has   an  epilogue. This duality  offered  opportunities for fine counterpoint writing, but  the work  is not disciplined  in  that  manner. Occasionally an event  like a wedding or film premiere is  reported  by  both   Clark   and   Bharati. We  can  thus  anticipate the  potential of the Rashomon-effect if it were employed consistently: it  would  confer on  the  text the  fullest  advantages of  their  two  quite different perspectives and  experience. Meanwhile  they   are   also   re-examining their  own  relationships; Bharati  is  able to see Clark  in an environment unfamiliar to  him  but  familiar to  her,  while  Clark tries  to separate his relationship to  Bha­ rati  and  to  India   (which would  at  least

I I I

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



amuse  linguists,  as Bharat is the  Sanscrit name  for much  of what  is now  India).
There is much  reflection on  epistemo­ logical   questions -on   how   one   knows India, how  one  discovers  the  truth, and  what   stance   should   be  taken   as  writer  towards "facts" or  "India," or  towards  one's   audience.  Clark's  project  is  quite  clear:

What is  the  "real" Bombay, the  real  India, the  real  anything for  a fiction writer?

How  is an outsider to  understand? Literally?
-certainly  not.

I  wanted to   acquire  India   to   replace  all that I had  lost  or  outgrown. I even  planned to set  a novel  there; I've never  spent a year anyplace without writing about it.

In  I975, Clark  later  decided that  his un­ intended  accomplishment  was   that   he "would  see  clearly   for  the  first  time ... that  whole  bloated  dropsical giant called the   West,   that   I  thought  I  knew  pro­  foundly." All this is embedded in a wealth  of detail  for which  he has a keen eye and ear,  though early  on  he grasps  (but  does not  analyse)   one  of the  funny and  bitter  truths  about    travelling and   reportage: "One shouldn't ask  the  questions I  ask;  all the information I've elicited is vaguely useless." Surely  his  task  as a  writer  is to make  it  vaguely   useful,  or  wait   until  it becomes  so?
Bharati's  project  is  just  as  ambitious and  complex, but  more  self-reflexive.  She re-explores  the   networks  of  her  family, and  reflects on her  childhood and school­ ing  ("the geometry of one's birth") while meeting  wealthy    former   classmates    or film  makers  like  Satyajit  Ray.  She  is as much  concerned with  a  stance  to take  as with    modes    of    discovery.    Confirming there  is such  a  thing  as the  Hindu imagi­  nation,  she  sees  it  in  "the  inspired and crazy  vision"  of  a  sculptured frieze  of a temple, marking "the enormity of detail. Nothing has  been  excluded." The  mes­ sage  of  this  vision  is "merge -there  are

I I 2
 no  insides  and  outsides,   no  serpents,   no gods."  In  contrast to "traditional" India, "where metaphor and  reality  continually change   places,"  she  says  "we  have  con­ fined    ourselves    to    single    obsessions." Faced  with  the  stark  contrasts of life  in Calcutta she feels  obliged  to take  a non­  judgmental stance:

Irony  is  the   privilege  of  observers  and   of affluent   societies.    [In  spite   of]   having  set myself  up  as  an   interpreter of  the  slightest signs ... it  was not  a  time  to  judge.

Nevertheless   there   is  judgment about literary   cultures. Both  authors are  awed by the scope of the  Bengali  literary world
-the sheer  volume  of production, the density   of   writers    and    poets    on   the ground, and the number of publications (there are  about  I 30 million  Bengalis  in India and  Bangladesh). Both  are  writers for  whom   the   important   audience  lies, they  say,  in  America. Bharati  contrasts the  Bengali  and  American situation with her feelings about  Canada:

While  changing citizenship is easy, changing cultures is not.... In  Canada I feel  isolated, separate in  the  vastness of  this  underpopu­ lated    country.... I  cannot    make    myself visible   at  all   as   a   Canadian   writer.  The literary world  in  Canada  is  nascent, aggres­ sively  nationalistic, and  self-engrossed.... I cannot yet  write   about   Montreal. It  does not  engage my  passions.  It is caught up  in passion  all  its  own.

Clark   is  led  to  ask,  in  the  face  of  the vitality    of   the    Bengali    literary  scene, where  his "own  energy  and  commitment have gone?"
One  of the abiding difficulties with this book  is that  nothing has  been  excluded. I feel it should  have  treated only their experiences in  Calcutta, and  emphasized those aspects of life to which they had privileged  access:  family life, servants, gossip,  keys and   security,  and   the  wed­ ding;   or   the   literary,  film  and   artistic community  and    its   audiences;   or   the sophisticated ladies  whom  Bharati  knew

BOOKS IN REVIEW



or  met  and   the  men  at  their  elbows  at evening parties, the  Number Ones  in tea, their   Clubs   and   the   anatomy  of   their boredom. Doubtless the  authors  weighed all  this  and  may  have  debated it  in  an­ ticipation of reviewers' comments.  But it would  be a good  book for anyone visiting India  for   the  first  time,  and   it   is  very good in its observations on family life, on elite  society  and   on  artistic and  literary  conditions. It is a book which  travels  well
-I read  it  in  the  forests  of British  Co­ lumbia   and   the   Mississippi   delta.  Even after  reading all this about  them,  I would still like to meet  the authors.

ROBERT S. ANDERSON



POET'S EFFORT

MICHAEL  HARRis, Sparks.  New  Delta, $2.00. DAVID   soLWAY,  The    Road   to   Arginos.  New
Delta, $2.50.
RICHARD SOMMER, Milarepa. New Delta, $2.50. RICHARD SOMMER, Left    Hand    Mind.   New
Delta, $2.50.

As  LONG  AS   CANADIAN  LITERATURE   is in competition with  American Literature then   it  will  necessarily  follow  the  same form.  Neither eager  nationalism nor aca­ demic   recognition  can   rush   literature; neither can  overconcern for  native  poets. Whatever  they   may   do   in   later   years, these  three  young  writers  here  introduce nothing distinctive except effort.
Milarepa  is a  very  odd  book  to  come from   an   urban    Wasp   in   Montreal. It contains nine long poems, each a series of shorter  poems;   but   all   are   very   much alike. Sommer has rambled over a  whole area  of Eastern philosophies, myths,  and religions,  so much  as to make  the readers feel  they  are  reading not  a  poem  but  a book  of worship.  It  is especially  difficult to decide  who  the narrator is speaking to if not  the  reader, and   just  who  this  nar­ rator  is. I  have  the  feeling  that  Sommer
 has   not   unravelled  this   either:   "These are  poems,  but  whose  poems  it is hard  to say."  Then  the  meditations  can   hardly be   poems.   They   are   meditative  tracts which    can   only   be   valued    from    the authenticity  of   Sommer's  source-not provided by this text.
Left  Hand  Mind  is another odd  book, where   the  verses  are  not  in  typeset  but are   a  reproduction  of  Sommer's  hand­ writing,  using  his  left  hand   (presumably this   being  a  special   task  if   he  is  right  handed). The poems  are  identified with successive   dates,   which   is   probably  to show  their   connecting  development. In­ stead,   like   Milarepa,   each   seems   very much  like the same poem.  Again,  as with Milarepa, the lines and  stanzas  appear to be  measured  arbitrarily. Still,  this  is  not enough  to break  up a droning monologue of  more   Eastern-religious-philosophy meditations:

out  early  morning for  t'ai  chi
studio floor  littered groggy  bumblebees turn  on  heater start the  form

there  is nowhere but  here  no elsewhere then  where is here 	here 	here
by the  time  you say that 	here  is there

Other subjects  in the book are  just as esoteric.  Whole   tracts   describe   the  rap­ tures   of   sex,  reflection,    pedantry,   and Sommer's "spasal" gazing.  Oddly,  Som­  mers  admits   his  fuzzy intentions  as,  "re­  lease and  a sudden  access/  to what?/ the poems  are  my only  reasons" given  by his left  hand  "to  remind   you ... of  the  rich clumsiness   of   our   access ... that's  the poem i guess." I guess not;  not  with  these verses.
Michael Harris's Sparks is a more earnest effort at lyrical poems largely concerned with love or occasional roman­ tic interludes. And some short verses suc­ ceed. Yet Harris draws strongly  on Imag­ ism,  while  at   the  same   time  displaying the  shortcomings  of   this  genre.  Such   as his  failure    to   follow  a  vital   image,   to


113

BOOKS IN REVIEW



discover  a larger  significance  and  make  a more  convincing appeal to  the  reader. Images in a poem must inspire cognizant associations  or  else  the  poem  becomes  a flat description.
Solway  has attempted something quite
daring in  The Road  to  Arginos:   he  has written  in   rhyme   and   metre-though rarely   in  traditional  designs-to  query the  modern state,  to try ornithology, and to  tell  of  Trolls.  Frequently,  his  verses refer  to classical  myths  to show how they parallel his own  dilemmas, and  how  the subjects   might   fare   in  a  contemporary situation. Much  of his poetry  is clever and very   carefully  worked;   Solway   shows great  verbal  felicity  and  humour. Yet the poems   seem  curiously   empty;  somehow they take  place  nowhere, with  no people; somehow   they  are  just  not  a  vital  exer­ cise. Also,  Solway  often  overexpands an image   or  stretches an   analogy   too  far. Most  likely, Solway could write  excellent  comedy; much  of  his  talent   would  work this  way. Unlike Sommer, Solway  is very clear  on his task with  poetry:

I choose  a Master's stern example. I confess  to a prosodic itch
but  I contend that it is such
as  by a kind  of mental torque,
by love, austerity, or  work, to turn the  Eleatic key
on  your  discontinuity .

He   seems   to   be   working   m   the   right direction.
Unfortunately  when    Canada  is   en­ couraging an  indigenous literature,  weak American literary  theories   are  followed. Imagism and  its corollary Free Verse has been   all   but   exhausted,  so  that  Harris  and  Sommer  would  do  well  to  attempt something new or an innovation of some­ thing old, which is what  Solway has done. The  Road    to   Arginos    is  a   refreshing change  from   Vers   Libre   and   the   way poor  poets  have used  it  to  hoax  readers.  Perhaps  Harris could   become  the  better  poet  insofar  as he appears to inherit that

I 14
 special impressionable poetic  mind. Nevertheless, he needs to work more carefully, which is why Solway succeeds, again,  over his lofty erudition.

STUART NEWTON



ORCHESTRATED NEW BRUNSWICK

DAVID ADAMS  RICHARDS,   Blood  Ties. Oberon,
$11.95·
BLOOD TIES, David  Adams  Richards' sec­ ond  novel,  is the  one  hundredth  title  to be issued by Oberon. In my judgment the novel  is a  classic, and  Oberon is indeed  fortunate to  have  been  the  publisher of such  a fine book.
Superficially, Blood Ties  is the account of  a  few  days  in  the  lives  of  the  Mac­
Durmot	family    of	New 	Brunswick's "North  Shore", concentrating upon   the months  of July  I967,  February Ig68, and October  I g6g.  The  point   of  view  de­ veloped  is  internal and   involves  all  the MacDurmots: Maufat and  Irene; Irene's "wild"  daughter,  Leah,    and    her    "no good"  husband, Cecil; and  the  MacDur­ mot children born  in wedlock, Cathy, the adolescent    daughter,  and   her   younger brother, the  one-eyed,   self-tortured Or­ ville.  All  the  other   characters  are  seen through the eyes and  the memories  of the MacDurmots.   Events    are    so   selected, however,   and   memories   so  dovetailed, that  behind  the fragmented surface  mon­ tage  of individual viewpoints, the  reader can  gradually focus  in  growing  depth as the   novel  proceeds   on  an   unshaken - almost  unshakeable-way of life  that  is rural  New Brunswick.
Rural New  Brunswick  is a remarkable
instance  of a society that  has substituted ritual    behaviour  for   ideational   intelli­ gence  in  all  avenues   of   life-religion,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



sex, commerce, speech  habits  and  speech rhythm, politics,  work.  All are  subject to implicit tacit   procedures  that  inevitably swallow   up,  absorb,   or  kill  attempts at personal expression  which  may be at odds with   ways  of  being   that   have   evolved among   hard-working   people 	through generations  of  living   with   one   another apart from  the  rest  of  the  world  on  the edge of a frontier that seemed  to demand standardization for  survival. It does  not matter what  the characters in Blood  Ties do  as individuals: the  Leahs  in  time  be­ come  Irenes; the Orvilles  and  Cecils turn into   Maufats as  years  of  routine   wear away   the  sharp edges  of  self-expression and  blunt  the "crazy" urge for impossible things.  This  one gradually  realizes  as one reads.   Yet   the   ultimate   effect   of   this realization  is  not  depressing. The  sure familiarity  of    conventional  day-by-day  intercourse as exemplified by Maufat and
Irene and  not  the  vagaries   of  passion  a
 la Cathy-John are  what  produce the  real "blood  ties", the maturity of love that justifies a  human  family.
At  the  same   time,  however,  that   the New  Brunswick   way  of  life  finds  a  kind of  ultimate  justification  in  Blood   Ties, its development is, incidentally, very  irri­ tating to  the  reader. One   keeps  asking one's  self,  "Why  does  it  have   to  be  so narrow, so unfair?" Here  are  in  fact  two societies   within    the   bosom   of   a   com­ munity,   within   the   bosom  of   a  family. Men  associate  and  work  with  men.  Wo­ men   associate   and   work   with   women.  Apart   from   passion   and   procreation, a man  and  a  woman   do  not  meet  as  per­  son to person,  and  when they  do meet  in any  other   than   the  most   primal sense, they  have  so  little  in  common that  their  meetings  result in  misunderstanding and  hostility.  This  compartmentalization of sexes  is  the   more   compelling  in  Blood Ties  in  that  David  Adams  Richards pre-





Fiddlehead Poetry Books
(from  the current list)
Mother Myths, by Jacqueline d'Amboise 	$s.oo
Twenty-Five, by George  McWhirter    $3.00
Black Wings, White Dead, by Michael  Bullock 	$4.00
Against  Perspective, by Fred Cogswell 	$4.00
Some  Crumbs, by Bawnie  Oulton 	$2.00
Counting Gifts, by Bryan  Hennessey    $2.00
Under This World's Green  Arches, by Mary  Willis   $3.00
The Water Book, by Ann J. West 	$4.00
Esox Nobilior, by J. Michael  Yates    $4.50
Order  from: FRED  COGSWELL P.O. Box 4400
English Department, University  of New Brunswick
Fredericton, N.B.  E3B 5A3
(CATALOGUE SUPPLIED ON  REQUEST)



I 15

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



sents   it   without  comment  simply   as  a thing  which  is so.
I  realize  that  the  foregoing treats with
the novel more in terms of its social impli­ cations than  its artistic merit. It would  be an  injustice to David  Adams Richards to say that  he wrote  Blood Ties to exemplify  ideas of rural  New Brunswick which  have been my personal interests for many years. Novels  are   primarily about  people   and  what  happens to them,  and  if  the  novelist does  honestly  get  inside  people,  the  kind of  secondary ideas  I  have   been  writing about  must   of   necessity   follow.   David  Adams  Richards is primarily interested in what  it  is like  to  be  young  and  growing  up   in   rural   New   Brunswick,  and   his young   people-Cathy,    Orville, Leah, Cecil-are rendered  with   a  sensitivity and  honesty  that  is completely  convinc­ ing. Secondarily, David  Adams  Richards is interested in the technique of  the novel, and in this work his orchestration of time, event,   conversation,  and   memory   is su­ perbly  conceived and  almost  as well exe­ cuted  in a prose that is often  highly poetic.  Blood Ties  is a  beautiful book  and  does, in  Richards'  way,  for  rural New  Bruns­ wick what Faulkner's novels in Faulkner's way,   do   for   rural  Mississippi.   Where, however,  can   Richards  go  from   here?  More  of  the  same  would,  I  feel, be anti­ climax.

FRED COGSWELL



STORY AND TELLER

MARGARET    GIBSON     GILBOORD,    The   Butterfly
Ward. Oberon, $8.95,  $3·95·
JACK   HODGINs,   Spit   Delaney's   Island.  Mac­
millan,  $g.gs.
ALISTAIR    MACLEOD,    The    Lost   Salt    Gift   of
Blood. McClelland & Stewart, $8.g5.

NEAR THE END of  Jack   Hodgins'  story "Spit  Delaney's Island," Delaney, after imagining a violently  dramatic ending to

I 16
 his story  ("Like  a movie") , reminds him­
self of the banal  actuality:

It isn't  true,  though. That isn't  the  way  it happened. Maybe   a  few   years  from   now when  I remember  that  day  at  the  Wooden Nickel  I won't  be  able  to  tell  which  was true  and  which I've  made  up. It won't  even matter. I will probably  remember  the made­ up one clearest, so that  when  I drive by the store in my camper  I can  think  that at least I offered  that  fellow  who  runs  it  a  bit  of excitement, a  story  he  can  remember. And I will probably  think  that, for  him  and  the others   who   work   in   there   with   him,   I offered a bit of myself, I exposed something.

Besides reiterating the  matter-of-fact  or­ dinariness   of   his    character,    Hodgins achieves   here   a   nice   psychological  ac­ curacy: Delaney,  in  the  very  striving to be honest,  realizes  that even  for  him  fic­ tion   is  likely  to   supplant  reality.   The passage   accelerates   the   realization  that  there   is  not  nearly   so  much,   either   in Delaney's  secret  poetic   personality or  in the  hitch-hiking poet  Phemie   Porter, as he invents.  But this realization would  still exist, its poignancy  undiminished, with much  less grinding of the literary gears. Hodgins himself seems to be thinking out loud  at   the  end   of  the  story,  with   the result  that  the  literary question  (what is the   truth  of  fiction?)   overwhelms the moral  dilemma  and  the  psychological  in­ sight,  and   tends   to  make   the  story  its servant.
Hodgins' collection  of ten  stories  takes
Vancouver Island   as  its  centre   and  the personalities of  its  apparently  ordinary, usually  rural,  people  as its  interest. This focus doesn't  make  the  book  as explicity regional  as might  be  expected, although there  are  carefully   observed   details   ("a ditch   clogged   with   dry   podded  broom and   a  wild  tangle   of  honeysuckle   and blackberry   vines") ,   and    "The  Trench Dwellers" includes some amusing specula­ tions   on   the   Island    identity.   Hodgins shares  Spit  Delaney's taste  for  "a  bit  of excitement," and  his stories often depend

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



on  an  incongruity slipping  into  the  gro­ tesque.  In  "Every Day  of  His  Life" Mr.  Swingler's courtship  of  Big  Glad   takes place  on her  roof  while  he  paints moun­ tain  vistas and she drinks dandelion wine ; in "Three Women  of  the  Country" Mrs. Starbuck kills  her  calf  with  an  axe  and  hides  her  son from  the  world  in an  attic.  Such  experiences are  successfully  drama­ tized  externally,  but  lack  an  echo  in  the inner   world   of   feeling.   Often  Hodgins seems simply to be reaching for the grand  effect-the  same  feeling  one  has  about  the symbolism of the  dividing line  in the opening story, or  the  strained allegory  of "At  the Foot of the Hill, Birdie's  School." Indeed the  more  one  thinks  on  Hodgins' stories  the  more  apt  Delaney's reflection on fiction becomes. It is not the elaborate, movie-like   gesture   that   reveals,  or  "ex­ poses"  the  characters, but  precisely  the simple,    seemingly    unremarkable,   mo­ ments  which  Delaney  wants  to  reject.
Alistair  MacLeod, in seven  stories col­ lected  under  the  title  The Lost  Salt  Gift of Blood, is more  content with illuminat­ ing the  commonplace. Each  of  the  stories moves  toward that  moment of  determin­ ing,   or   appreciating,   otherness,  of  dis­ covering that   another's  perception  of exactly  the same experience can  be com­ pletely  different, and   yet  just  as  valid. MacLeod builds to his quiet  revelations mainly  through the subtle power and  pain of family  ties, most established in the fish­ ing   and   mining  communities  of   Cape Breton.   His  emphasis   on  memory  raises the  same  questions about fiction  and re­ membering which  so perplexed  Spit  De­ laney.  Several  of  MacLeod's  stories  are told  in  the  historical  present:   "We   are in   the   kitchen   of   our   house   and   my mother is  speaking  as  she  energetically pokes  at  the  wood  and  coal  within her stove."  But  this  formula, which   should mark   an  intimate  and   confiding narra­ tive, can feel, ironically, austere, as if the narrator  were  speaking into   a  tape   re-
 corder, setting  his experiences down  for history,  as artifacts, rather than telling  a story. The  immediacy of "we  are" is dis­ rupted  and   diminished  by  the  obvious retrospective, with  the result  that the  nar­  rative  seems  coy  rather than  revealing.
It is  this   danger,  no   doubt,  which makes    the    historical   present   so   rare
among    modern  storytellers. MacLeod's repeated use of it indicates that he values its  aura  of  the  old-fashioned,  its  sugges­ tion  of  stories  being  swapped  around a hot   stove.  And   even   the   stories  which don't use the  technique  share  a  tone  of thoughtful nostalgia. An incident in "The Boat,"  for   example,   demonstrates  the contradictory responses evoked  by the  re­ constructing memory. The narrator, who teaches   in  a  midwestern  university,  re­ calls  his  Cape  Breton  boyhood,  and  par­ ticularly  his father's harsh  life and  cruel death on  the  sea. One  of  the  most  vivid memories  is of  his  father  drunk,  singing for  hours  through  his  repertoire of  sea shanties,  war  songs,  and  Gaelic  drinking songs for a group  of tourists. As the  nar­ rator   recalls  his  own   response:  "I  was ashamed  yet  proud, young   yet  old  and  saved yet forever  lost, and  there  was noth­ ing  I could  do  to control my legs  which trembled  nor   my  eyes  which   wept  for what  they  could  not  tell."  The  narrator is delighted, yet  hurt  by his own  insensi­ tivity,   to  discover   that   his   father  is  a frustrated artist, linked through song with generations of primitive suffering. On  the other hand  he is embarrassed at the prodi­ gality of the emotions, and  the fawning of the tourists. So it is, in a sense, with  read­  ing MacLeod: the stories, especially  "The Return"  and   "The  Road to   Rankin's Point," are  often  emotionally subtle,  but the  self-conscious  remembering can  turn revelation into  contrivance. The  quoted passage, for example, quivers on  the edge of   excess,   and   drifts   into   increasingly vague  sentiment.  The  self-assertive  nar­ rator, again  reminiscent of Spit Delaney,


117

BOOKS IN REVIEW



is always adjusting to try to put  things straight: "I say this again  as if it all hap­ pened  at  once  and  as if all  of my  sisters were  of  identical ages  and  like so  many lemmings  going   into   another  sea   and,  again, it  was  of  course   not  that  way at all."  But  his  hesitations and  repetitions do  more  to deflect  interest  from  the  guts of   a   father/son    relationship  than    to arouse  concern for the  narrator's struggle  with  his story.
By contrast the  six stories  in  Margaret Gilboord's  The   Butterfly   Ward   startle with  their continually deepening illumina­ tion of individual minds. Gilboord writes, in a  prose  that  is tense  and  exact,  of the agony  and   the  lyrical  clarity of  people going  mad.  She  knows  the  combination of discovery  and  mystery  that  can  come with   careful   attention  to  her   narrator. For  instance,  Jenny in  "Ada": her  sus­ tained   interest   in   others,   and   her   re­ strained comments, just hint  at  the depth of  her  own  feeling: "I  can't  remember how   I   reacted   [to   Leslie's   eating  her water glass],  I think  I  just said  oh Christ when   the   blood  spurted  onto   my  leg." The simple vocabulary and  the minimal punctuation here  suggest  the  urgency which   the  incident  has  in  Jenny's  own mind,  and  the  straining she  does  to  pre­ tend  such  things  are  ordinary (or  have they become so for her?) . Similarly Kira, in   the   title   story,   concentrates   on   her ward-mate, Mrs.  Watson, and  on  intro­ ducing her  to  the  frightening  neurologi­ cal  examination which  she  calls  the  but­  terfly  treatment. Kira's  reputation in  the hospital as  a  stoic  is  at  once  confirmed and  yet neatly  denied  by her  own  words, most  tellingly  in  her  obsession  with  the ironically beautiful butterfly which  hovers behind  almost everything she says:  "One sees  Dr.   Carter   only   during  the   great  pinning  day  or  as  he  flies  through  the ward, white  coat  flapping...."
Perhaps Gilboord's cool skill with  such understated  revelations is at  its  finest  in

118
 "Considering Her  Condition." The  story is told  from  the  point  of view of Stephen Davis, as he perceives  the  pregnancy and eventual suicide  of  his wife. As a  televi­ sion writer  and producer Stephen watches  Clare -her confusions, her  fear of preg­  nancy,    her    biting    his   hand-  with camera-like detachment. But  beyond  our growing    recognition    that    Stephen   is smothering  his  wife's  feelings   and   dis­ missing    her    intelligence,   Gilboord   is quietly    working   toward   the    moment when we realize that  the story is as much  a study of Stephen. We begin  to consider his  condition, too,  first  with  anger,   and then  with  something like pity:  he  is obsessed with his job, unable to feel any emotion, impotent, and  finally,  it  seems, as insane  as Clare  ever  was.
The Butterfly Ward, then, makes an answer  to  Spit  Delaney. Here  are  stories that  'we can remember,' that  'expose something' of the  person  telling  the story. But   they   are   memorable  precisely   be­ cause  they  ignore  the  grandiose  gestures
of the  movies. This,  of course,  is a point
Jack   Hodgins  is  making,  but   it   never quite  takes  hold  in  his  own  stories.  Ali­ stair   MacLeod's  story-tellers,  concerned less with  'excitement' and  more  with  the fragile and  essential relationships between  people, occasionally go too far in offering
'a  bit  of  themselves.'   In   The   Butterfly
Ward   the  distinctions  between   what   is
'true' and  what  is 'made up'  become  es­ sentially   meaningless, as  they  will  when story and  teller  become  one.

LAURENCE  RICOU


NORTHERN JOURNEY

CLAUDE LIMAN,  Landing. Sesame  Press,  $3.00.

LANDING  is  the  newest  and  perhaps the most interesting book yet published by Sesame  Press-the young  Windsor  pub­ lishing  house  and  labour of  love  run  by

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Gene McNamara, Peter  Stevens, and Dorothy Farmiloe. The book is a kind of poetic  North American Education: a loose sequence  of poems  dealing with  the experience of immigration, the author's move from Colorado to north  Ontario. Within these  poems  Liman investigates  a number of  attitudes, therein attempting to come  to terms  with  the meaning of his move, trying to understand the elusive meanings of the harsh  and  unfamiliar environment of the Canadian Lakehead, and  expressing  his discomfort at  being an American in Canada in the I 97o's. In the first section  of  the  book  ("An  American in Canada")  the  voice one hears  is often ill at  ease,  occasionally  querulous,  some­ times defensive  or hostile; in some  of the poems  of  the  first  part,  however,  and  in the  concluding section   ("Landed"), the reader  begins  to hear  a different tone, as a  new  awareness   and   understanding of place  begins  to  compensate him  for  his sense of displacement.
The  journey   into   a  new  country  de­
scribed  in the book is not only more  than a physical one, it is also more  than  simply emotional; ultimately it  is a  poetic  pro­ gress. The  poems record  a search for, and a   struggle   with,   poetic   voice.   We  see, initially,    that    some   change   has   taken place   when,   in   the   second   poem,   the speaker   wanders  his  darkened  and   still strange  house and hears

the  whoosh  of  the  vaporizer that in the old days might have  lived in a poem  all by itself.

Small   poems   of   objectified    experience having eluded  him, the speaker finds him­ self seeking  instead  to define  his  relation­ ship to the new world he discovers around  him,  but  his first  responses  are  somehow unsatisfactory: he is depressed and  there­ fore  in stasis, anxious  and  thus  unable  to feel  at   home.  He   moves   into   prose  to describe going to a  Finnish  sauna; want­  ing  to  write  a  poem  about  Mount  Me-
 Kay,  he  finds  himself   encountering "an alien  landscape  that   will  not  scan";  at­ tempting   to   capture  one   moment    of experience   (in   "The   Elusive   Dizziness Poem"), he  finds  instead   that  "My  life,
that   old   cave   painting, I spreads  on   a
surface   thin  as an  eyelid."  After  reading
an  interview with  a Canadian writer, he responds  as to a new language :

The print blurs,  beds  down  in  the  page; lamplight softens  in  all four  corners, drawing me off from  this solid  room where  I've  known  who  I am
towards an  invisible ell
where  a stranger keeps  syntax.

("Late Night Research")

Meanwhile he exercises, frightened of mortality and  trying  to find his body's language as  well  as  his  mind's  ("in   last
night's   TIME, another poet  dead  I and
this  one  not  sweating yet"),  attempts to
keep  "old rituals  alive," and  struggles against  his sense of stalemate:

and  the  snowsuit of my daughter binds -an  omen   of  bunched fabric in  the  cogs of all  journeys.

My teeth  grit  like a clogged zipper, the  curse  caught between them
like old food.

("The Bind")

In    the   book's   conclusion,  the   poet begins   to  free  himself   at   last  from   his binds,  not  so much  by resolving  his  diffi­ culties   as  by  recognizing them,  and   in consequence seeing   the  meaning  of  the experiences that  surround him,  as  of  his wife practicing her "Morning Scales":

But  our  hands are  tense in  those  taut  strings;
our  rigid  posture won't relax
until  we have  climbed into  comfort again:
slow, careful, articulate  notes,
scales  to the  familiar.

Significantly  this   relaxation,  this   re­
discovery  of  familiar objects,   results  not

119

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



only in poems in which  the poet moves at last from his past to his present, from America   to   Canada,  but    also   poems which  show him  more  open  and  outward
-turning away  from  self-absorption and preoccupation to  a  new  awareness of his family and of his interactions with others: a  tenth   anniversary  is  seen  as  fulfilling the  promise  of familiarity that  has grown out  of having  once  been a stranger to his wife;  watching his son asleep  or  pushing his daughter in a backyard  swing now becomes suitable material for poetry. The visit  of  an  insurance salesman   brings  a new awareness  of death, one  that  he now responds  to  not  with  poetry  or  with exercise,  but   with  an  intense   awareness of   the   time   that    threatens  the   whole family  and  yet also draws  them  together. It is  this  new  sense  of  time  that   he  ex­ presses   in   the   book's   final   poem,   one which  concludes with  his imagining him­ self become  a part  of the  distant  past  for future generations to come:

My  broken watch and  yesterday's paper are  shards at  this  level of our  cave. When the  future chips  back  to us
with  its delicate tools,  assemble these  bones:
buildings, textbooks, students, the  swish of cars,
pavements, concerns, a man  in his high
office,
his files, his desk, his shelves,
the  wind  on  all  buildings the  corniced  howl of earth's oldest  time  he's  learning to tell.

Liman says that  he  first  began  to take himself   seriously   as  a   poet   around  the time   that   he  came   to  Canada in  1973. Clearly  the  experience of a new  environ­ ment   provided   him   with   an  important topic   for   poetic   investigation.  Landing,  the  result  of that, is an interesting record of  a  northern  journey,  one  which  seems also to have been a process of maturation.

RUSSELL M. BROWN




120
 FATAL DISTRACTION

HUGH  GARNER, Death in  Don Mills. McGraw- Hill  Ryerson, $8.95.

OIROT  MAY   BE    DEAD,    but   McDumont hves. Inspector Walter McDumont, that is, principal agent  of Hugh Garner's first murder  mystery,  The   Sin   Sniper,   and now of its sequel,  Death in Don Mills­ a  veritable Maigret, Holmes  and   Poirot all  in  one.  McDumont,  whose  exciting  adventures impel the reader through page after  action-packed  page  of mystery  and suspense.
There are  in  fact  one  or  two  interest­
ing things  about  this novel,  though  prob­ ably  none  that  its  author  intended. For example, the endless paragraphs of filler, though thoroughly  counter-productive as fiction, hold a perverse  fascination for the astute   critic.    It's    a    toss-up    whether Garner's  preferred  cotton   batting is the menu  for  lunch  or  the  map  of Toronto, but  we may at least observe  that  when  he resorts  to  the  latter  Garner  writes   not about Toronto per se but about the mere grid  of  its streets:

"Where's Gamble Avenue, Inspector?" "I think   your   best  bet,  Clary, is  to  turn
around  in   the   Don   Mills   Centre  and   go
south  on Don  Mills  to O'Connor Drive, turn right  on   O'Connor  to   Donlands  Avenue, and   it's   the  third or  fourth street down."
"Okay, Inspector. I got  it."

Garner's characters receive much  the same  treatment as  his locations, and  are invariably  and   repeatedly  described   in such a way as to establish  their  precise position  on  the  social  grid.  All of  this  is simply in  keeping  with  the  austere Order Ethic    which    has   permeated  Garner's work since the first page of Cabbagetown.
The good guys in  this  novel, especially
McDumont,   behave     in    a    peculiarly
courtly  fashion.  Again  and  again  McDu­ mont  curtsies and  murmurs, "Good work, Bill";   "Good   job,  Tom"-thereby  en-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW


suring the  loyalty  of  his  subordinates  as he   demonstrates  that   even   the   highest ranks  of  the  hierarchy bow  to  the  com­ mon  cause.  But  woe  betide  anyone  who profanes that  sacred  order. The wealthy lawyer  who  pulls rank  to evade  a drunk­ driving charge,  the  social   climber  who breaks   rank   by  concealing his  working­  class  origins:   these -plus  homosexuals
-are the  villains  for  whom  McDumont
reserves  the  full strength of his  acid  sar­ casm: "I'd throw  up  if  I  hear  more  fag love  confessions."
Death  in  Don Mills could  be called  a working-class  novel,   since   in   virtually
every   respect    it   betrays    a   mind   pro­ foundly conditioned by the working-class myth.   In   the  Garnerian  beehive,  every­ one   must   produce:   McDumont  detests the   unproductive  rich,  whose  money   is pe:rforce  "stolen  or  inherited." Everyone  must   keep   the   laws  of  the   hive.   And everyone,  beneath  the  superficial  differ-
 ences of rank and  function, must  be alike: McDumont tolerates Jews  and  Blacks  so long as they do a "good  job."
The   minimal   entertainment  value   of such writing  is hardly  surprising, for if the art of the working  class is kitschy or mere­ tricious,   that   of  the  working-class  myth is unspeakably  minimalist. Banality, rou­  tine  and  repetition  are   its  highest   pre­  cepts.   Together  with   the   Aesthetic  of Detail, that  niggling camp-follower of fic­ tional   forensica,   they   combine  here   to produce a work that  seems two-thirds composed  of literary sawdust.
Traditionally, reviewers of mystery novels  are  expected  to  leave   the  disen­ tanglement of the  mystery  to  the  private enjoyment of  the   reader.  In  the  event that  anyone  could  possibly  be  interested in  reading this  book,  I  take  pleasure   in refraining from  discussing  it  any  further.

ROD  WILLMOT




CANADIAN FICTION  MAGAZINE  #28

THE  SPECIAL  ISSUE FEATURING  MAVIS GALLANT

including new  fiction, worksheets, photos, an  exclusive interview at   her   home in   Paris with   editor GEOFF  HANCOCK,  art  by  JOE PLASKETT,   bibliography, and   further  contributions by  RONALD HATCH,  PETER  STEVENS,  ROBERTSON  DAVIES,  and  GEORGE
WOODCOCK.

By subscription: 4 issues  $9/year, $10/U.S.A. Single  copy  $3.75 (inc. postage) Available March 1978 from:

CANADIAN FICTION MAGAZINE P.O.  BOX 46422 STATION G VANCOUVER, B.C.,  CANADA V6R 4G7



I21

BOOKS IN REVIEW



SOCIAL CHANGE

HUGH   GARNER,  The   Intruders.  McGraw-Hill
Ryerson,  $8.g5.

ONE OF THE MOST difficult  tasks  for  the "realistic" writer   is confronted when  he brings  together characters of different social  classes. He  must  transcend the limitations of his own  social  background and  accurately depict  not  only characters whose feelings and  experiences he can identify  with, but  those whose experiences are   completely  alien   to   his   own.   The ability   to  do   just  this   is  one   of  Hugh Garner's greatest talents and  is evident  on every  page  of  his  latest   novel,  The  In­ truders.
The setting  of  the  novel  is  "Cabbage­ town," Toronto,  some  forty   years  later than  the  neighbourhood  described in  his earlier  classic. The area  is much  changed: physically,  economically,  and   more   im­ portantly, socially.  It is  no  longer  exclu­ sively  the  dwelling  place   of  those  who can't afford  anything  better; it  is a  mix­ ture  of  young "arty types,"  upper middle­  class  professionals who  have   decided  to move  back  into  the  city,  working people who  have   lived  in  Cabbagetown  all  of their lives and  see no reason  to leave now that  they  can  afford   to  do  so, long-time residents   thinking of  selling  their  homes at today's  high prices and  escaping at last, young  people striving for an  honest work­ ing class living, teen-age punks hoping  to steal  their  way  through  life,  and  drunks  who  gave  up  making  choices  years  ago.
The novel's  contrapuntal form  with  its narrative  deftly   shifting  from   scene   to scene,  character to character, is perfectly suited  to its subject  matter. No one or two characters are  dominant; the  book  care­ fully  examines the  relation of each  char­ acter  to his environment. Garner's largely descriptive goal  is a  complex  composite  social  view  of  the  Cabbagetown  neigh­ bourhood of  today. The area  is seen as a

122
 mosaic  of people  with  wide  ranging  dif­ ferences   in  interests,  view   points,  eco­ nomic  resources,  and  social  backgrounds. Their  tensions  and   points  of  agreement continually  balance   each    other.  The  members  of  the  Community  Association exert efforts toward community programs and projects, but  find little  support either locally   or   from   municipal  government officials, and eventually they see the "Out­ siders Club" becoming more popular than  their   group.    But   the   most   important aspect  of Garner's description is the atti­ tude  of the characters toward their  com­ munity,  and  the  fact   that   most  of  the residents of the area  have  uneasy feelings about the potpourri the area  has become. The  Rawleys and  the Harcourts, upper­ middleclass  families  looking  for  involve­ ment  in a more  urban life than  they  had known  in the suburbs, find that they have irreconcilable differences with  the  work­ ing  class  people   they  find   running  the business    and    community    associations.  Elsie Dales,  a  working  class  widow  and a long  time  resident, finds herself  among "intruders" with  whom  she is uncomfort­ able,  and  finds  her  son  involved  with  a stupid   destructive  teen-age gang.  With­ out  compromising himself,  Syd Tedland, a  member  of the community association, local businessman, peacemaker, and  sage, tries   to   accommodate  the    variety    of people  he  now  meets.  And   honest   and hard-working, young Jim Travis attempts to find his way in a place  that  has grown extremely   confusing. Throughout  the novel characters attempt to overcome, either  voluntarily or by the force of the situation thrust  upon them, their class consciousness and  the  limitations of their own class stratified pasts. Some have more success  than   others,   but   none   finds  it easy.
A  very   peculiar  aspect   of  the   book (and  something for which  Garner should be given great  credit) is its ability  to hold the reader's interest with almost  no action

BOOKS IN REVIEW



and  relatively little  dramatic  tension. Except for the antics  and  outbursts of the teen-age  gang, most of the characters deal with   the   problematic  relation  of   them­ selves  to  the  neighbourhood  in  a  quiet low-key  fashion. Their  alienation  builds slowly, is caused  by  subtle  things  rather than  dramatic incidents, and  can  be tem­ porarily put  aside,  but  never  completely overcome.
This  calm   tone,  especially  when  con­
trasted  to the  feelings  of bounded energy
just  waiting to  be  released   in  Cabbage­ town,  is   indicative   of   the   important change   (since  the  earlier  book)  in  Gar­  ner's   attitude  toward   the  structures of organized  society.   In   Cabbagetown  he seems  to   view   the   existing   social   and economic  structures of the  30's as unjust,  arbitrary,  and   destructive,  and   implies that  society  must be  changed  very  dra­  matically  and  very soon  even  though at­  tempts  to  change it  appear to  be futile.
But  in  The Intruders rapid   social change   also  has  its  difficulties,  it  is  too fast  and  people  can't change  as quickly. The  impetus for  the  liberal  mixed  neigh­ bourhood of the  70's is intellectual and  is exemplified  by the Rawleys  and  the  Har­ courts.  From  the perspective of his subur­  ban  home  and  his  downtown law  office Len Rawley decides  to move to Cabbage­ town.  He  reasons  that  his political  ambi­  tions  (to be a city Councilman represent­ ing the area)  will be aided,  and that  more involvement with  the  city would  produce a healthier life style. His wife and friends, the  Harcourts, agree  with  the  reasoning and  join him.  But  the  facts  of existence in a mixed neighbourhood are quite a different thing. They  discover  barriers be­ tween  themselves  and   the  working  class residents  of  the  area. Perhaps the  hope for  change   lies  in  younger  people,  like Jim   Travis,  who   becomes   a   friend  of Bonnie  Rawley.  Travis' thinking is not so rooted  in older  social orders  and  he finds less difficulty  in  relating to  Bonnie  and
 the  other  characters. It becomes  increas­ ingly   clear   that    the   most   meaningful changes  can  occur  only  as  people's   atti­ tudes change. Garner suggests  that  this is a slow evolutionary process.

GARY WERDEN



OUT OF PURDY-LAND

AL   PURDY, ed.,  Storm  Warning 2. McClelland
& Stewart.

ON  FIRST   READING  through this  book  I found   editor   AI  Purdy   everywhere. He must  be flattered. For  example:

cold's getting in and  this  beer smells
and  besides
my  chest   hurts nicotine
and   me  listening to  some  crap artist pop  poet  on  the  radio
sulking  about losing  his  job
and
all  of  a  sudden
my  desk  becomes  a  bar and   ...

and  I'm  thinking maybe Purdy's influence is too pervasive in this collection of not widely known Canadian poets, though I have  to  admit   that   this  poem   (by  Rolf Harvey)  is worth  reading. But  then   the powerful  vision of Peter  Trower's distinc­ tive alliterative poetry  attracts me:  vivid, intense  portraits of a logger's world.  And Laurence Hutchman  is his  own  man  in the  fine "Perseus."
However,  Tom    Howe    perhaps   out­ Purdys  Purdy,  avoiding  superfluous  lan­  guage  and  producing  metaphorical con­ nections   that   are  at  once  startling  and beautiful:

outside Williams Lake  in  a  field beyond   an  Indian cemetery I am trying to  name  the  colours
but  the  grass  refuses  all  categories


123

BOOKS IN REVIEW



it  is  a  tapestry woven   by  ethereal  women whose  fingers  are  the  roots  of  trees
they  wear  stars  around  their necks

"The grass refuses  all  categories." That's the  kind  of  thing   Purdy would  say  and surely  the  five  words   encompass a  vast range  of implication. At times I think  the collection  is a  put-on: Purdy  is  publish­ ing  his latest  poems  under other  people's  names.  Here  is more  of  Howe's   "Death In  Autumn":

they  are  Chilcotin farmers
who  fight  with   the   north for  nothing  more than  modest money and   that part of  their
soul
travelling glances cannot  reveal

The long  elegiac  enjambement, the "down-to-earth" stance    ("modest  mon­ ey"),  the   neat    way   the   syntax   shifts the  perspective from   the  farmers  to the poet  or,  perhaps, the  "traveller"  in  the last   two   lines-that's  all   very   Purdy.  And  so is this  evasion  of glibness,  as the poem   continues  in   yet   a  couple   more humble  subordinate clauses (casual, loose, no overstatement) :

which  is something to  consider
past  glib  assertions of  man's struggle
against life 	while  death awaits

Man's struggle  for life is what  one expects as a "glib  assertion," but  "against life" is a  bit  of  a  surprise. The  poem  demon­ strates    an    impressive    mastery    of   all Purdy's tricks,  and  it  is,  to  me, a  power­ ful  poem.
And  yet one  wonders-how is it  that so many  people  are  sounding like  Purdy and  that  so many  poems,  just  like  these, wrestle  with  an  impressive landscape in a manner  that   reinforces what   the  critics tell  us  about  "Canadian  themes"?  (see, for    example,   Peter     Trower,   Gordon Buries, Lome Daniel, Anne  Corkett, Erin Moure). I  guess  it  must   be  that   many gifted  writers  really admire Purdy  enough to  be influenced by him  and  that  Cana­ dians   really  are   wrestling   with  the  im-


124
 passivity of both the social and natural environments. Canadian  poets  seem  sur­ rounded by death.
Most people fight death through some kind  of  life-affirming relationship  (dare one say love?), but  Rosemary Aubert, recalling    Sylvia   Plath,  pronounces  the "nice  nuclear  family" dead,  and  does  it in a pretty devastating way. Susan  Hazy's "Bridal Veil"  tries  to do  the  same  thing, but  the  perspective is not  sufficiently  an­ gular  to be arresting, if that  makes sense. Then Darien   Watson gives  us  death-in­ life itself, with a crushingly intense  vision of a foetus in a jar. It is quite  an achieve­ ment   to  write  an  original poem  on  this overworked   subject    (Plath,   Snodgrass, and  who  else?)  but  she  has  that  eye for detail and that  angularity of vision which compel complete attention, whether you wish it or not.
But  it's  still, surely,  the  mastery  of  an­ other   author's tone  and   technique  that  one appreciates:

Rare baby,  Parian
porcelain and  creamy rose,  I
see  jeweller's veins  finer   than
silk  from  caterpillars
tracked  under  your   cobweb skin.••.

Still,  mastery  it  is. Plath   was  seldom,  if ever,  more  vivid than  that.
Turn the page, though, and  we're  back with  AI again:

Idon't  feel  bad   about  wasting my  time eating blades  of  grass   under a  tree
or  writing volumes  of  poetry
or  not  having the  energy to  sit  in  the  sun
and  get  tanned
because   no one  really  cares
if my father conquered Persia or  if ...

Believe it or not, this poem by Andrew Wreggitt  turns   out   well,   but   it's   still straight out  of Purdy-land ("I  am a sen­ sitive man").
But  the  subject  I  was considering was
how to fight death. Fraser  Sutherland, in
"Undergoing," faces physical  pain  with  a

BOOKS IN REVIEW



bluntness that  makes one twitch. Erin Moure has the victimized  Riel undergoing a uniquely  Canadian version of pastoral metamorphosis and,  in  "Trusting  the Song,"  takes a trainride which  ends in the scattering of  man,  machine, and  history into  Rocky  Mountain oblivion. Moure is an  excellent  poet. If some  of  the  women attack marriage as death-in-life, Wayne Wright takes  the same  view of a  middle­ class Canadian girl in "For A  Woman in Cam   Che,   Vietnam."  A   battle  of  the sexes, no less. He is a very good  poet,  too. So  is Gordon Buries,  who  continues the struggle  in  "She  Goes  Away"  (but  "Old  Xenophon   Remembers"  is  even   better; Buries is a  powerful  writer).
Anyway, after  rejection by the land,  by father, mother, history,  husband, wife, where  does one go? This  sounds  so much like  a  soap-opera. But  anyone who  has read Survival  knows that one goes into whatever life  one  can  find:  plants, flies, worms,   animal  victims.   Don   Domanski does  this superbly,  making some  very in­ telligent   historical   points.   Here  he  des­ cribes flies (you have  to be  threatened by Uncle  Sam  before  you  really  understand this) :

they  are  always  pioneers Puritans escaping suppression having landed here
not  to compromise
but  to establish themselves

I am  a man  staring out  in  wonder between trees
I am  their Indian

Maureen McCarthy merges with  "the friendly  earth" in her fine poem, "Plants." Peter  Christensen embodies a lot of chaos and  hate  in  his description of carpenter
ants.   Elizabeth 1ohnston  completes her
beautiful mythic "The 1ourney" like this:

I saw  a lizard  crawl  up  upon a  rock and  scuttle in  four-legged haste
to  disappear beneath a  waterfall.

The animal  as "other," as "Thou" if you
 like, and  the fascination that  accompanies such   Roethkean perception-there's   a lot  of  that   in  this  collection. The   clues these   poets   give   about   surviving   boil down  to this:  see things  as clearly  and  as fully  as  possible;  find  life  in  imaginative perception. If that  sounds  disconcertingly like a horoscope  reading, I can assure  you anyway   that    these   poets   communicate their  perceptions with  convincing detail and  particularity. There are,  in  fact,  so many   good   poems   in   the   book   that   it would  require much  more  space  to do  it full  justice.
However, I'll  close with  some personal gripes.  Why  is there  virtually nothing in closed forms?  It really is a bit much  when a  poet  as  excellent   as  Richard Outram can't get  published  in  his  own  country (see his Turns, Chatto and  Windus), but maybe  this anthology gives  us the  reason why. Outram's poems, after  all, aren't "free." To  make  one other sour  face,  this time in another direction: it took more intelligence and  commitment to  achieve the  level  of  artistry this  book  maintains than  it does  to write  good  journalism or good literary criticism. Sure,  this may  not be enduring stuff  (emphasis on may) , but any English  prof who would  not be proud to take credit  for it wouldn't, to my mind, be  worth   his  salt   (e.g.,  I'd   distrust  his criticism  of Milton). I say this in passing because    the   money    which    could    put many  of these gifted  people  on our  liter­ ary map  is now going  to subsidize literary research  done,  by and   large,  for  profes­ sional  advancement.
So don't scoff, English  prof!  This  book represents  a commitment to excellence which  is total,  and  goes without pay.

LLOYD  ABBEY






I25

BOOKS IN REVIEW



A FLOODING PAST

PETER  TROWER,  The   Alders  and  Others. Har­
bour  Publishing.
JOY   KOGAWA,  Jericho   Road.    McClelland  &
Stewart, $4·95·
KEN   CATHERS,   Images   on   Water. Oolichan
Books,  $4.00.

THERE ARE SEVERAL  GOOD and  valid  rea­ sons why I should  not review any book of Peter   Trower's. Item-I  just  wrote  an Introduction for a larger collection of his poems  to  be published  by  McClelland & Stewart. Item -I  swiped  a  line  from  a poem  of  his  recently, using  it  in  one  of my own  without acknowledgement. Item
-John Newlove  and   I  read   his  poems
for  several  years,  selecting those  that seemed   the   best   for   book   publication. And  therefore  I'm   not  exactly   unbiased about Trower.
However, not  being  an  angel  I plunge
in, or rush  in as the case may  be.
My  understanding is that  this particu­ lar small book was published by the poet's  friends,  and  that  Trower was unaware of it  until   the  book  appeared.  And   poems selected  by friends  are  liable to be slightly different  from   those   you   would   choose yourself.  This   book  is a  mixture of  log­ ging   poems   (many   of   them   having  al­ ready  appeared in  Between the  Sky  and the  Splinters), and  other   pieces  arising  from  the lowdown shabby  streets  of Van­ couver:  poems  written by a man  looking up from  the underside of life.
Of course  a poem  is a poem  no matter what    its    subject    matter;    nevertheless Trower's metier  is certainly the  Vancou­ ver   pubs,   B.C.  logging  camps,  and   in­ cludes   a  kind  of   poignance for  what  is unchangeable   in   these   places   and   yet always changing. Most are set in the past, but a skilful  use of  verbs lends them  some timelessness  in  the  present. Counting the verbs   in   particular  poems   gives   some insight-into "Outhouse," for  instance. The poem  arrives   out   of  the  past,  and
 then stretches  into  the future when the builder  is said  to  have  been  "planning a confident  kingdom/ to  last  at  least  for­ ever."   Which   makes   me  think   that  the quality  of timelessness contained in poems is   nevertheless    always   concerned  with time,  if  that  doesn't  sound  like  a cliche.
This  sense of nostalgia for  the  ongoing past is one of Trower's most attractive qualities. And  since  many  of  his  better­ known  poems have  been reprinted several times,  Trower  himself  must  be aware  of this flooding  pastness. In fact  this book is just  a  small  taste   of   the  man's poems;  knowing  them so well, I think  many were omitted that  I would  have  included. But just  to  read  a  poem  like  "The  Ravens" makes the whole  book worthwhile:

They  circle  strange in  the  curdled sky black  messengers
bearing indecipherable messages­
oldtime loggers
named them  soulbearers - where  you go when  you die
to wake  feathered and  swooping
your  fat  brain  reduced
to a walnut of useful  instinct-

Joy Kogawa  published A Choice  of Dreams   in  '974·  It consisted   of  poems about   going  back  to  Japan, and  experi­ encing  there  some  kind  of  culture-shock. In   Canada  she   had   felt   she   was  not exactly  Canadian; but  in  Japan she cer­ tainly  was  not  Japanese  any  longer.  I'm  sure  that,   in  some  sense,  she  had   been looking   for  a  "spiritual  home" on  this trip,  as  well as  some  kind  of  inner  and outer   voice  to  say  "you   are   you,"  and  thus be reassured and  inviolate inside her­  self. Of  course  no inner  voice did  speak: and  I  think  Kogawa's own  attitude  to­ ward  the dichotomy of herself was amusement-detached    amusement, at least  partly   amusement, or  else  she wouldn't have been able to write those poems.
Always  there  are  questionings in  our­
selves: who we are, and  what  the purpose

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



of  our  residence on  earth. "I am  me"  is seldom  a  satisfactory answer, and  gener­ ally requires tougher self-questioning than  we  are  prepared to  attempt. (In   fact,  I think   Kogawa  knew  all  along   that   she was  really  a  westerner in Japan, knew  it without   full   self-admission    underneath the  obvious  dichotomy of slight  physical difference  versus  residence   in  Canada.) But   the   purpose    of   our   residence  on earth?   That  has   nothing  to   do   with nationality, only  with our  questing selves.
In  Jericho  Road  Kogawa is still  look­
ing  for  herself,  but  this  time  in  relation
to  a  marriage that  is gradually breaking up, and also day-to-day incidents whose significance is related  to her  own  percep­ tions.   She   is  an   examiner  of   portents, omens,  and   her  own  entrails,  is  able  to switch  her literary and  real identity-for the   purposes    of   the   poem?   In   other  words,  I  think   the  poet's  actual persona  is rarely  reliable  and static  as  the  poem makes  it out  to  be; and  yet, in this poem entitled   "Fear,"  the   fear   is  indubitably real,  although not  for  very  obvious  rea­ sons:
I fear  you
as I fear  the
flower  in  the  flood
drowned in  the river  of rain

as I fear  the water-skiing  fly leaping from flower  to flower

and  the  fish pursuing and  the  man
with  his fishing net

The   poem  is an  exercise  of  ambiguities, in which  everything is both  itself and something else. In the previous  book, Kogawa  had   concrete strangenesses to push  against   and   make  poems  with: in Jericho  she is pushing against  different familiar objects  and  feelings,  with  differ­ ent  degrees  of poems and  human success.
With   Kogawa,  I  have  always  an  im-
 pression of this fluttering and  questing mind.   In  a  letter  she  said  something to me that,  if not  typical,  is at  least charac­ teristic -"well, the thing  is that  i believe in   the   miracle-the  grace    thing. you think   that   god's  switchboard  is  jammed and  i  think  it  is too,  but  i  think   there's an   underground  at   work,  sending mes­ sages. i think  that  right  now,  if the  mes­ sage gets put  into  the  right  code,  it'll  get through and   the  code  has  to  be  free  of the  power  fallout  and  that  kind  of pollu­ tion  and  i think  i  have to shut  down  the munitions factory  somehow. at  least  it's worked  before. though it could  have  been a ruse."
She  writes  letters  like poems  and  vice­
versa. Translators should  read  them. There are  poems   to  which   one  can't
relate,  and  it's  a  question as  to  whether one should  even  attempt to review  them. Ken  Cathers' poems  are  like that  for  me. I  might  myself  write  poems  on  the  sub­ jects he chooses or which  choose him,  for I  think   they  are  valid  subjects  (in  fact, what  isn't  a valid subject?), but  I remain disinterested in these examples.
And  now  I suppose  I have  to give rea­ sons for  my disinterest. Because  these are not   bad   or   worthless   poems.   Perhaps, curiously,  they seem  things  that  I've  read before,  or  are  similar   to  other  people's  poems.  Maybe   even  similar to  some  of my _?Wn. One  verse  even  reinforces this impression:

changing into  some­ one  else, another shape on  the  open  field.

So  maybe  this  is a  poetry  of  echoes,  of shape-changing without  things   being  re­ solved-resolved in the sense that  it can mean   very  much   to  me  personally.  Or have  I  changed   into  something  else  my­ self  before  Cathers can  reach  me?  If so, there  will be other  readers.

AL  PURDY


127

BOOKS IN REVIEW



VAGABOND MASK

c.  F.  KLINCK, Robert   Service.   McGraw   Hill
Ryerson.

DuRING WORLD  wAR n,  when  Robert Service  was in his seventies,  he published two autobiographies, Ploughman of the Moon:   An    Adventure   into    Memory ( 1945)  and  Harper  of Heaven: A Record of  Radiant  Living   ( 1948) . These are highly-coloured  adventure   stories,   un­ doubtedly  biographically  true   in   their broad   outlines,  but   heightened  and  fic­ tionalized, I believe,  in  their  many  de­ tails. They  constitute the self-devised  ro­ mantic image  of  the  man who  achieved  fame  and  a fortune  out  of Sam  McGee,  Dan  McGrew, some twenty  collections of verse and  several  novels. Service's  style of versifying  was outmoded by the  twenties,  but  he still spoke of writing a poem every few days until  he died  at 84, in 1958. The old magic of his name  continued to assure the   publication  of   such   collections  as Lyrics  of a Lowbrow  (1951)   and  Carols of  an  Old   Codger   (1954), and   on  his eighty-fourth birthday he was suggesting to  Dodd   Mead   that  some  "modest  pub­ licity"  be  given  him.  The  determination still  to  be  remembered  commands sym­ pathy,   though   it  also  breeds  an  embar­ rassed  pity.
To  make  this  biography, Carl   Klinck has drawn from  the autobiographies, Ser­ vice's  works,  particularly his  novels,  and from  personal  interviews  with  his widow and   daughter. The   result  is  a  kaleido­  scopic  picture of  a  long  life,  from  Scot­ land   as  a  young  man   to  America,  the Klondike,  the  South  Seas,   Russia,   the battlefields of  World War   Iand  Holly­ wood  in  World  War   II  (where, in  The Spoilers,   1942,  he   played    the   part   of Robert  Service  in  a  scene  with  Marlene Dietrich) . After  his marriage to a French­ woman   in  1913,  the  home  base  for  his travels  was in  France-in  Paris,  Monte
 Carlo   and   Brittany. The  man   at   the centre  of the picture remains a sentimen­ tal  American stereotype of  the late  nine­  teenth    and   early   twentieth  century,  a Mark   Twain  vemacular-speaking  inno­  cent  abroad, a  travelling cowboy encased in  his  own  fantasy  bubble   of  a  world where  a  real  man   was  a  fighter  with  a heart  of  gold and  morality was as simple a   diagram of black and  white  as the Hollywood   Westems made   it  (the  films of  John   Ford  demonstrate the  next  his­ torical   development  of  that  stereotype, particularly  as  it   was   played   by  Gary Cooper).
When   the   twenty-two-year-old  Scot­
tish  bank  clerk  emigrated to  America in
1896, he had  already been  versifying  and dabbling in  the  theatre for several  years. He   brought  with   him   his  own   ready­ made    picture   of   the   vagabond   hero,  American style, derived  from  music-hall vaudeville and  the  works  of  Bret  Harte. As  Klinck  remarks:   "Glasgow, and   not primarily  the  hobo  camps  of the  Ameri­  can   Pacific  coast,   made   Service's   voice and  ear  adaptable  to  the  free  tums   of speech  in  which  this  boy  from  the  land of Bums  characterized and  immortalized the  common,   unbookish language of  the Yukon."
Carl  Klinck  was constrained in his portrayal of Service  by the very existence and   insistent   detail    of   the   two   auto­ biographies, a  hazard  of  which  he  was well  aware:  "the Iand   the  me  in  his stories constituted a conventional literary device  . . . a  means  of  providing a  mask behind  which  he  could  preserve  his pri­  vacy." Service was tenaciously devoted  to his  mask,  however; he  had  wom   it  for so  long  successfully   and   then,   in  later  years, defensively,  that  its lineaments and its  morality seem  indistinguishable from his own.  Some  years  ago, in  the  museum  at Whitehorse, I read  a letter  which  said, in  part:  "We   have  a  new  teller  in  the bank.  His  name  is Mr.  Service.  He  is a

BOOKS IN REVIEW



very quiet  young man,  but he reads poetry beautifully. Last  night   he  read  us  some of  the  poems  of  Lord   Tennyson." The quiet  man  undoubtedly lived  somewhere behind   the  mask,  but  his capitulation  to his own  luck and  legend  was pretty com­ plete -too    complete   to    provide    his biographer with  the  warmth  and   depth  of personality he searched for.

CLARA THOMAS


FICTION STRONGER THAN FACT

FARLEY  MOWAT,   The   Snow   Walker.  McClel- land  &  Stewart.  $8.gs.

The Snow  Walker is Farley  Mowat's first work of fiction  for adults, which  makes it something of a milestone in a prolific writing career  that  has  spanned nearly  a quarter of  a  century. In   common  with the majority of his previous works, The Snow  Walker provides Mowat with a convenient platform  from   which   to  ex­ pound   his  passionately held  convictions  about   the  North and   its  people,   but  it also proves,  to this  reviewer's satisfaction at  any  rate,  that  Farley   Mowat can  be counted among the  top  story-tellers writ­ ing in Canada today.
There  are   nine   short   stories   in  The Snow  Walkers, each  of which  plays some variation on  the  general theme  of  char­ acter   in  conflict  with  environment, and two  non-fictional  pieces which   are  used to  introduce and   conclude  them.   The  first  of  these,  titled   simply   "Snow",  is probably  least  successful  of  the  lot.  An ingenious collection  of observations about  the nature and  effect of snow, its purpose  is   to   compare  modern  man's  view  of snow as a nuisance with  the Eskimo's welcome  of it as an  ally against the  cold. This  would  have  been  all  well and  good if Mowat had  not also seen fit to include
 a  quasi-poetic  series   of  answers   to   his own  question, "How do  we  envisage snow?  ... It is the  fragility of Christmas dreams  sintering through azure  darkness.
... It is the  invitation that   glows  ephe­ meral  on  a  women's   lashes  on  a  winter night." ... etc.,  etc.  Surely  it  should   be possible  for  a  writer  of  Mowat's experi­ ence   to  describe   snow   without  getting bogged  down  in  heavy  slush.
But  the  concluding piece in The Snow Walker, "Dark Odyssey of Soosie", is vin­ tage  Mowat indeed. In  it  he  documents the  true  and   tragic  story  of  a  group of Eskimo    families    whom    the   Canadian government and  the  Hudson's  Bay Com­ pany  shunted from  one  bleak  and  hope­  less location to  another  over  a  period  of
30 years, refusing  to return them  to their original home. Mowat's description of the Eskimos'  ordeal, culminating  in  a  mur­ der   trial; of  the   trial   itself,  and  of  its aftermath are  as gripping as anything he has ever  written.
Yet  despite  its  power,  "Dark  Odyssey of Soosie" may seem out of place in a collection  of short  stories  until  we  recol­ lect  that  The Snow  Walker  is,  after all, a  book  by  Farley   Mowat.  Leaving well enough  alone, or appreciating the Eskimo experience from  a  comfortable aesthetic distance, would  be as foreign  to  Mowat's purpose as  a  baobab  on  Baffin  Island. Though each  of  his  fictional   pieces  is a self-contained   story   which   can   be   en­ joyed  purely  as  a  story,  each   is  also  in some measure a fierce and  uncompromis­ ing  sermon  directed against white  arro­ gance, ignorance and  greed.  Read  as an epilogue,  "Dark Odyssey  of Soosie"  goes a  long  way  towards  justifying Mowat's sermonizing. Truth,  it   demonstrates,   is both  stranger and  more  terrible than fiction.
All of which  may  seem  to relegate the stories  themselves  to second  place,  which may  well  be  precisely  what   their  author had   in  mind.   Yet  looking   back  on  the


129

BOOKS IN REVIEW



book as a whole it is Mowat's fictional characters,  especially   his   animal   char­ acters, which  spring  to mind.
The life of  the  Eskimo  in  Farley Mowat's Arctic  is stripped to its elements: love, death, hunger, work  and  tradition, and   gives   rise   not   to   despair,  but   to moral  purification. The  plot of each story is generally a straightforward explanation of  a  mystery  or  an  anomaly. All  of  the stories,  sooner   or  later, deal   with  some aspect   of  the  theme   of  brotherhood or self-sacrifice.  Narration is divided  equally between  Eskimo characters and  Mowat himself.
But it is Mowat's prose style, even more than    the   sometimes   spectacularly   dra­ matic  stories  he has  to tell,  which  makes The Snow   Walker  exceptional.  His  vo­ cabulary is large  and  knowledgeable; he is rich  in the  wiles of  the  born  and  prac­  tised  story-teller; his  ability  to select  the best  of  all   possible  words   at   the  ideal moment is first rate.
PAT  BARCLAY


THE WAR OF 1812
AND MORE
JOHN   RICHARDSON, The   Canadian   Brothers; or, The   Prophecy  Fulfilled:   A  Tale   of  the Late  American   War. Introduction by  Carl F.   Klinck.    University   of   Toronto   Press.
$r8.so cloth,  $6.95  paper.

WHEN  JOHN RICHARDSON   (I796-I852) returned to Canada in  I 838,  he  brought with   him   an   almost   completed   manu­ script   of  a  sequel   to  his  popular  novel Wacousta:  Or, The   Prophecy:  A  Tale  Of  The  Canadas  (I832). In  the  spring  of  I 839,  two  selections  from   this  sequel appeared in the  Literary  Garland. By the fall  of  I 839,  Richardson, who  was  then  living  in  Sandwich, had   completed the manuscript and  left  for  Montreal to  ar­ range  for  its  publication. The  Canadian Brothers; Or,  The  Prophecy  Fulfilled. A
 Tale   Of  The   Late   American  War,  by Major Richardson, Knight of  the  Mili­ tary  Order of Saint Ferdinand, published by  A.  H.  Armour and  H.  Ramsay   and  printed  by   John    Lovell   of    Montreal, appeared  in   a   two-volume   edition   in
I 840.  It is  this  edition which   has  been used  as  the  text  for  The  Canadian Brothers; or, The  Prophecy Fulfilled: A Tale  of the  Late  American War.
This second Canadian edition of The Canadian Brothers  has  been  reproduced by   a   process   of   photo-offset printing. Thus,  although  it  comes,   curiously enough,   without  the   title   page   of  the I 840 edition, it comes with  its tiny  print, its   printing  errors,    its   dedication,   its errata, and  its preface, in which Richard­
son  includes  four  letters  relevant to  Wa­
cousta  and  The Canadian Brothers writ­ ten  in  I 832  and   I 833  by  King  William  IV's  secretary,  a discussion  of the novel's historical anachronisms, and  an "apology  for  the  imperfect Scotch" spoken  by one character.  Also,  because   this   reprint  is one of the  Literature of Canada volumes, it  comes  with  an  "Introduction." In   it Professor  Klinck  analyses  the  revised - "Americanized"-version of The Cana­ dian   Brothers,    Matilda   Montgomerie: Or,  The Prophecy  Fulfilled. A  Tale   Of The  Late   American  War.  Being   The Sequel   To  Wacousta, first  published   in New York  in  I85I; the  autobiographical aspects  of  The   Canadian  Brothers;   the connections  between   it   and   W acousta; Richardson's  use  of   the   " 'Beauchamp tragedy,   which   took   place   at   or   near Weiseger's    Hotel,    in   Frankfort,   Ken­ tucky' " in I 825;  and  his disappointment about   the   poor   sales  of   the   novel   in Canada, even  though when   it  was  first published, it  received   generally  favour­ able reviews.
There are  reasons  why  Canadians did not  rush  to  buy The  Canadian  Brothers then    and    have    only    republished it now.   Klinck   mentions  two-"Middle-

llOOKS IN  REVIEW



ton's   puns"   and   Sambo's "odd   speech"
-in addition to Cranstoun's "imperfect Scotch." But there are other, more funda­ mental problems  with  the  novel.  Its  set­ ting,  the  War  of  I8I2,  frequently diverts Richardson from  his fable  with  the result that  the reader  often loses sight of Gerald  and    Henry   Grantham,  the    Canadian brothers, and  the  curse  which  they  have inherited  as  great-grandsons of  Colonel de   Haldimar.  Strands  of   the   plot   are introduced and dropped without being satisfactorily woven into  the  novel. Char­ acters such as Sampson  Gattrie are colour­  ful, but  play no integral role in  the  fable. Richardson often  writes  badly.
Still,  The Canadian Brothers  is fascin­ ating. One  reason  is, despite  the difficul­ ties it  creates  for  the  fable, Richardson's handling of  the  War  of   I8I2, especially  as it was waged  on the western  Canadian frontier  in    I 8 I 2- I 8 I 3·  Richardson,  of course,  was  born  and  grew   up  on  this frontier.   Moreover,   serving    with    the Right  Division  of  the  Canadian  Army, he  fought at  Detroit in   I8I 2, was  cap­ tured  at  Moraviantown in  I8I3, and  was imprisoned  for  a  year  in   I8I3-I8I4 in Ohio  and  Kentucky. Thus, in The Cana­ dian  Brothers  his  descriptions of   places, people,   and   events  connected  with  this setting are  not  only  historically  accurate but   based  on  personal  experience. Fur­ thermore, when  he  began   his  sequel   to W acousta  shortly  after  its  publication in I832,  Richardson   had   already  learned  much  about  turning  this  war  into  litera­ ture  through his work on "A Canadian Campaign" (I826-I827) and Tecumseh: Or,  The Warrior  Of The West   ( I828). As  a  result,  in  The  Canadian Brothers such  characters as  Brock  and  Tecumseh and  such  events  as  the  capture of  Fort Detroit and  the disaster of Moraviantown are   rendered  with   precision   and   com­ plexity.  In  addition, Richardson  presents this   war   as   a  challenge to   Canadian loyalty  and  nationality.
 But as well as allowing him  to illumin­ ate  Canadian subjects, the  War  of  I8I2 also   allows   Richardson  to   throw    light upon  more  psychological  and  moral  con­ cerns. It seems clear  that in  I8I2-I8I4 he himself  lived  through  moments of terror and  violence  that  severely  tested   all  his adolescent physical and emotional strength and  that continued  to haunt him  and  his works  throughout his life.  In  The Cana­  dian   Brothers  these  traumas are  most dramatically developed by Gothic motifs and  by the  continuation from  W acousta of the story of Ellen Halloway's curse. Richardson  quotes  from   "Monk"  Lewis at one point in the novel; at several he introduces motifs of betrayal, madness, mystery, revenge, and the supernatural. Some  of these, including the  sudden  ap­ pearance of a horribly grinning face  one night  at an upstairs window, are repeated from W acousta.
The  most   intriguing  aspect   of  these characteristics of The Canadian Brothers, however,  is the  way  in  which  they  trans­ form   themselves   so  readily   into   arche­ types. Gerald's being  bitten by a snake on Hog  Island  on  an  Indian  summer's day in  October  I8I 2,   Matilda's  sucking   the poison  from  his  arm,  and  her  bathing it with a preparation of herbs she has boiled over  a  fire-events  which   end  Volume One-introduce   motifs   of   poison   and potions  and  transform  them   into  arche­ typal  images of temptation, sin, evil, and  death. Similarly,  motifs of  revenge,  super­ human strength, and  violence  are  trans­ formed   in  the  final  scenes  of  the  novel into  an  image  of   men falling into  "the bottom  of  a  chasm  into  which   the  sun­  beam  had  never   yet  penetrated." Such symbolism   as  this   finally   controls The Canadian  Brothers  and  makes  it  a  com­ pelling excursion  both  into  the  dark  wil­ dernesses of North  America in  I8I2-I8I4 and  into  the  shadowy wildernesses  of  us all.
MARY   JANE EDWARDS


131




· VITZLIPUTZLI REVISITED

C. H. IBERSHOFF, in an early article on Vitzliputzli/ traces  the origin  of the name back   to   Mexican  mythology  as   Brock­ haus'   Konversations-Lexikon lists  it.  He also finds in Heinsius' Deutsches Worter­ buch  (I 822)  the German colloquial usage of  Vitzliputzli  as  "ein   Liebkosungswort kleiner    Kinder" -which,  incidentally, may  still  be  encountered  today.  Having given  these two rather opposed  aspects  of the  name, Ibershoff  then  sets out  to trace the  literary  occurrence of  a  Vitzliputzli­ figure. He mentions Christian Weise's Die drei   iirgsten   Erznarren   (I 672)   as   the earliest   work  that   contains the  name   in the bowdlerizing version of "Pizlipuzli." Friedrich Muller's Faust   ( I 778)   is  next on   his  list  where   "one   of  the  devils  is called   Vizlipuzli."2   Vitzliputzli  then  ap­  pears  in a poem each  by Heine and  Hebel  and also in Goethe's W est-ostlicher Divan, as Ibershoff  points out.
Without  attempting  a   complete   ac­ count, I  would  suggest  that  a  couple of works  be  added  here   to  Ibershoff's list. On  the stage, Vitzlipuzli appears in Vien­  na in  I8I7: "Der Vizlipuzli. Eine  roman­ tisch-komische  Volkssage  mit  Gesang  in drei  Aufziigen,  nach  einer  Erziihlung des Hrn. Baron   de  la  Motte-Fouque, bear­ beitet  von Ferdinand Rosenau, die Musik vom   Hrn.  Kapellmeister Muller."  This  romantic folk tale  was first  performed on February  I4,  I8I7 in  Vienna's "Theater in  der   Leopoldstadt."3   The   novella   on which  the  play  is based  is very  likely  la Motte-Fouque's   Das    Galgenmiinnlein,' the charming story of a bottle-imp which, however,  makes  no mention of the  name
 
Vitzliputzli at  all.  This  musical  play  was followed  two years  later  by what  appears to  be  a  parody   called  "Der Pu ( t)livizli oder Der Mann ohne Schatten, komisches Zauberspiel  in   drei   Akten   nach   de   la Motte-Fouque, von Ferdinand Rosenau." Its  first-night performance  took  place  at the "Theater in der  Josefsstadt" in Vien­ na  on  February I,  I 8 I g.5  In  prose, there  is a  reference   to  Heine's  poem  in Theo­ dor  Fontane's  Effi  Briest   ( I895)  which brings  out  the grotesque and  cruel  aspect  of  Vitzliputzli   as   the   Aztec   god   being pacified   with   the   sacrifices   of  Spanish prisoners   by  his  Mexican  worshippers.6
All   the   literary    references  to   Vitzli­ putzli mentioned so far appear in German works  prior   to  the  twentieth  century. It would,   therefore,  be   surprising  to  find Vitzliputzli make  its  way  suddenly into  the  Canadian literary  scene,  were  it  not for  the  fact  that   it  shows  up  in  Davies'  trilogy;   for  Davies'  work  makes   use,  in part,  of a  German   (Swiss)   cultural and  geographical   background.   A   brief   at­  tempt  will  be made  now to point  to some possible   ways  of  looking   at   the  Vitzli­ putzli-figure  in Davies'  novels.
Liselotte  Vitzlipiitzli is the  stage  name of a character in  Fifth  Business  who has been described  to the  reader  as "a woman of captivating intellect and  charm, cruel­ ly imprisoned in a deformed  body."7  She is given  this  "absurd name," as  the  nar­  rator  puts it,S when she becomes the busi­ ness  partner  of   the   magician  Magnus Eisengrim, who  is at  that   time  perform­ ing in Guadalupe, Mexico.  The  reader  is left with  his own associations concerning the   Vitzlipiitzli-name,  until   Davies   has Liesl  herself come forth  with an explana­ tion  toward   the  end  of  the  final  volume
in the trilogy, World   of Wonders: "Dear, dear,  how ignorant people  are in this supposedly  brilliant modern world," said Liesl.  "You  surely  know  Faust?  Not Goethe's Faust,  of  course; every  Teuton has  that   by  heart -both  parts   of  it -

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



but   the  old  German  play  on  which   he based  his poem. Look among the charac­ ters there,  and  you will find that the least of  the   demons  attending  on   the  great  magician is Vitzlipiitzli.... "9  Liesl's tone of snide condescension hits the "ignorant" reader  as well as her  partner in conversa­ tion.  Her   derivation  of   the   Vitzliputzli surname  takes  us,  then,  into  the  "Teu­ tonic," scholarly direction, thus indicating Liesl's  own   literary and   German  philo­ logical  interests. Speaking of Vitzliputzli as a demon  and  a servant  of a great  mas­ ter, Liesl points directly to aspects of her relationship with  Eisengrim. The  reader, however,   need   not  stop   there   with  his own  interpretation. For  even  within  the Faust context, the characteristics of  Vitz­ liputzli   are   more   numerous than   what Liesl  mentions. In  Maler  Muller's  early Fausts  Leben   (the  drama  mentioned by Ibershoff),  Vizlipuzli    is,   among  other  things,  a  sharp critic  and  satirist   of  the apparently brilliant  characters surround­ ing   him10 -a   trait   that   can   easily  be spotted  in Liesl as well.
Only a full character analysis of Dr. Liselotte  Naegeli,  alias  Liesl  Vitzlipiitzli, can come to grips with the  total complex­ ity of her  pseudonym. It must,  therefore, suffice here  only  to  point  to  some  of the other  allusions  evoked  by  Davies'  choice of the name.
The   stage   name  is first  mentioned  in that  part  of the novel that  takes  place  in
Mexico.  Thus, a connexion is established
to Vitzliputzli's mythological origin  Huit­ zilopochtli. This   god-as,  for  instance, seen   within    the   context  of    Fontane's novel-devours human  beings. An  allu­ sion to  this  Aztec god  cannot  be ignored  here,  since  the  name  occurs at  about the time   of  the   weird   power  struggle   that inaugurates Liesl's lasting friendship with Dunstan   Ramsay.   During   their    fight, Dunstan refers  to  Liesl  as  "a  Swiss gar­ goyle,"   thus   evoking   the   image   of   a grotesque  demon-like figure.11  And  later,
 when  Padre  Blazon asks Ramsay: "Have you met  the  Devil  yet?",  he  replies affir­ matively  referring back to his victory over Liesl  that   night.  "I met  Him  in  Mexico  City. He  was disguised as a woman-an extremely ugly  woman,  but   unquestion­ ably  a  woman."12  Partly  Liesl  may  have acted  as her  master's servant in  this close encounter  with   Ramsay,  but   partly  she also  reflected   the   ruthlessly   demanding spirit  of  the  mythological Vitzliputzli figure   (whose  name  she  brings  up  again during this scene13)  •
Finally,   there   remains  the  association this  name  evokes in colloquial usage,  the one of a small, mischievous but endearing figure,  as  mentioned  by  Heinsius. Small she  is not,  this Swiss  lady  Liselotte  Nae­ geli;  on  the contrary, she is huge  in  size. Clearly,  we have here a glimpse of  Davies'  humour  in  giving   a   giant   of   an   ugly woman  the surname of  Vitzliputzli which creates  the image  of a cute  small  creature in   the   reader's   mind.   Mischievous  or malicious   she  may  often   be  called,   and rightly   so.  Endearing she  is,  or  actually much  more:  Liesl  is immensely  lovable in  her   complex,   ugly-looking, beautiful personality.
In summary  we may say that, while several German works of literature have made  use of the name Vitzliputzli one restricted  way or another, it  appears that Robertson Davies has used the name Vitzliputzli in  a considerably more  com­ plex   way.   His   allusions   comprise   the mythological, philological  and  colloquial
aspects  of Vitziliputzli and  are  united  in
one  of his great  character studies.

NOTES
1 "Vitzliputzli," Modern Language Notes, 28 ( I9I3), 2I I f.
2   Ibid., 2 I I.
3  Kaehler, "Kritik  iiber   die   Erstauffiihrung des   'Vizlipuzli,' " Biiuerles    Wiener   Allge­ meine  Theaterzeitung, No. 25, 27. February I8I7, p. IOO.
4     (Berlin: Aufbau   Verlag, I944).

133

OPINIONS AND NOTES



5   Information courtesy of  Dr.  Christine  Gru­ ber,    Osterreichische   N ationalbibliothek, Vienna,  Theatersammlung.
6 Fontane,   Romane,  Erziihlungen, Gedichte
(Miinchen: Carl Hanser, I 963), iv,  I 38.
1   (Toronto: Macmillan, I97o), p. 246.
8   Ibid., p. 248.
9   (Toronto: Macmillan, I975), p.  332.
1o  Deutsche Litteraturdenkmaler des  I8. Jahr­ hunderts, vol.  37   (Heilbronn,  I88I;  Klaus reprint, I 968).
11 Fifth  Business, p. 262.
12  Ibid., p. 293.
1a   Ibid., p. 266.

GERTRUD J ARON LEWIS
 being  in  violent  conflict  with  itself. The Moon  of Falling  Leaves  in  Part  II of Malcolm's Katie  is cast in the role of a succubus  descending upon the dark  wood.

The keen,  two-bladed Moon
Of  Falling Leaves  roll'd up on crested mists
And  where  the  lush,  rank  boughs had foil'd  the sun
In his red  prime, her  pale,  sharp fingers crept
After  the wind  and  felt  about the  moss,
And  seem'd to pluck  from  shrinking twig and  stem
The burning leaves -while groaned the shudd'ring wood.




lkfalcolr.n's atie
THE INTERIOR VIEW

ON   THE  SUBJECT  OF  NATURE poetry, Margaret Atwood  has written in Survival that   such   poetry   usually   involves   more than  just writing  about Nature. "That is," she writes, "landscapes in poems are often interior  landscapes; they  are  maps  of  a state  of  mind." In  this  way,  it  certainly can  be said  that   Isabella Valancy  Craw­ ford's  A1alcolm's  Katie  is not  just a poem about Love  or  Nature. More  important, it  tells  us something about its  creator­ about her "state of mind."
Malcolm's  Katie   is, on  the  surface,   a love story,  but  below  that  surface  there  is a great  deal of violence  and  confusion, as well  as  beauty.   In   regard  to  Crawford herself,  Northrop Frye  has pointed out in The Bush Garden that  her  "framework," or   surface,  "is   that    of   an   intellectual songbird  of the kind who filled so many anthologies in  the  last  century." But  it is also  true   to say  that   at  certain  times­ perhaps when  at  the  height  of  her  poetic powers-Crawford is a  soaring eagle  or
a    villainous   hawk,     with    a    songbird clamped bloodily  in her  talons.
Crawford frequently depicts  Nature as

134
 
(Part II, stanza 4)

In   the  opening  stanza   of  Part   IV,   the North  Wind  attacks the  earth m the manner of an Indian brave.

From his far  wigwam sprang the strong North Wind
And  rush'd with  war-cry down  the steep
ravines,
And  wrestl'd with  the  giants of the  woods; And  with  his ice-club beat  the  swelling
crests
Of  the  deep  watercourses into  death

And  smote  the  tall  reeds  to the  harden'd earth....

Crawford even  describes  the  fast-moving water  as being in conflict with itself.

In a green  sheen,  smooth as a naiad's locks, The water rolled  between the shuddering
jaws,
Then on  the  river  level  roared and  reeled
In ivory-armed conflict with  itself.

(Part VI, stanza 2)

It appears that   much  of  Crawford's  in­ terior  must  have  been  "deep  and  dusky"  like her "pulseless forest."
Perhaps in trying  to overcome,  or "civilize," her own  bizarre  nature, Craw­ ford   sought   refuge   in   the   comforting symbol of the daffodil, as Max, the young lover,  does  near  the end of Part  II of the poem.

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



And  Max  car'd little for  the  blotted sun, And  nothing for  the  startl'd, outshone stars; For  Love, once  set within a lover's breast, Has its own Sun-its own peculiar  sky,
All one  great  daffodil-on  which  do  lie
The sun,  the  moon,  the  stars  ...

In  order   to  affirm   the  existence   of  the daffodil, Max and  the poet, both, must disregard reality  to some degree.  Prior  to the  above  quoted   passage,  Max  has  just built   a   funeral  pyre   "strewn  with   the tangl'd dead" of the forest  he is chopping down  in order  to marry Katie. The "resin­ ous black smoke"  from  that  fire is in utter conflict   with   the  sunny   daffodil  in  the next stanza.
We see this conflict again  between  the forest  carnage and  the  daffodilian  senti­ ments   when  11ax   points   out  where   his and  Katie's home shall stand.

And  heard  so often, "there shall  stand our home-
On  yonder slope,  with  vines  about the
door!"
That the good  wives were  almost made to
see
The snowy walls,  deep  porches, and  the gleam
Of Katie's garments flitting through the
rooms;
And  the black  slope  bristling with  burn'd
stumps
Was  known  amongst them  all  as  "Max's
House."

(Part II, second to last  stanza)

Atwood's comment that  "Canadian writ­ ers as a whole  do  not  trust  Nature,  they are  always  suspecting  some  dirty   trick" certainly applies  to this ominous passage. How  the  conflict  is to  be  resolved  is un­ stated;  in  this  way,  the  possible  conse­ quences  seem  all  the  more  horrible and inevitable.
In   view  of  all  this,  the   last  lines  of
Malcolm's Katie  can be seen as heavily ironical.  Katie  says:

I would  not  change these  wild  and   rocking woods,
Dotted by little homes  of unbarked trees,
 Where dwell  the fleers  from  the  waves of want,
For  the smooth sward of selfish  Eden bowers,
Nor-Max for  Adam, if I knew  my mind!

(Part VII, final  stanza)

Try  as  she  might   to  convince us  other­ wise,  we  cannot  help   but   think   Craw­ ford's  lines portend the flight of  Max  and Katie  from  their  savagely-hewn  Eden.
Frye  has written this about the  poem:

In   the   long   mythopoeic  passage ... begin­ ning   with   "The  South  Wind laid  his moc­ casins  aside," we  see  how  the  poet  is, first,  taming   the    landscape    imaginatively,   as settlement tames  it  physically, by  animating the   lifeless   scene   with   humanized  figures, and,  second,  integrating the   literary tradi­ tion  of  the  country by deliberately re-estab­ lishing  the  broken cultural link  with  Indian civilization....

It probably would  have  been  more accu­ rate  to say  that  Crawford   was  trying  to tame   her  interior  landscape  by  way  of writing  about  the external  one surround­ ing  her.  Any  "deliberate" linking  of cul­ tures  was probably done  just as much  for psychological   reasons  as  for  purely  liter­  ary  or  mythological  ones. Crawford's in­ terior   landscape  was  one  in  which   her imagination beat, throbbed, and  pulsated uncontrollably-sometimes ambiguously
-and,  when   she  allowed   as  much   on paper,  the  result  was a unique, eerie  kind of grandeur. Malcolm's Katie  is indeed  a "map of a state  of mind": one  in  which the  more  treacherous routes  seem  much
more  appealing than   the  long  and  nar­
row scemc ones.
MARSHALL BROOKS


EXPENSIVE TOOL

A USEFUL new research tool which  all but the prosperous will  be wise  to use in libraries is English-Canadian Literature to  1900: A Guide to  Information Sources, compiled by R.  G. Moyles and  published by the Gale  Research Company in  Detroit as  one  volume in  a  cart-

I35

OPINIONS AND NOTES



before-the-horse-titled  compilation  called   The American  Literature,  English Literature,  and World   Literatures   in    English   Information Guide  Series.  A   faintly  distasteful  odour  of American  literary  imperialism hangs   over   the Gale series  as  a  whole,   but   those   whose  con­ cern    is   mainly  with    Canadian   writers   and  writings  should   not   be  deterred,  for   English­ Canadian  Literature  to  rgoo  is  capably done, divided  between  General   Reference   Guides, Literary Histories and   Criticism,  Anthologies, Major  Authors, Minor  Authors, and   two  ina! and  particularly useful  sections entitled Litera­ ture   of   Exploration,   Travel  and   Description and   Selected  Nineteenth-Century Journals. It is  a  good  starting  text   for   anyone  beginning on   the   study    of   Canadian  literature-and Canadian   social    attitudes  as   well-in     the Victorian era.  Yet  it  remains no  more   than a starting text; there is  much that  Moyles  does not  include.
G.W.



NEW IN PAPER

PAPERJ ACKS AND  SEAL BOOKS between  them have  brought a small  squad of paperbacks into print in  the  last  few  months. Surfacing among them   are  eight recent titles: Ian  McLachlan's Hong  Kong  thriller  The  Seventh  Hexagram, Bruce   Powe's  cautionary  Killing Ground,  Far­ ley  Mowat's The  Snow Walker, and two  sear­ ing  comedies by Robert Kroetsch: The  Words of  My   Roaring  and    (at last   back   in   print!) The  Studhorse Man  (all   at  $1.95).   Slightly more  expensive are  Martin Myers' bawdy satire Frigate  and  Brian  Moore's banal  romance The Doctor's Wife  (at $2.25), and  John  Glassco's unnecessary story  of a sadist, Harriet Marwood, Governess  (at    $2.95).  Whether  there  is   an intentional  correlation   between  subject   and  price  is not indicated.
Other  recent paperbacks include two  novels from   Talonbooks:  Jane  Rule's  Desert   of  the Heart   and  George Ryga's Hungry Hills  ($2.95
each), and  three works  of non-fiction: J. Rus­
sell Harper's admirable Painting in  Canada: A
History  (University of  Toronto, $12.50), Carl Berger's instructive  and   illuminating  explora­ tion  of Canadian historiography,  The  Writing
of   Canadian History  (Oxford,  $5.95),  and
J. G.  MacGregor's evocative narrative  memoir
of pioneering in  Northern Alberta, North-West
of Sixteen (Prairie Books, $4.25).
W.H.N.
 REFERENCES

Two INVALUABLE   RECENT REFERENCE works are  J. L. Granatstein and  Paul  Stevens' revised Canada   since    r867     (Hakkert,   $4.95)   and
Philip Stratford's second edition of  his  Bibliog­ raphy     of    Canadian   Books     in    Translation (French-English, English-French)  (HRCC,
$1.00). Stratford adds  some  200  further  titles to  his  work,  and   writes   a  provocative preface examining  trends  in   translation  and  contem­ plating  its   future.  Stevens  and   Granatstein bring   together eight  subject   guides,  by  eight  different  writers, to  aspects  of   Canadian  his­ tory    (national  and   regional   policies, foreign and  economic  relations, social  and   intellectual history-the  last  of  these   assembled  by  Carl  Berger).   Stratford's  method  is  enumerative; the  historians provide a commentary and  guide along with   a  selective history, which   students of   literature  will   find   particularly   valuable. M. H. Scargill's fascinating book  A  Short  His­ tory  of Canadian English  (Sono Nis,  $3.95) is an   engaging  and   informative  account  of  the words   that   Canadian  experience has  given   to the  language, thus  providing a  mini-social his­ tory  in  its  own  right. The New  Canadian Ox­ ford  Atlas   ( $6.95), by contrast, does  not  suffi­ ciently   take   into    account   the    geographical implications of current social  history. A  gener­ ally  adequate atlas,  it  provides too little  detail on  areas  of  increasing interest to  Canada: in part because  of recent patterns of  immigration: The  Caribbean, Hong  Kong,  India; in   part  because   of  economic,  ecological,  and   political interests:  Africa,  South   America,  the   Arctic, the    Oceans.   Finally,  all   users   of   Canadian books  would   do  well  to  consult  A.  A.  Keyes and  C. Brunet's Copyright in  Canada: Propo­  sals  for  a Revision of the  Law   (Department of Consumer and  Corporate Affairs).

W.H.N.


ON THE VERGE

****   PAUL DUVAL.  The Art  of Glen   Loates. Cerebrus and  Prentice-Hall of Canada, $35.00. The  work   of   this    32-year-old nature   artist deserves   to  be  much  better  known than  it  is. A meticulous craftsman, Loates is as skilled  in portraying the  ruffled fur  of a woodchuck as in catching  in   paint   the   multiple  textures  of  a Scotch thistle.  Texture, indeed, is  what  Loates has  learned best  to  render. Duval's handsomely produced  volume   traces  Loates'   development

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



from  a precociously gifted  schoolboy  artist to a mature and  visually  eloquent observer of the natural world.  The  illustrations compel  the attention;  quietly occupying the  background, Duval's  text   comments  sensibly   and   sympa­ thetically on   the   paintings, and  complements them.
W.H.N.

****   DAVID   R.    WILLIAMS.  "The  Man   for a New   Country":  Sir   Matthew  Baillie  Begbie. Gray's Publishing Ltd., $15.95. It is  astonish­ ing   that   up  to  now   no  full   biography of  Sir Matthew  Baillie  Begbie,  first  Judge and   later first  Chief  Justice of  British  Columbia, should have   been  written, for  Begbie  not  only  played an  influential role  in  keeping British  Columbia free   from   American intrusion  and   in  shaping the  colony,  and   later the  province, in  a  politi­ cal  as well  as a  juridical direction, but  he  was
also  an  exceptionally interesting  personality in a  time  and   place  when  colourful figures  were not  rare.   In  "The Man   for a New  Country," David   Williams has  at  last  given  us  that biography.  A  lawyer   practising in  British Columbia,  he   has    been    able    to   deal    with Begbie's  career as a  judge  from  the  professional viewpoint, and  he  shows  that, eccentrically though he may have  sometimes expressed   them, Begbie's   judgments  were   usually   correct  and often  wise. But  Mr.  Williams does  not  neglect the  other   man,  something of an  adventurer in the  better   sense,  humane in  terms  of his  time, devout   but    passionately   interested   in    the natural   world, and    devoted  to   the   land   he travelled so  extensively, so  often, and  in  such hard  and    primitive  ways.   Some   of   the   old Begbie  legends  are  dispelled, but  enough  stand the  test  of  research   for  Begbie  to  remain one of   the   most   interesting  people    involved    in giving  Canada a far  west.
L.T.C.

****   JOHN  ENGLISH.  Borden,  His  Life  and World. McGraw-Hill Ryerson, $14.95. Robert Borden    is   not   the   kind   of   politician  about whom  one  might   expect a  lively  and  interest­ ing   book  to  be  written. He  was  not  without abilities; after all,  he resurrected the Conser­ vative   Party from   the  decay  into  which  it  fell on  Macdonald's death, and  he  kept  the  Tories in  power  longer   than any  Conservative leader since his time. But his virtues  were those of the organizer, and  he lacked  either the  charismatic charm of  Macdonald  or  Laurier or  the  fasci­ nating secretiveness of Mackenzie King. But he lived  in  an  interesting and   eventful  period  -
 the  turn   of the  century and   the  Great  War­ when  Canada was changing into  an  urban and  largely industrial  country,  and   he   played   his own   part   in  asserting the  country's  autonomy within the  Empire. By an  adept  counterpoint­ ing  of background and  actor, John English  has given   us  a   readable,   lavishly  illustrated  and  highly    interesting   study ·of   this   worthy  and  ponderous man  and  his  exciting times.

L.T.C.

**  W.  L.    MORTON   and   L.    F.  HANNON. This Land, These  People:  An  Illustrated  History of Canada. Gage,  $29.95. Two  major beliefs  :__ in multiculturalism and  in  the  impact of the  land upon   Canadian life-lie  behind   this  popular national  history;  but   on   the   surface  lies   its open,    almost    belligerent  enthusiasm  for   the nation  itself  and   a  romantic  fascination  with the   past  and   the  future. The diction and   the story   occasionally falter.  It  is   surprising  to read,    for   example,  that    "the  forest-products industry  rejoices   in  years  of  industrial peace" unless  "in  years  of"  means   "in  the  years  when there  is  any"; and   it  is  equally arresting  to
read    of   "the   charming,   small-town  lawyer, John  A.  Macdonald." But   despite  the  occa­ sionally   odd   judgments,  the   book  succeeds   in asking    readers  to   consider  the   actual  lives Canadian  people    have    led,    the   values    for which   they  have  stood,   and   the  opportunities which,   by sharing the  land, they  have  collec­  tively  created for each  other.
W.H.N.

*  One  Canada:   Memoirs  of the  Right  Hon­ ourable  fohn  G.  Diefenbaker. The  Tumultous Years  1962 to  1967. Macmillan,  $15.95. As a public   speaker, John  Diefenbaker  has  a  great deal   of   power   and   wit,   but   in   writing  his manner-not  to  mention his rampant  egotism
-seems  to defy  all  the  ghost-writer's skills, so that he emerges out  of these  memoirs of his successive  defeats by Lester  Pearson and  Robert Stanfield  (or  Dalton Camp?)  as a prolix  and bombastic man,  resoundingly empty  of wisdom. Perhaps this is because  his intent in this third volume   of  One   Canada   is  so  narrowly   self­ justificatory.  Memoirs  by  participants  in  his­ torical   events    are   valuable,  but    not   if   the process  is  a  partisan  refighting of  old  battles; reflectiveness, objectivity and  an  ironic  view of oneself   are   the   qualities  that  make   a   good political   memoir,  and    John   Diefenbaker  in these   pages   shows  evidence  of   none  of  them.

L.T.C.

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



from  a precociously gifted  schoolboy  artist  to a mature and  visually  eloquent observer of the natural world. The illustrations compel   the attention;  quietly occupying the  background, Duval's  text   comments  sensibly   and   sympa­ thetically  on  the   paintings, and  complements them.
W.H.N.

****   DAVID   R.    WILLIAMS. "The  Man    for  a New    Country":  Sir   Matthew  Baillie   Begbie. Gray's Publishing Ltd., $I5·95· It  is  astonish­ ing   that   up  to  now   no  full   biography of  Sir Matthew  Baillie   Begbie,  first  Judge and   later first  Chief  Justice of  British  Columbia, should have   been  written, for  Begbie  not  only  played an  influential role  in  keeping British  Columbia free   from   American intrusion  and   in  shaping the  colony,  and   later the  province, in  a  politi­ cal  as well  as a  juridical direction, but  he  was also  an  exceptionally interesting personality in a  time  and   place  when  colourful figures  were not  rare.   In  "The  Man for  a  New  Country," David    Williams   has   at    last   given    us   that biography.   A    lawyer    practising   in    British Columbia,  he   has    been    able    to   deal    with Begbie's  career as a  judge  from  the  professional viewpoint,  and   he   shows   that,  eccentrically though he may have  sometimes expressed  them, Begbie's   judgments  were   usually   correct  and often  wise. But  Mr.  Williams does  not  neglect the  other   man,  something of  an  adventurer in the  better   sense,  humane in  terms  of his  time, devout   but    passionately   interested   in    the natural  world,  and   devoted  to   the   land   he travelled so  extensively, so  often, and  in  such hard  and   primitive  ways.   Some   of   the   old Begbie  legends  are  dispelled, but  enough stand the   test  of  research for  Begbie   to  remain one of   the   most   interesting  people    involved  in giving  Canada a far  west.
L.T.C.

****   JOHN   ENGLISH.   Borden, His  Life   and World. McGraw-Hill Ryerson, $I4·95· Robert Borden    is  not   the   kind   of   politician  about whom  one  might   expect a  lively  and  interest­ ing   book   to  be  written. He  was   not  without abilities; after   all,  he  resurrected  the  Conser­ vative   Party   from  the  decay  into  which  it  fell on  Macdonald's death, and  he kept  the  Tories in  power  longer   than any  Conservative leader since his time. But his virtues were those of the organizer, and  he lacked either the  charismatic charm of Macdonald or Laurier or the fasci­ nating secretiveness of Mackenzie King.  But  he lived  in  an  interesting and   eventful period  -
 the  turn  of  the  century and  the  Great  War­ when  Canada was changing into  an  urban and largely   industrial  country, and   he   played   his own   part   in  asserting the  country's  autonomy within the  Empire. By an  adept  counterpoint­ ing  of background and  actor, John English  has given   us  a  readable,  lavishly   illustrated  and  highly    interesting   study  of   this   worthy  and  ponderous man  and  his exciting times.

L.T.C.

**  W.  L.    MORTON   and   L.    F.  HANNON.  This Land, These People: An  Illustrated History  of Canada. Gage,  $29.95. Two  major beliefs_.:._ in multiculturalism and  in  the  impact of the  land upon   Canadian life-lie  behind   this  popular national  history;  but   on   the   surface  lies  its open,    almost    belligerent  enthusiasm  for   the nation  itself  and   a  romantic  fascination  with the   past  and   the  future. The diction and   the story   occasionally falter.  It  is  surprising  to read,    for   example,  that    "the  forest-products industry  rejoices   in  years  of  industrial peace" unless  "in  years  of"  means  "in  the  years  when there  is  any"; and   it  is  equally arresting  to read    of   "the   charming,   small-town  lawyer, John  A.  Macdonald." But   despite  the  occa­ sionally   odd   judgments, the   book  succeeds   in asking    readers  to   consider  the   actual  lives Canadian   people    have    led,   the   values    for which   they  have  stood,   and   the  opportunities which,   by sharing the  land, they  have  collec­  tively  created for each  other.
W.H.N.

*  One   Canada: Memoirs of the  Right  Hon­ ourable   John  G.  Diefenbaker. The  Tumultous Years   rg62  to  1967.  Macmillan,  $I5·95· As a public   speaker, John  Diefenbaker  has  a  great deal    of   power   and   wit,   but   in   writing  his manner -not  to  mention his  rampant egotism
-seems to defy  all  the  ghost-writer's skills, so that he emerges out of these  memoirs  of his successive  defeats by Lester  Pearson and  Robert Stanfield  (or  Dalton Camp?)  as a  prolix  and bombastic man,  resoundingly empty  of wisdom. Perhaps this  is  because   his  intent in  this  third volume   of  One    Canada  is  so  narrowly  self­ justificatory.  Memoirs  by  participants  in   his­ torical   events    are   valuable,  but    not   if   the process  is  a  partisan  refighting of  old  battles; reflectiveness, objectivity and  an  ironic  view of oneself   are   the   qualities  that    make   a   good political   memoir,  and    John   Diefenbaker   in these   pages   shows  evidence  of   none  of  them.

L.T.C.
