$3.00  per copy




CANADIAN llTERATURE N°·77
Summer, 1978

)(LBERT)( WRITERS

Articles

BY  P. L. SURETTE, RODERICK W. HARVEY, SUSAN  WOOD, FRANCIS MANSBRIDGE, R.  P. BILAN, ELIZABETH MARSLAND, DONALD R. BARTLETT, ROBERT A. LECKER

Poems

BY  PATRICK LANE, MARK FORTIER, DAYV  JAMES FRENCH, ALEXANDRE L.
AMPRIMOZ, IRVING LAYTON, RON  MILES, RALPH GUSTAFSON

Review Articles  and  Reviews

BY  SUSAN JACKEL, GEORGE WOODCOCK, LEON EDEL, SHERRILL E. GRACE, KEITH GAREBIAN, DAVID  JACKEL, BARBARA HELDT MONTER, JOHN W. ROBINSON, ZONIA KEYWAN, ANDREW SUKNASKI,  JULIAN REID,
LAURIE RICOU

Opinions and  Notes

BY WAYNE H. COLE


A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW







THIS YEAR COUNTRY






0NE OF  THE  MOST INTERESTING publications of I 977 was a set of two volumes by Eli Mandel: a book of poems called Out  of Place-an attempt to re-enter the world of his prairie boyhood-and a book of critical essays called Another Time, both published by Press Porcepic. They are not published as a set, but for Mandel  the arts of poetry and  criticism are twin acts of the same mind, and it is particularly  because of the happy combination they make that  they draw attention  to the multiple  dimensions of creativity.
Two  books, two  punning   titles,  two  creative  acts,  two  worlds:  it  would  be tempting  to locate a preoccupation with dualities here, were it not for Mandel's repeated  revelation  of the  simultaneity  of the  acts. Doubleness, not  dualism,  is what  the  puns, for example,  sound. The  poems and  essays are  not Manichaean either/ or activities, but declarations  of the integrity of the human  spirit -despite the uncertainties and tensions people daily experience. And lodged in the notion of doubleness is a  whole  theory  of art  which  links person  with  place,  place  with time, time with home, home with identity, identity with language,  language  with person. The essays constitute a set of efforts to step at different points, with differ­ ent perspectives, into this circle;  the poems provide an evocative example of the linking  process  at  work,  revealing  the  mind  catching  at  its  own  doubleness: marvelling at  the  mystery, and  both  fearful  and  a little surprised  at  the  horror and the joy it discovers.
The  first two sections  of  Out   of Place  (subtitled  "The Return" and  "The Double")  enact two parts of the link:  those of walking back into boyhood's land­ scapes and contemplating the mind's fascination with doppelgangers. The relation between the two is specified in the critical commentary: to return  home is by its very nature  to set up a doubleness, at once to affirm the difference between then and  now and  to collapse the distinction.  And for Mandel  himself, encountering  "his own dilemma,  writing  west," the temporal/spatial  dimensions  transform  by degrees into language, still asserting the multiple doubleness:  "the shaping  form


2

EDITORIAL

and  the  sense of otherness,  the  resistant  material." The  poet-critic's  task  as he isolates it, then, is to find the language  that  will voice the simultaneous  twinning of person and  place, rendering  the public and  private landscapes one.
Though it is somewhat  deceptive, to return  thus to landscape  is to specify one of Mandel's central  concerns. The  deceptiveness derives from the usual definition of "landscape" as "setting." But landscape,  undeniably  "out  there,"  also exists conceptually,  and in this sense it serves as both the subject and object of Another Time. The  configuration  surfaces particularly in the group of essays called "Writ­ ing West,"  a group  concerned with images of prairie man,  the romantic and  the real in  Western  Canadian fiction, and  the  relation  between  himself and  region. Directly, he writes:  "The images of prairie man are images of a search for  home and  therefore  a search  for the self. The  question  we have  come  to  then  is not who is prairie  man,  but  what  images does he choose?" The  focus lies not  on  a story told but on a manner  of story-telling; the creative circle exists not in theme but in process; and a regional consciousness consists not of a set of  mimetic repre­ sentations  of external  geography  but  of the  process of sharing  communally  the spaces  one  mentally  inhabits.  As  a  consequence,  for  Mandel,  the  realities  of Western  writing  do  not  manifest  themselves in  sociological  realism  but  in  the constant   re-creations,  re-enactments,  re-inventions  of  the  terms  of  the  mind. "Region," embodied  in the sharing  of stories (which  elements of folklore? what balance  of rogues, outlaws, heroes, ballads, and  myths?),  is therefore  not identi­ fiable just with  geographical  boundary  lines,  nor even with  the  facts of history. The  coherence  derives from  the  language, from  the  recognition  that  identity  is a fiction, shaped  by the dreams of art and shared in the shaping.
The  task of the reader, in such a world, becomes more demanding than  simply to  be a  passive recipient  of instruction  or  entertainment. No sharing  can  take place unless there are sharers. Reflecting more generally on theories of aesthetics, Mandel  notes that  the act of listening (an active silence)  is a profound  tribute  to language.  It  asserts also the  human  value we attach  to communicating, and  in turn suggests again  the public connection that  literature  repeatedly  enacts.  Art is often avowedly apolitical.  But even when writers eschew politics, they frequently find themselves drawn  or troubled  by the public, political world. It is part  of the external  landscape  through  which  they move, part  of the  tension  that  declares itself most deeply in the "private and perilous" recesses of the artist's mind. Shar­ ing the dreamed  identity, the imagined world, the shaping of fiction, the reader/ listener shares in the tension, too. In the public world we draw identities on the map -delineating  Alberta,  the  prairies, Canada, the  West-for  a structure to rely on in daily life. Sharing  the fiction, we take part in the doubleness, recogniz­ ing the limitations of the boundaries we seem to need; we reach back for ourselves into  regions we scarcely know, and  actively listen for  the voices we recognize as our own. 	W.H.N.

3

POEM
 


THE WITNESSES


Patrick Lane


To  know  as the word is known,  to know little or less than little,  nothing, to contemplate
the setting sun and  sit for hours,  the world
turning you  into  the sun  as day begins again

To  remember words,  to remember nothing but  words  and  make  out  of nothing the  past to remember my father, the  McLeod Kid carrying the  beat,  riding  against  time

On  the  rodeo  circuit  of fifty years ago the  prairie, stretched wet  hide
scraped by a knife,  disappearing everywhere to know  the  McLeod Kid  was defeated

And  rose again from  the  dust,  to know these  things,  to climb  into  the confusions which  are  only words, to climb into  desire to ride  in the sun,  to ride against  time

The McLeod Kid  raking  his spurs  on  the  mare the  cheers  from  the  wagon-backs
where  the  people  sit and  watch  the local boy ride  against  the  riders  from  Calgary

To  spit  melon  seeds into  the dust
to roll  cigarettes, to leave  them  hanging from  the  lip,  to tip your hat  back  and  grin
to laugh  or  not  laugh,  to climb  into  darkness

Below  the  stands  and  touch  Erla's  breast to eat  corn  or  melons,  to roll  cigarettes
to drink  beer,  bottles  hidden in paper  bags
to grin  at  the  RCMP, horseless, dust  on their  boots

To  watch  or not  watch,  to surround the spectacle horses asleep in their  harness,  tails switching
bees swarming on melon  rinds, flies buzzing and  what  if my words are  their  voices

4

POEM

What if I try to recapture an ecstasy that  is not mine,  what  if these are only words saying
this was or this was not, a story told to me until  I now no longer  believe it was told  me

The witnesses dead,  what if I create  a past that  never  was, make out of nothing
a history  of my people whether in pain
or ecstasy, my father riding  in the McLeod Rodeo

The hours  before dawn  when in the last of darkness I make  out  of nothing a man  riding  against time and thus  my agony,  the mare  twisted  sideways muscles  bunched in knots beneath her  hide

Her  mane,  black hair feathered in the wind that  I believe I see, caked  mud  in her  eyes
the  breath broken  from  her  body and  the  McLeod Kid in the air,  falling,  the clock stopped?







PSYCHOPHOBIJI

Mark Fortier


The mind  is too complex and  delicate
A thing  for man; he'd  feel much  easier
With  a computer that  an  expert  set
Up  with  detailed instructions to refer
To  at  the  slightest  problem. For  the  mind
Is too confusing. Never  has he seen
So many  owner's manuals  for one kind Of  device,  but of those none has been Stamped by the manufacturer. Some say It capable of most incredible
And  varied  wonders and  foresee  the  day
All other tools become dispensable.
But  still none  whom  he knows have  gotten   theirs
To  smoothly  manage their  routine affairs.


5

THE FABULAR FICTION OF ROBERT KROETSCH



P. L. Surette



I


N  SPEAKING TO  DONALD  CAMERON of his now-completed  Out
West  trilogy Robert  Kroetsch said of the last novel of the series:

I'm fascinated right now by the effects of moving away from realism-the kinds of freedom you get, and the kinds of truth you get at, by departing from the sterner varieties of realism. I'm not sure anyone has a "realistic" experience; it's a literary convention to begin with, the notion of realism.1

I wish to explore the nature  of that  literary convention and the manner  in which Kroetsch is moving away from it. He had earlier confessed to an impatience  "with certain  traditional kinds of realism, because,"  he said, "I think  there  is a more profound  kind available  to us." 2  It  would seem that  he wishes to distinguish  his own writing from  the tradition  of realism, but  wishes also to retain  some of the connotations of honest-to-god truthfulness  that cling irremovably to the term.
Kroetsch's  Out  West  trilogy-or  triptych,  as  he  prefers  to  call  it-is  an
elaborate  creation  of the "fiction" of the West. The  three novels, The  Words  of My  Roaring  (1g66), The  Studhorse  Man   (1g6g), and  Gone  Indian   (1973) share  a  common  setting,  but  are  independent  stories. It  is for  this  reason  that Kroetsch  prefers the  term,  "triptych." As he has said, the  "connections  are  not narrative  ones, they are  of another  sort:   juxtaposition,  repetition,  contrast.  The first volume is set in the 193o's, the depression, the second is at the end of the war, and the third  will be contemporary."3
The  Words  of My  Roaring is the first person narrative  of Johnnie  Backstrom, Notikeewin undertaker, "a heller with women," and Social Credit candidate in the provincial  election.  Challenged  at  an  election  rally  to  top  the  promises  of  his opponent, Doc Murdoch   (who brought  Johnnie  into the world thirty-three  years before), Johnnie  asks his challenger  how he would like some rain. That careless reply dominates the rest of the campaign,  finally assuring the undertaker's election when the rain does fall on election eve.
The  Studhorse Man is a novel of the road, but it begins and ends in the vicinity of Notikeewin and Coulee Hill. Its protagonist is Hazard  Lepage, a studhorse man

6

FABULAR FICTION

of Acadian  origin, squatting in an abandoned  mansion overlooking Wildfire Lake. None of the characters  from  the  previous novel has any role in this one, but the election  of  Backstrom  is  mentioned.  The  story  is  retrospectively  narrated  by Demeter  Proudfoot,  cousin to  Martha, Hazard's fiancee.  He  is confined  to  an insane asylum as a result of his role in Hazard's death.  The  time of the story is some ten years later than  the first novel, but Demeter's  telling of it is still later.
Gone Indian is set in  Notikeewin and  Edmonton  with  the  ghostly persistence
of Binghamton,  New York:  whence the protagonist,  Jeremy  Sadness, an  Ameri­ can graduate student, had come in search of a position in the University of Alberta English department. Jeremy  becomes involved in the Notikeewin Winter Festival, replacing  the grievously in jured Roger Dorck. The  story is  narrated through  the device of a long letter  from  Mark  Madham, Jeremy's  professor at  Binghamton, to Jill Sunderman  of Notikeewin. The  letter quotes liberally from  cassette tapes Jeremy had mailed to Madham before his mysterious disappearance in a blinding snow storm. This novel is set in the lateI g6o's or earlyI 970's.
Clearly these three novels do not form a trilogy in the usual sense of the term, for  there  are  no narrative  connections  between  them,  nor  even  any  persistence of characters. Johnnie Backstrom does put in a cameo appearance in Gone Indian, but the only real persistence is the setting. Of course the three  novels are also re­ lated thematically,  but not more strikingly to one another  than  to Kroetsch's first novel, But We  Are Exiles (I g65) . Indeed, Morton  Ross has written  an excellent study  of  Kroetsch's  first  three  novels demonstrating   a  consistency  of   thematic  interest  and  of the device of pairing  opposed figures.4   The  absence  of  narrative  links in the triptych is, I believe, an important  dimension of the "more  profound kind of realism" Kroetsch is reaching toward.
Efforts to define realism in fiction are dauntingly  numerous and disappointingly inconclusive. I shall not attempt  to resolve the issue here, but  some clarification of my understanding  of it is necessary if I am to be understood  myself. It  would appear  to me that  much of the difficulty with the term "realism" stems from the fact  that  its meaning  when  applied  to fiction arises from  three  quite  different grounds  of classification. One  might conveniently classify virtually  all narratives on the basis of four distinct grounds:  their reference, their form,  their manner  of presentation, and the matter  presented.
History, for example,  is best defined on referential  grounds,  since it  refers to past and  witnessed event. Whatever  the form adopted  by an  historical narrative, whatever  its manner  of presentation,  and  whatever  the  matter  presented,  it  re­ mains  history if it  refers to  past  witnessed events. Fiction  is similarly  definable referentially, since it refers to invented event. Realistic fiction, by the same token, is distinguished from fantasy on the grounds of references, since it refers to possible and  probable events and  persons, while fantasy refers to improbable or even im­ possible events and persons.

7

FABULAR FICTION

But fictions which  deal  with  perfectly possible and  probable  events  (such  as lost children, shipwrecks, chance  meetings and  positive identification  of long-lost children  and  parents)   are commonly excluded from the category of realism, and labelled romance. Realism is distinguished from romance, then, on formal, not referential grounds. Romance narratives  do not possess a sufficiently rational  and unified  plot  to qualify  for  entry  into  the  category  of realistic  fiction.  In  other words, it is not the events in romance  that  are implausible  ( as is the case with fantasy), but the manner  in which the events are formally inter-connected.
Since manner of presentation  is a rhetorical category it does not provide grounds for distinguishing  between the traditional types of narrative.  Any narrative theo­ retically has access to any or all of the rhetorical  devices available  to  writers of narrative.  However,  if an  historian  were to write an  historical  narrative  in the manner  of stream-of-consciousness,  he  would  probably  find  a  larger  audience among  people with  literary  interests than  among  those with  historical  interests. Manner  of presentation,  then,  permits  classification within  the  major  narrative  types of history, novel, and romance. 5
The last grounds, of matter  presented, is a little more difficult to define precisely, but is essential to an understanding of the way in which we apply a term such as "realistic." For example,  mythical  narratives  are defined by their  matter,  which is sacred event. Again, epic is defined essentially by its matter, which is great public event. A narrative  about a little girl's outing into the country would not be labelled epic however many elements of epic form and manner  it employed -such as in­ vocation, epic simile, beginning  in medias res, unity of action, etc. It could  never be other than  a mock epic.
The novel itself is distinguished from other forms of fictional narrative  primarily on grounds  of matter.  The  characteristic  matter  of the novel is domestic event. Those  novels which depart  from  the matter  of domestic event  are  distinguished from the novel proper  by some qualifying epithet-as  with the detective  novel, the  adventure  novel, the  pornographic novel, science fiction, and  so forth.  Ian Watt's  notion  of "formal  realism"  ("a  full and  authentic  report  of human  ex­ perience"), applies  the  grounds  of  matter   and   reference  rather   than  formal grounds in my sense.6   The  epithet,  "realistic,"  when applied  to the novel, stresses the characteristic  domestic matter  of the novel.
The  mode of character definition is also a dimension of the  matter.  Mythical characters,  for example,  are defined by their function  in the mythical story. The characters  in heroic narrative and  in romance are defined by ethical  or religious ideals. The characters  in the novel, whose matter  is domestic event, are defined in terms of sociological and  psychological types. Readers invariably  complain that characters  defined by function  or ethical ideal are "unrealistic."
A further  dimension of matter  is the setting in which the events and actions of the  narrative  take  place. A  narrative  whose setting  is an  imaginary  country  or

8

FABULAR FICTION

planet would have a difficult time being accepted as realistic however possible and probable  were the events of which it was composed, and however "realistic" were the formal  interconnections  between those events. Novels with  an  exotic setting (novels of adventure  and romance), or with a setting located in the past  ( histori­ cal novels),  are seldom considered  realistic even if they possess the  appropriate elements of form and reference. It must be admitted,  though,  that one of the diffi­ culties with  the historical  novel is that  it confuses the issue of  reference, since it commonly  refers to both  actual  events and  invented  ones. It  is  perhaps  on  this ground  more than  grounds of matter  that it is rejected from  the ranks of realistic fiction.




l:E PRIMARY PURPOSE of the foregoing discussion has been to explore the notion of realism when applied to narrative  fiction. However, I have introduced  a comprehensive scheme for the categorization  of narrative, and  have referred a number  of times to the elusive category of romance.
Like "realism," "romance" is a term that is applied to all forms of art from the
graphic arts, through  literature,  to music. There is also a particular narrative type commonly labelled romance. My interest here is in the term "romance" only when applied  to narrative  as a qualifying epithet on a parallel  with "realism." That is to say, one  wishes to know what  elements of a  narrative  lead  one  to label  it a romance.
As  with  realistic  narartive,   one  identifies  romance   narrative   primarily   on
grounds of form and matter. The romance can tolerate improbable event, but characteristically relates probable events whose interconnections follow the dictates of human  wishes rather  than  the Aristotelian probability and  necessity. Romance matter  may  be domestic  and  familiar  or exotic and  strange,  but  not  public  or sacred event. Romance  character  definition is based on generalized  human  type (for example, a young man, an old woman, etc.)  rather than ethical, religious, sociological or psychological type.
But the crucial element of romance is setting. In romance narratives  the setting functions metaphorically  rather  than  representationally.  Deserts, seas, fertile  val­ leys, storms, droughts,  etc. are introduced  as needed  to advance  the story, set a mood, or express the theme. It is for this reason that  romance  narratives  tend  to be tales of  journeys. A  journey is the  least question-begging  means  of  altering setting.
Romance,  then,  is distinguished  from other  narrative  modes primarily  by the
metamorphic and  metaphorical character  of its setting. This  feature  also makes romance peculiarly hospitable to allegorical expression, since allegory is essentially the transposition of one kind of event to another  kind of setting-for example,  a


9

FABULAR FICTION

political struggle transposed  onto a barnyard,  or a moral struggle transposed onto a jousting field.
The  grounds  of matter  is the only important  one for the realist movement  of the nineteenth  century  in France,  which is the progenitor of modern  realism. The realists insisted upon certain  types of subject matter  in art. They declared that the unusual person and the extraordinary action  (acts of heroism or sacrifice)  were no longer suitable  matter  for serious fiction and  confused the issue by asserting that the particular domestic and  unheroic  matter  which interested  them  was referen­ tially true, that  is to say, real. But, of course, the realistic novelists wrote fiction. Hence  their  persons  and  actions  were  not  referentially  true  or  real.  Indeed,  an actual  person, and an actual  extraordinary human  action-the story of Joan of Arc, for example-would be unsuitable matter for realistic fiction. The realistic writer might choose heroic matter as his subject, but would endeavour  to make the agent of an heroic action conform to psychological or sociological type rather  than ethical or religious type, as would be proper to an heroic action.
The fact that  the realists declared  certain  kinds of matter  to be true-to-life has seriously  confused  the  discussion  of  realism  ever  since.  Referentially   defined, realism means  a  narrative of possible and  probable  events, and  one can  accept this definition  without  settling  the  philosophic  issue of appearance and  reality. Formally  defined,  realism means a rational  and  unified plot with a main  action to which incident  and  chance  event are rationally subordinated. It  is only when one comes to the grounds  of matter  that  the issue of appearance and  reality  be­ comes relevant. But even here the issue is a false one, because the realists do not so much  insist that  heroic action  is unreal or illusory as that  it is atypical. Such a  belief finds its root  in  psychology, sociology, or even theology rather  than  in ontology.  In  other  words,  the  realists assert explicitly that  certain  propositions about  human  nature  and  human  conduct  are true, and  others false. The  real is that  which  conforms  to  those  propositions  they  assert to  be  true.  Change  the propositions and  you change the reality. Thus  the new propositions about  human nature  in this century,  emanating  from Freud  and  J ung, internalized  the action of the realistic novel to the point  where its reference was no longer fictional and plausible event, but the fictional perception of event, or even the implausible event of dream, as in Finnegan's Wake.
Kroetsch's fiction in the Out  West triptych is realistic on referential grounds for the most part-although  he introduces  some rather  implausible  events in The Studhorse  Man  and  Gone  Indian.  He obviously feels the  referential  criterion  of realism to be a restraint,  and seeks to escape it in Studhorse Man  by inventing the insane narrator, Demeter  Proudfoot,  and by the device of dream in Gone Indian. Plausibility of event, then,  is one of the conventions of realism that  Kroetsch  is moving away from.
On  the grounds  of matter,  Out  West is both  realistic and  unrealistic. The  set-


10

FABULAR FICTION

ting of all three novels is primarily Alberta  (with some recollection of exotic set­ tings like Ontario, France,  and  Binghamton,  New York), and  it is described  in verisimilitudinous detail. The  types of events which form the matter of the narra­ tives, however, tend  to be somewhat exotic and unusual  removing them from the category  of  realism.  Nonetheless  the  persons involved  in  the  actions  are  fully identifiable sociological and  psychological types-as in  realistic  fiction. But  be­ cause they are  involved in exotic and  unusual  actions,  they  take on exotic  and unusual  attributes,  thus  moving  them  away  from  sociological type  toward  the exaggerated and grotesque satirical type. Clearly, once again, Kroetsch is straining  against the realistic convention of character definition in terms of sociological and psychological type.
Finally, and  most significantly, the Out  West  novels lack the Aristotelian  plot, or unified and  rational  action. Although  Aristotle does not draw  the inference, a unified and rational  action implies a single agent for the action  of which the plot is composed. But the agent  itself must be both stable and  rationally  comprehen­ sible. One such agent is Aristotle's consistent and rational character  (that  is, obey­ ing the rules of probability  and necessity). Fiction which lacks an Aristotelian plot generally also lacks a stable and  rational agent. The  picaresque novel is one sub­ type of the novel which lacks both unified plot and stable character.
Stuart  Miller, in his book The  Picaresque Novel, is distressed by the disunity of action and the instability of character  in picaresque fiction:

The hero of the picaresque novel differs from characters in other  types of fiction. His origins are uncertain. He becomes a rogue in a world full of roguery. His roguery differs from comic roguery in being gratuitous. He cannot love or feel strong emo­ tion; he is incapable of anchoring his personality to some idea or ideal of  conduct. His internal chaos is externally reflected in his protean  roles. This  instability of personality is seen in the picaresque novel as a reflection of the  outer chaos dis­ covered by the plot patterns. The picaresque character is not merely a rogue, and his chaos of personality is greater than any purely moral  chaos. It  reflects a total lack of structure in the world, not merely lack of ethical or social structure.7

Miller's assumption  that  an  irrational  plot and  an  unstable  character  in a work of fiction imply a chaotic universe reveals his expectation  that  the organization  of a fictional narrative should  perform an explanatory  role. Rational plot and stable character  tell the reader  that  God's in his heaven and  all's right  with the world, while an irrational  plot and  unstable character  tell him that  all Hell's broke loose. Miller's expectation is one that  realistic fiction has fostered in him, for the matter and  form  of realistic  fiction  are  designed to  fit certain  propositions  about  the nature  of the world which are believed to be true. But not all narrative (nor  all fiction)  is designed to fulfil such explanatory expectations. Picaresque  is one type of narrative  not designed in its form or matter  to fulfil an explanatory role.
The  picaresque novel is not so much an anomaly in the history of the novel, as


I I

FABULAR FICTION

the survival  of an older  narrative form  alongside the  novel. The  realistic  novel, from its earliest beginnings,  has had  a didactic  function  rather  similar  to that  of epic. It has both articulated and preached the bourgeois world view just as Homer and Virgil articulated  and  promulgated  the Greek and Roman  paideia. But there has always existed an  unofficial narrative  art  alongside the official, public forms of the epic and the novel. That unofficial art  has never been fundamentally con­ cerned with plot or stable character, because it has not been concerned  to articu­ late  a coherent  world  view. Its sources tend  to be popular  rather  than  learned, legendary  rather  than  mythical.  This  other  narrative  tradition   might  be  called fabular,8 because it is basically a story-telling tradition. Its raison d'etre  is the story or fable conceived as a narrative metaphor  unattached to time or place, to char­ acter  or narrative  causality. It seeks rationality  and  coherence  elsewhere than  in plot and character.



KROETSCH TELLS us that the connections between the three novels of Out  West  are to be found in "juxtaposition, repetition,  [and] contrast," but he does not say what  is to be juxtaposed, repeated and  contrasted.  In fact, it is not at all difficult to identify  the major  elements so treated.  Each  of the three novels possesses a roving figure  (Johnnie Backstrom, Hazard  Lepage, and Jeremy Sadness)   and  a static  figure  (Jonah Bledd, Demeter  Proudfoot,   and  Professor Mark  Madham) . In  each  case  the  roving figure has affinities with  the  picaro figure in that  he does rove, is morally irresponsible, and chaotic of personality. He is also, in each case, sexually active. Jonah  Bledd of The  Words of My Roaring is morally  responsible, of clear  and  consistent personality, and  happily  married. The  other static figures tend  to be parodies rather  than  exemplars  of the Jonah Bledd paradigm/1  There  are many  more recurring  figures in the three  novels, in particular pairs of predatory  and  nurturing  women, but  it would occupy  many pages to pursue them.
The  recurring  figures  and  situations -albeit  recurring  with  alterations,  re­ formulations  and  even inversions -provide  a thematic  coherence  which  is  the hallmark  of fabular  narrative  when it moves to larger forms, the kind of coherence which the framing  device of the pilgrimage to Canterbury  provides for Chaucer's  Canterbury Tales. The  point of the Chaucerian  frame is not, of  course, to  justify a collection of unrelated  tales. His audience  would not have expected  or desired any such  justification.  Its  function  is, rather,  to  provide  his  readers  with  some guidance  to aid them in interpreting his tales. For in the fabular tradition, the tale is a vehicle of significance, and  it is the artist's function  to articulate  that  signifi­ cance. A tale is not a record of an event, as history, epic, and  novella purport  to be, but  a parable  of the human  condition, and  the  parable  requires  a rubric  or contextual frame to reveal its significance.


12

FABULAR FICTION

Kroetsch, then, achieves thematic coherence  and  provides  his readers with  some guidance in the interpretation of his tales or episodes, by means  of recurring pat­ terns  and  recurring figures. His patterns are formal  or reflexive rather than narra­ tive or  progressive. Such  patterns give coherence, not only  to the  Out West trip­ tych,  but  also to each  of the  novels within  it. Each  novel  is itself  without stable  character or unified plot. The  following  pages will illustrate the fabular form  from The  Words  of My  Roaring.
The  writer  of fabular fiction  may  clothe  his take  in the  mousseline of romantic
fantasy, the shrouds  of gothic  horror, or the  tweed  of everyday  experience, but  is in  every  case  fundamentally  unconcerned about   either  narrative  plausibility or narrative  coherence. Kroetsch chooses the  tweed  of everyday  experience in The Words  of My  Roaring,  but  presents  his  readers  with  an  inherently implausible story. Backstrom  is a hard-drinking, philandering undertaker. "Six-four in my stocking feet, or nearly  so,"  he says, "a  man  consumed  by high  ambitions, pretty well hung,  and  famed  as a heller  with  women.  Or  at least  I was,  until  the  eldest unmarried  daughter of  the  Burkhardt  clan  proved   marvelously  fertile   on  the strength of an  awkward and  hurried trial." He  decides  to run  for  election  to the Alberta legislature   behind   the  leadership of  John   George   Applecart, a  bible­ thumping, teetotal, evangelizing preacher constantly  inveighing against  the  East­  ern  "who-er of Babylon." His motives are entirely selfish and  pecuniary. He  hopes to sit

up there in the Parliament  buildings, gawking out a window at the streetcars cross­ ing the High Level Bridge. The  micks and bohunks be damned; let the krauts  and the  crazy Swedes bury  their  own  dead.  Tough  titty,  boys. No  more  digging  the grave myself to make the extra  two bucks. Not for John  B. MLA.  Indemnity they call it;  nothing so crass as salary. Compensation  for money that  was never yours to lose. Five solid years of good green indemnification.

He  shortly  promises  rain  to his electorate in a moment  of not-quite-sober  em­ barrassment, as we have  already heard. As the election  nears,  Johnnie encounters less and  less derisive scorn,  and  more  and  more  desperate  hopefulness  from  the drought-stricken farmers; until  the  rain  miraculously arrives on  election  eve, and his victory  is assured.  As if this sin  against  plausibility of plot  were  not  enough, Kroetsch has  the  cynical,  self-serving  Backstrom  suddenly turn   into  a  reflective moralist. As the din of the rain  mounts on the leaky roof of his hearse,  he is seized by a "terrible doubt":

The  more I confronted  the facts, the more I was overwhelmed  by a terrible realiz­
ation.
I had nothing to do with the rain.
I had not a thing to do with the coming of the rain. That  realization  came to me in the form of an emotion. I don't  trust emotions. I have a goddamned good reason for not trusting them, they tend to run riot over my mind and  body night and  day.

13

FABULAR FICTION

The  rain had  just happened. By sheer accident. And here I was, about  to cash in on an accident.

One  can see in the  narrative device and  Backstrom's reaction to his undeserved good  fortune, the  unstable personality of the  picaro  reflecting  the  outer  chaos  of the  world -which Miller  identifies  as the  essence of the  picaresque novel. The difficulty  with  this  reading is that   the  rain -far  from  being  an  instance of  a chaotic universe -is evidence of a totally  unexpected providential pattern in the universe.  Backstrom's remorse  -if it  is explicable  at  all -is occasioned  by  his awareness that  he has  no connection whatever, in body, mind  or spirit,  with  that providence. Moreover, Backstrom's keen awareness  of his own  instability of  per­ sonality  would suggest that it is not so much  a device of the  novel as its subject.
The  main  action  -prairie  politician gains  seat  in  parliament on  strength of promise  of rain -is little  more  than  a wire-copy  Alberta   joke, but  it is an  echo of the  facts  of Alberta political  history. As Kroetsch  himself  puts  it:

In the rhetoric  of prairie  politics-the voices of Riel, Tommy  Douglas, Aberhart, Diefenbaker -we go from  Eden  to the apocalypse in one easy leap. They  never quite know whether  it's the end or the beginning. I was playing with it a little bit in The Words of My  Roaring. There's  very little credence given to the notion that we exist in history, in timeY'

And in Alberta political  history itself, Kroetsch  hears an echo of the historical  and social thinking of evangelical Christianity. The  story, in other  words, is neither  a plausible  sequence  of rationally related  events, nor an implausible sequence  of  un­ related  events,  but  a metaphorical pattern of event.  In  its generic  form,  it  is the quest  for the comfort and  prosperity of the  promised  land.
It may seem tedious  to belabour this point, but the orthodoxy of realistic fiction,
with  its insistence  upon  stability of character and  plotted  sequence  of events, fre­ quently  prevents  the  perception of what  would otherwise  be obvious and apparent. The  following  review from  the University of Toronto Quarterly demonstrates how thoroughly realistic  expectations can  interfere with  the  proper  perception of  a fabular narrative:

Robert  Kroetsch ... does  try,  though  perhaps  a  little  too  hard,   to  inject  some humour  into his Alberta  novel, The Words of My  Roaring, a story of one political campaign  in the first Aberhart  (Applecart  in the novel) election in the mid-rg3o's. However,  the time and  place are largely irrelevant-regrettably so, since Alberta politics of that era would seem to offer prime material for the fiction writer. There is some significance in the fact that  the anti-heroic  narrator, an undertaker, is run­ ning  against  the  old  doctor  who  brought  him  into  the  world,  and  concurrently carrying on an extra-marital affair with the doctor's daughter,  but  the point is by no means clear.  Incidents  such as the suicide of the narrator's friend,  Jonah,  and the goring of a clown at a rodeo, seem gratuitous, though  they may be intended  to add appropriately modern  dark elements to the robust comic scenes. The  narrator's

FABULAR FICTION

election  promise of rain  for  the parched  farms, a promise which  ironically  comes true in the nick of time, also has little apparent narrative  meaning.11

It is, of  course,  entirely  unfair   to cite,  some  eight  years  after   the  event,  the hastily  formed  opinions of  a  man  reviewing  a  book.  But  the  spontaneous  mis­ apprehensions of a learned  and  intelligent  reader  most clearly  reveal  the  kinds of expectations such  a  reader brings  to a  work  of fiction.  This  reader  attempts to stabilize  the  character of  the  protagonist by  labelling  him  an  "anti-hero," and expresses his displeasure at  the  absence  of a rationally related  sequence of events by the epithet, "gratuitous," and  the  phrase,  "little  apparent  narrative meaning." The  coming  of the  rain  is part  of the fable,  and  it makes  no  more  sense  to com­ plain of its lack of "narrative meaning" than  it does to register a similar  complaint about  Hamlet's death at the end of the celebrated play.


A MUCH  MORE   SERIOUS  misapprehension, however,  is  the reviewer's  assertion  that  "time and  place are largely irrelevant." I assume  that  he
misses the  detail  of social  observation which  is so central   to  nineteenth-century British fiction, and early twentieth-century American fiction. These  expectations apparently blind him to Kroetsch's absolutely  brilliant  evocation  of time and  place. There is nothing in George  Eliot or even Dickens  to surpass  the following recrea­ tion of Alberta in the dry thirties:

We drove through  the cooling night, and we felt pretty good, I can tell you. The crows had stopped knocking around  the sky. All day they were boss, but now it was ours. A dozen bottles of beer were ours. It was all listed under our names, we were certain,  and we drove and stopped and we had to stop again.
Man,  it  felt  good,  just  to  be half-loaded  and  the  pressure  easing  up  in  your bladder  and  the  old  tool held  firmly in  the  right  hand.  For  that  one  beautiful moment you feel you've spent a lifetime looking for a place to pee, and here you've found it. We watered  the parched  earth.  You could hear water  running,  and  that was a mighty pleasant  change.  Oh  show me the way to go home. That  clear  sky above all rashing  over with  millions of stars and  the baked earth  letting  out  the breath  it had  held all day;  the cowshit and  buck-brush  and  a dying slough  hole scenting the air; a little rank yet fertile with hope. It felt good.

Not only is this perhaps the  greatest  passage on  peeing  in literature (better than Rabelais  or Swift), it is also attached intimately and  significantly  to its time  and place. But the reviewer is blind  to this evocation  of place and  others like it because they do  nothing to advance the  plot or  develop  the  character. What they  do  is articulate the fable, Backstrom's quest for "five solid years of good green indemni­ fication."
The  ingestion  and  evacuation of liquids  is a matter of no small  concern   in  a drought-ravaged land -especially when that  evacuation is performed by one who

15

FABULAR FICTION

is about   to  become  responsible  for  his best  friend's drowning in  Wildfire  Lake, and, ultimately, for  the  return of the  fructifying rains.  But  Johnnie Backstrom's homage  to  the  cowshit  and  buckbrush looks beyond  even  this  novel  to  Hazard Lepage  of The  Studhorse  Man. Hazard, like his great  stallion,  Poseidon, is not properly  housebroken. We find him,  dressed in a stolen Mountie's uniform, salut­ ing the Alberta legislative  building:

Without  further ado  he aimed  his golden  stream  at  a commemorative garden a number of floors below. That moment was resonant with the future  held in store; but  Hazard,  unthinking, fumbled  with  the  historic  buttons,  resumed  his burden then went in his cavalier way down the marble stairways, past the rows of glowering oil portraits,  past the battle flags to an exit.
A reluctant  spring had come overnight  to the city.

The  future with  which   Hazard's golden  stream   is resonant is PMU, Pregnant Mare's Urine, from  which  estrogen  is extracted in order,  in Demeter Proudfoot's words, "to  prevent  the further multiplication of man  upon  the  face of the earth." PMU proves  to  be  the  salvation of the  Lepage  stallions.  However, the  urinary vision  reaches  its apotheosis in The  Studhorse  Man.  I  cannot recall  a single  in­ stance  of liquid  evacuation in Gone Indian.
The  rigorous  critic  will observe  that  neither  Johnnie's nor  Hazard's evacuation is essential  to  the  plot,  and  the  fastidious  will  note  that  their  characters are  so thinly  offensive  that  such  gratuitous bad  taste  is hardly  needed. Those  who  are neither  rigorous  nor  fastidious may  hear  the  delicate  tracery of Kroetsch's  prose through the hyperbole and  vulgarity  of which it is composed. Since event is treated as metaphor in   fabular fiction,  police  court  logic  (rules  of relevance, based  on rules of evidence)  does  not  apply.  Both  Backstrom and  Lepage  reveal  their  be­ nighted  humanity in  simple  and  humble  acts  of  mere  animality that   are  none­  theless redolent with  human imagination and  significance.
Johnnie raises  the  issue of  the  final  relevance  of event  himself  while  in  con­ templation upon  the  futility  of his nightly  amorous adventures with  Helen  Mur­ doch,  daughter of his political  opponent:

You know, the way you half-despise yourself and  half-know  the boredom  has set in already, and how the hell do I bow out without hurting anybody's feelings? How the hell did I get here? How long is it really great:  maybe eight seconds. If a man comes for  the  grand  total  of six days of his life he will go down  in history as a heroic  performer.  One  miserable week of joy, including  a day of rest. And  to do that  you spend  seventy years;  three  score and  ten conniving,  cheating,  betraying your wife, inventing filthy lies, wasting your money, missing sleep, deceiving your best friends,  risking the creation  of further  ridiculous  life, wrecking your clothes. My God, a two-week vacation  is longer.

Backstrom  has an answer  for this scepticism,  born  of reading  life as a well-plotted story:

FABULAR FICTION

But out  there in that  garden  with Helen, I wanted  to reach  up and  stop  the  old world from spinning.  I simply wanted  to stop time right  there  and  say, "Helen,  I regret to say the sun will not come up this morning."

He  rejects  the  inexorable logic  of events,  and  the  law  of  consequence, and embraces a futile  desire  for  the  infinite  prolongation of  the  fleeting  moment of his bliss. This  is the  Edenic and  nostalgic  counterpart of Applecart's apocalyptic preaching which  would  collapse time in order  to hasten  punishment of the  wicked and  reward  the virtuous. Applecart, preaching over the  radio  to a group  of voters in  Backstrom's funeral parlour, accepts  the  law  of consequence, but  is impatient of time's slow chariot:

Applecart  was onto  the  dirty  Easterners  who were gouging  the  West. He  had built  up  to  that  and  now  he  was onto  them. He  was talking  about  the  Second Coming and  the Last Judgement, the final reckoning of the  Fifty Big Shots. Just wait, he said. And he gave them a blanket condemnation. "Just  wait, and  in short order the wicked will be punished  and the suffering good will be rewarded...."
Then  it was time  to drive  home his point  and  he  clinched  her  tight:   "Come hither; I will show unto thee the  judgement of the great  Who-er  that  sitteth  upon many waters ... "
I worked on the lakes for a number of years, but  the thought  had  never struck
my mind;  the Whore,  it turned  out, was Toronto,  and  all her  high-muckie-muck
millionaires.

It is in the light of Applecart's apocalyptic fulminations and  Backstrom's Edenic yearnings  that  his unexpected remorse upon  the arrival of the  rain  must  be under­ stood. The  coming of the rain  has nothing  to do with plot or character -and that  is precisely the point. Johnnie repeats to himself the terrible realization that  he had  nothing to do with  the  coming  of the  rain.  Through the  entirely  fortuitous coin­ cidence  of his prophecy  and  the  event,  he is sanctified  in  the  desperate imagina­ tions of the farm  folk. The  rain  unmans him. In a nice inversion  of the  tragic  role of  Fortune, Backstrom   becomes   Fortune's  fool  through  good   rather  than   bad fortune. The  coming  of the  rain  forever  denies to him  the  possibility  of an  honest victory  over  Dr.  Murdoch, his political  opponent  and  surrogate father. The re­ viewer's  complaint, then,  that  the coming  of the  rain  has little  "narrative mean­ ing,"  rather  misses the  mark.  It  has  no "narrative meaning." It is an  untoward intrusion  of the desired  into  the actual; in other  words, it has a fabular meaning.
Just  as all of the  tales in the  Canterbury Tales  must  be read  in  the  context  of the  pilgrimage to the shrine  of the  martyred saint  as an  act  of Easter-time devo­ tion,  so all of the  incidents in  The Words of My   Roaring   must  be  read  in  the context  of Backstrom's futile  quest for "five solid years of good green indemnifica­ tion," of Applecart's promise  of the  final reckoning  for the  Fifty  Big Shots,  of the necessity of dreams:

17

FABULAR. FICTION

Christ, you have to dream out here. You've got to be half goofy-just to stay sane.
I'm  a great  one for  paradox.  My reading  of the  Bible, I suppose;  dying  to be
born and all that. But really, it isn't an easy place to live. Like when the wind blows black, when  it's  dry, you drive  all  day with  your  lights on. Great  electioneering weather. The  fish lose their  gills in this country. The  gophers come  up for a  bite
to eat, and  they crawl right into the air.
I won't swear to that-but it's a God's truth, you have to dream.

Backstrom is well aware of the futility  of his quest,  and is all the  more appalled at its inexplicable success.
The  "gratuitous" incident of the  clown's  goring  by a  bull  is one  of the  many episodes enclosed  by Backstrom's quest.  A boy rides a bull in a rodeo  for  the  full time, "making points  all the  way for style."  But when the time  was up

the bull wasn't finished. He kept  bucking and  turning.  And the boy who had  been riding so grandly suddenly looked scared. His hat was too new, and  that  was a bad sign. He  had  got onto  something  and  he didn't  know how to get off, I suppose, and here he was riding the worst animal of the lot, and he wasn't  losing. That was his trouble.

A rodeo  clown,  as tall  as Backstrom, steps in between  the  boy and  the  bull, after the boy finally falls to the ground, and  sticks out his rump.

The  bull saw the clown's  red-and-yellow  behind  and snorted.  The  crowd  roared. The clown started  his quick sidestep.
But he was just a split second late. The  bull must have tossed him thirty feet in
the air.
The  funny  thing was, the crowd all thought  it was part of the act. They  roared and  applauded. They  thought  the  clown would  jump  up and  run  for  his barrel. But he didn't. He  tried  to get  up  but  wasn't  moving quite  fast  enough,  and  the
bull was on him again.

The  clown,  who  was  all skin  and  bones  under  his baggy  costume, later  dies in
hospital.
Backstrom seizes the opportunity to address the assembled  crowd, delivering an impromptu campaign speech, identifying himself with the clown, and  the bull with the  Fifty  Big Shots  from  Toronto. The  speech  is phenomenally successful-par­ ticularly  his repetition of the  promise  of rain. The  point of it all is in Backstrom's ironic misidentification of himself with the clown. It turns out that  he, like the boy on the bull, isn't  going to lose.

NOTES

1 Donald  Cameron,  "Robert Kroetsch: The  American Experience and  the Canadian
Voice," Journal of Canadian  Fiction,   I (Summer  1972), p. 48.
2   "A Conversation  with Margaret Laurence" in Creation, ed. Robert  Kroetsch  (To­
ronto:  New Press, 1970),  p. 53·

18

FABULAR FICTION

8  Russell   M.  Brown,  "An   Interview  with   Robert  Kroetsch," The    University   of
Windsor  Review  (Spring I972), pp. 2-3.
4 Morton L.  Ross, "Robert Kroetsch and  His  Novels,"  in  Writers  of the  Prairies,
ed. D. G. Stephens (Vancouver: U.B.C.  Press, I973), pp.  IOI-I4.
6  Autobiography, it  is true,  can  be distinguished on  grounds of  the  manner of  pre­ sentation, since only  in  autobiography can  author, narrator, and  the  agent  of  the action be the same person.
6  Ian  Watt, The  Rise of the Novel  (Berkeley & Los Angeles:  University of California
Press,  I96o), p. 32.
7  Stuart Miller, The  Picaresque Novel  (Cleveland: Case Western Reserve  University, I967)' p.  I31.
8  Robert Scholes  has anticipated me in this  use of fable-in  The  Fabulators  (New York: Oxford, I967). His earlier book in collaboration with  Robert Kellogg  (The Nature  of Narrative,  New  York: Oxford, I966)   is an  extremely useful  discussion of narrative from Theocritus to Robbe-Grillet.
9 These  patterns are  discussed  in  Morton Ross' article  for  the  first  two  of  the  Out West  novels and  But We  Are Exiles. Kroetsch himself mentions them  for The Stud­ horse Man  in the interview with  Cameron (p. 50).
1° Cameron interview, p. 49·
11 J. M. Stedmond, "Letters in Canada: Fiction," UTQ, 36  (July   I967), p. 386.

















CANADIAN AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY  OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075 WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T  1W5  / 228-4741


19

THE LIMITATIONS OF MEDIA





Roderick W. Harvey








MARSHALL MCLUHAN HAS  BEEN TELLING us  loc yea"' now that  the medium  is the message. Modern Canadian poets and  novelists have reacted to his work, and indeed have often used it as a springboard, for their experiments  with media  have made explicit the theories McLuhan gave us. Most literary critics have reacted  against McLuhan's view of them as "Gutenberg men" or "print men" -terms  not  exactly complimentary  but  hard  to  disagree with. Yet the dilemma of Gutenberg man in the electronic age is a real one, for at what point does the book as experience give way to the book as print medium? Do electronic media improve our view of human experience? What  are the limitations of the  electronic  universe? These  questions are explored  at length  in two novels by Robert  Kroetsch,  The  Studhorse  Man  and  Gone Indian, though  the conclu­ sions reached  are somewhat  ambiguous.
Both these books explore  the  uses of different  media;  for  both  narrators,  De­
meter of The  Studhorse  Man  and Jeremy Sadness of Gone Indian  are Gutenberg men who are  trapped, respectively, by print  and  tapes. Demeter  seems trapped by his attempt  to impose a chronological order on the chaos of his own  experi­ ence.  He  is writing  a  biography  of  Hazard   Lepage,  the  studhorse  man,  who is  obsessed with   junk -"scrap  iron,  rags,  bones,  and   miscellaneous" -and stays alive by gathering stray  bones and  beer  bottles.  Hazard's environment  is one of furnace  rooms, telegraph  keys, and  bridges such as the High  Level Bridge in Edmonton. He leads his horse, Poseidon, by a rein made from a "broken set of snow chains." And at home he has an amazing collection of junk, including rivets, horse liniment,  Spanish  fly and  bones. The  historian,  Demeter,  must  take  the details, the bones of Hazard's life, and reconstruct the life of a human  being. Past events,  past  lives,  and   former  deaths  are  pieces  which  the  biographer   must assemble like a  jigsaw puzzle  so  the  "very  beast dismantled" can  be  put  back together again.
The  biographer's   subject,  Hazard, is actually  a  sort  of  archetypal   Western


20

LIMITATIONS OF  MEDIA

frontier  hero, a difficult subject for a biographer; for it is difficult to write a good biography  of a figure whose exploits are already  legendary.  How  does the  biog­ rapher  tell fact from fiction? Hazard  is an eccentric who is driven by his devotion to the Lepage horses; as the novel tells us, "extinction  or survival was quite simply to be the fate of the  breed of horse he alone had  preserved  through  six genera­ tions." As he wanders from place to place in his wish to breed the "perfect  horse," he looks for  reference to the  Encyclopedia  Britannica  and  to the  General  Stud Book, a set of leather-bound volumes which form, we are told, "Hazard's history of man  and  his theology."  He  retreats into  his  bizarre mansion  and  pores over breeding lists; he becomes an authority on the attributes of the perfect mare. Every time Poseidon is used as a stud,  Hazard  pockets three  dollars, which  he uses to help maintain his quest.
But Hazard's chaotic  wandering  is a difficult area  for his faithful  biographer.
Artifice and  art  prove to be an  uneasy combination.  Unlike  the  quiet,  retiring Demeter,  Hazard  is a man  of extravagant  tastes. When  the  biographer  first sees Hazard  at a bridal reception, he notices that  his subject is consuming  huge quan­ tities of food and  drink. "In  the midst of all that  extravagance," Demeter com­ plains, "I would only nibble  at  a shimmering  jelly salad  on  one  corner  of my heaped  plate."
When the difference between author  and subject is so great, the myth changes,
for the  reconstruction  may  be incorrect.  Sitting  in  his bathtub,  surrounded  by papers and  notes, Demeter  can see only a mirror  image of reality:  "A  mirror  is so placed  above  my sink that  I  have  been able  to sit for  hours,  attempting  to imagine what in fact did happen  (allowing for the reversal of the image)  exactly where I imagine it. It is then time  I must reconstruct,  not space." The Demeter­ Hazard  relationship  is similar  to the Professor Madham-Jeremy  Sadness  one  in Gone Indian:  in both cases a technological medium proves inadequate in captur­ ing experience. But then biography is not life; it is a  picture of life.
At the novel's end Demeter's  new role as a studhorse man implies his rejection of biography. It is now he who will save the Lepage horses from extinction.  Before this sudden shift, however, he is a dull, tedious priest to Hazard's colourful  con­ fession. He likes to believe that  he and Hazard  are "alike in strenuously  resisting that distortion of facts by which men delude themselves." But he is still a man of facts, an historian, while Hazard  is a man of action. Hazard  denies the  past and prefers life in the present;  Demeter  thrives on assembling "fragments" in a vain attempt  to capture  "a  whole image of the vanished past." Hence  his notes, care­ fully taken  on  three-by-five cards,  mean  nothing  until  they  are  interpreted for "invisible meanings."  He  must be both relevant  and  accurate, and  much  of the detail he recalls is simply relevant. This biography of Hazard  Lepage  is, finally, an incomplete  picture of a man;  the fragments  of the  past  remain  as they were, and the whole image escapes us.


21

LIMITATIONS OF  MEDIA



IT MAY  BE  THAT GUTENBERG MAN  is print-oriented and  needs the freedom of electronic  technology. If this is so, Gone Indian  should  be the re­ verse of The  Studhorse  Man, and  Jeremy Sadness should be fulfilled where  De­ meter is frustrated. But this is not the case, for Jeremy Sadness is just as frustrated  by his tape  recorder  as Demeter  was by the  biographical  form. Gone  Indian  is really an anti-novel, a collection of tape recordings sent by an unemployed  Ameri­ can graduate student,  Jeremy Sadness, to his supervisor, Professor R. Mark  Mad­  ham,  who  then  plays  the  tapes  and  offers comment.s  on  them.  This  structure permits  Kroetsch  to manipulate the time sequence so  that  he can  offer  us mis­ cellaneous events, which  can  be played back at  various times. The  novel is in­ formed by a series of reflections and disguises. If Jeremy disguises himself as him­ self, what  is he trying  to hide?  Is the  mysterious Professor Madham a facet  of Jeremy's own personality? Is it important that the name "Madham" is a combina­  tion of the words "madman" and "madam"? When Jeremy first sees Notikeewin, he notices a mirage  at the same time. His own suitcase has disappeared, and  the one he is carrying  belongs to a mysterious Roger Dorck, the official Winter  King of the Notikeewin Winter Carnival.  On his arrival at the Edmonton  International Airport, Jeremy is met by a beautiful blonde who proceeds to remove her "tattered mink coat," a "tattered red sweat-shirt," her "snowboots," a "patriotic plaid skirt" and, finally, her "tits." She claims to have been a buffalo in a previous existence. No wonder Jeremy asks for the  patience of a buffalo, and  notes that  "illusion  is rife."
Now we do not know how accurate  Professor Madham's transcripts  of Jeremy's tapes are. He is having  an affair  with Jeremy's  wife, Carol, and  is certainly  not unbiased. As Jeremy  tells Professor Madham, "how  ironic:  you do nothing,  I do everything:  we arrive  at  the same  predicament." And once  Professor Madham has listened to the tapes and  has erased them, the record has been destroyed. We actually see Jeremy  as Professor Madham wants us to see him, for Jeremy finally jumps off a bridge, leaving his tape  recorder hanging from a protruding timber.
But Jeremy  does not seem to be any better off with his tape  recorder  than  he
would be if he had to write a book. The details of his universe are fragmented  and not accessible to him. Lost without  his Samsonite suitcase, which contains his be­ loved "grip  developer,"  sweater, socks, and  a few chewed pencils, he  complains he is "marooned for want of a Gillette Blue Blade." So he fortifies himself with a toothbrush,  shaving  set, and  a  "deodorant that  is guaranteed to  seal the  body against disintegration." He always carries many unnecessary keys, and sees life as a door that  might  be unlocked, or, perhaps, as an experience he can collect. The  three  identical  princesses at  the  Notikeewin Winter  Carnival  might  be "Xerox  copies," he muses, but  he cannot  decide which one to crown  as the  queen.  He

22

LIMITATIONS OF  MEDIA

notices that  the  bedroom  at  the Sunderman  house contains  many  clocks, all of which have stopped. The travelling in the novel occurs in symbols of modern technology: trains, cars, and snowmobiles. Significantly, the railway track Jeremy ultimately  follows to his death  proves to be  merely an  antidote, a  corrective  to the "space of his own drowning" in which he is so totally lost.
The  tape  recorder  becomes Jeremy's friend  and  companion. It  allows him to record not only his notes and  feelings, but  also his asides, phone  calls, and  mis­ cellaneous observations; and  it is eventually found dangling  from a timber in the middle of the Kelchamoot  Bridge after Jeremy and Jill Sunderman have  jumped to avoid a train  which is "off schedule" and on a track  "it  was not supposed  to be on." The  recorder  is Jeremy's  most prized  possession and  his  only  real  link with the outside world.
Professor Madham's problem in editing the tapes is, he claims, the overwhelm­ ing detail. The Professor's original suggestion is that Jeremy take the tape recorder with him to help him finish his dissertation. Since Jeremy  is  unable  to write his dissertation, this idea seems logical enough.  Jeremy  will  mail cassettes back  to Professor Madham, who will then  edit them into a  presentable  form. But  prob­ lems arise when Jeremy  finds that  the tape  recorder  provides his only link with the real world. Instead  of sending the cassettes to Professor Madham, he wants to hear his own voice for reassurance. On many of the tapes, he insults the university traditions of which Professor  Madham  is so proud. "I needed my tape  recorder;  given a microphone  I could  have spoken," he says at one point, and  he comes to treat  the tape recorder as a trusty weapon, often drawing  the microphone  as if it were a six-gun. He even uses the microphone to masturbate; and  when he wants to test himself, he tests the tape recorder:

Where he had expected to find his suitcase, he found instead his tape recorder. Consequence: He seized the recorder in his shaking hands. He  jerked the micro­
phone out of its leatherette  pouch. He pushed the plastic buttons, listened for the first whisper of the turning tape:  TESTING, TESTING ONE TWO,  TESTING  THREE  FOUR FIVE   SIX   SEVEN EIGHT  NINE.  He talks. He jumps to his feet and  falls down on the
floor on his toes and fingers and one UP  two UP   three UP   four UP   five. He talks some
more.

In  spite of his tape  recorder,  Jeremy  cannot  escape  the  conditioning  of  his urban  childhood. For he is, in essence, a programmed  robot,  and  he sees all his experience in mechanized  terms. A "child of Manhattan" who has "dreamed Northwest" ever since he was very young, he regards himself as a "poor  city boy set down by blundering  jet among the wicked and the rebellious of the vanished frontier."  Innocent  and in need of experience, he consoles himself with grip exer­ cises, push ups, and sit ups; he feels a constant need to improve himself. His urban  background  has  hardly  prepared   him  for  an  adventure   in  the  wilderness.  He believes he was named  after Jeremy Bentham, the ultimate scholar and  professor,

LIMITATIONS OF  MEDIA

and feels that there was an expectation  in his own family that some day he would become a professor. But as Jeremy reviews his own graduate  programme in English
-the failed  dissertation,  exhausting  teaching,  and  final oral  examination   that
never came -he realizes that  he would have made a poor scholar  indeed.
This combination  of urban  life and scholarly activity has affected Jeremy's love life. He can get an erection when he is standing up, but not when he is lying down. He  believes that  this perhaps  is due  to the "OATH OF  CHASTITY" he took when he was ten, and  he often refers to himself through  the sexual metaphor. He recalls his affair  with  a  Miss Cohen  at  university;  surrounded   by copies of the Norton  Anthology, the  Anatomy of Criticism, and  Notes and  Queries, they had made love while standing  up against  a bookcase. But Jeremy  is impotent  in bed with  his wife, Carol,  even  though  he suggests she  read  to  him  from  Gibbon's Decline and Fall; as he explains, "maybe  I'm  so programmed  that  I  have to be in a learning situation." As in The  Studhorse Man, the penis plays the part  of a trickster. When Jeremy  is worried  he attempts  to "flog''  his "limp  imagination," and  when he is cold he worries because his penis may "freeze off." His only real sexual triumph  comes when  he is able to make love while lying down  with  Bea Sunderman, but  he has already  found out this new sexual potency while resting in a coffin.
These double symbols of creation  and death emphasize Jeremy's  need to reject
the competitive  values of his former  urban  life. Appropriately,  he chooses as his model the mysterious Grey Owl,  a man  who left his native  England  in order  to live in Canada  as an  Indian. This  "model  from the  utmost  cultivated  shores of the civilized world" fascinates Jeremy  but also terrifies him. He wants to emulate Grey Owl, but knows that  to create Grey Owl another  Englishman,  the  uninter­ esting Archie  Belaney, actually  "died  into a new life." For  although  Grey  Owl seemed  to be a real  Indian, he was actually  an  imposter  and  an  illusion. And when Jeremy  decides that  he, too, must live as an  Indian, he  also  becomes an illusion.  Dressed  in  levis, moccasins,  and  a  buckskin  jacket,  he  resembles an Indian  so much  that  he is actually  arrested  and taken for one. But as soon as he speaks to a real Indian, it becomes clear that Jeremy is a fake. In the city he has played at being an Indian, but  never before has he attempted  to live the experi­ ence, and  he finds the  jump from illusion to reality very difficult.




OTHER CHARACTERS BLUR  THE  SEPARATION between illusion and reality. One town resident apparently  died while playing hockey, but phoned his wife after  he died.  This  couple's  house is appropriately   called  "WORLDS END. Some one had left out the apostrophe." But the character who most concerns Jeremy  is the mysterious Roger  Dorck, whose suitcase Jeremy  has picked up by

LIMITATIONS OF  MEDIA

mistake. When  Jeremy  calls Dorck's wife, he finds that  Dorck  went  to the  U.S. on business and cannot  be located;  later, he discovers that  Dorck has met with a snowmobile  accident  and  is lying unconscious in a nearby  hospital.  After  a leap of legendary  proportions on his snowmobile, Dorck is carried  into "Our Lady of Sorrows Hospital" in Notikeewin and there he remains. The  Northern  "Kingdom of Dorck. Snow. And the cold sun" must put on a winter festival without  its ruler in attendance.
Dorck  himself  is a  trickster  figure  who  represents  the  creative   unconscious Jeremy  is trying  to explore. Usually Dorck is the  judge at  the  Festival, and  his absence forces Jeremy  to decide whether  or not he is capable  of being  a  judge. The  records Dorck has kept of previous contests are not available  to Jeremy,  and since Dorck remains in a coma until the end of the novel he can give Jeremy  no guidance.  Hence  except for  Professor Madham's admonishments and  unhelpful directions, Jeremy  is completely on his own. If he is to  judge the  contestants  at the carnival,  the final decision will be his alone.
When  Jeremy  reverts to his academic  mentality for aid,  however,  he receives
little help. Professor Madham is himself the judge of Jeremy, a judge who cannot resist the impulse to evaluate. And since he plays the  part  of Jeremy's  acamedic alter  ego, Professor Madham is often confused with Jeremy  himself. As Jeremy says to  him, "one  false move, Professor, and  instead  of addressing  you,  I'll  be you."  As Jeremy's  thesis director,  Professor Madham has arranged   a  job  inter­ view for him  at the  University of Alberta;  but  we suspect this is really  because the Professor is having an affair with Jeremy's  wife, Carol.  And  Professor Mad­  ham  is the stereotype  of the  college English  professor. A  pompous  bachelor  of forty-seven, he has a social life centred  on the faculty club  and  regular  "Friday Night Mead Suppers." The  rest of his time is spent grading papers and  writing a book on "The Tragic  Vision in Modern Prose," which i5 pretentiously dedicated to "Professors Grunt  and  Fart for drinking stout with me in London." Since Jeremy looks and  sounds like a member  of the  counter-culture, it is not surprising  that Professor Madham's "greying  wavy  hair,"  "squash  player's  perfect  figure,"  and omnipresent  "pipe" are anathema to him.
Professor  Madham tends  to classify the information  Jeremy  sends  him;  and
while  he is editing  the  tapes,  the  Professor cannot  resist adding  sarcastic  com­ ments of his own. Although  he realizes that  the prairies symbolize the "continent interior" in Jeremy's voyage of self-discovery, he thinks the tapes reveal his student to be "avoiding  life" and "failing  miserably." He is unable  to avoid  approaching the tapes as if they were a student's  term  paper,  and  he complains  that  Jeremy "simply  does not  give  us adequate motivation,  adequate  allowance,  for  what happens." Often  he inserts marginal  comments that  indicate he does not  really understand  Jeremy. And the transcript  he produces lacks the total  content  of the

25

LIMITATIONS OF  MEDIA

tape  medium, for it omits the speech patterns  and  inflections which are  basic to the form.
Although  Jeremy  is rejecting  this  academic  approach, he  is limited  by  the academic  quality of his own vision. His "stumbling,  ossified, PhD-seeking  mind" sees everything  in metaphors, in symbols; he hates Professor Madham's "go-get­ a-job syndrome,  publish,  head  a committee,"  but  cannot  escape from  seeing all experience in academic terms. When  he is asked about  women, for  instance,  he pompously replies that  " I think I know something about  women. I've done some graduate work in that  area  of specialization."  He  "skims" the  titles of books in Jill Sunderman's bookcase so he can impress Chairman  Balding in his interview. When he is asked to judge the  princesses in the  Notikeewin Winter  Carnival,  he cannot  avoid  "marking" then  individually;   as  he  puts  it,  "something   in  me wanted to write in the margins of those lives: Awk. Frag. Emph. Cap. Fig." Nine years of graduate school have made him arbitrary  as well as submissive.
Jeremy may well be one object in Professor Madham's "collection of beautiful objects." He can compose articulate  letters of reference and imaginative  epitaphs, but neither of these does him much good in the world of the living, for he cannot finish his dissertation  and  thus  cannot  get a  job. Titles  and  dedications  become obsessions, for Jeremy loses interest as soon as he begins a particular  topic. In fact, he begins to see life itself in  terms  of his dissertation. During  a  shoe  race,  for instance,  he begins a dissertation  called "Collapse:  The  Theory  and  Practice"; after  making  love to  Bea Sunderman, he thinks  he may  reflect  his success by writing  one  called  "The Quest   Unquestioned."  None  of  these  attempts   goes beyond a title, but  he has brought  along six notebooks in case ideas start  to flow quickly, and  if he should  finish one  page he will immediately  copy it  "lest  the original  be destroyed  in a two-plane  crash or a bombing  outrage." Yet even in the  multiplicity  of imaginative  experiences in  Notikeewin,  inspiration  does  not come to Jeremy's  academic  mind.
Trained by the  urban  academic  world to  judge, to classify, and  to evaluate, Jeremy  finds himself in  a situation  where these skills are  useless. At  the  Winter Carnival  he is even addressed  as "Judge," and  people are  impressed because he has come all the way from  New York. Yet he finds the beauty  contest cannot  be judged, though  his academic  conscience tells him he must  judge the beauty con­ test and  he knows it. As he tries to reach a conclusion, he thinks of  "Dissertation  Number  Eight," which appropriately takes the form of "Colon: Blank" and then, finally, "The  Forgery of Distance: Ritual for a Long Night." After futile attempts  to classify the contestants  as I, II, and III, or as RED, WHITE, and YELLOW, he finally places the  crown  on  the  head  of the  "BUFFALO WOMAN," Miss Jill Sunderman, who is not even running  in the contest. And in so doing he sym­ bolically rejects the statistical mind, the academic mentality;  he opts out of urban  society by refusing to participate in  one of its own rituals-the  beauty  contest.

LIMITATIONS OF  MEDIA

He proves to be as inept at judging a contest as he was at writing his dissertation; and  perhaps  the two problems are related, for he is unable  to use his facilities to extend his power through  the media. This failure is as pathetic  in its own way as Demeter's  was in The Studhorse Man.
In The  Studhorse Man and  Gone Indian, Kroetsch's  philosophical  position is
ambiguous. Both Demeter and Jeremy are limited in their power to communicate, and  they seem compelled  to explore their  respective psyches through  the  media available to them. One novel is a mock biography, the other is a collection of badly edited tape recordings. These are considerable achievements, but they do not really present a unified vision of man in society; for Demeter  and  Jeremy  are  isolates, not typical men, and their societies are highly artificial. Kroetsch shows his talents for experimentation in these two novels, and his interest in how the media control us. But we still are, for all that, Gutenberg men, and we will, like Kroetsch's anti­ heroes, continue  to question  and  rebel against the media we created  to serve our needs.







THE JIPJIRTMENT
 

Dayv James French


My bootheels tapping out the boundaries of the apartment-to-let
will be the substance of my biography.

Once the carpeting is laid,
minor appliances find counter space, I'll be only a footnote for reference.

Cocktail conversation will pose a question, the necessity of annotation, e.g.
"I noticed egg shells in the sink.

Are they symbolic, the dichotomy
of cleanliness and godliness, obvious
Easter mythologies, spirit vs machine?"

I'll remember the rooms as empty, needing no explanation but
will, strangely, not desire to move.

REINVENTING THE WORD
Kroetsch's Poetry



Susan Wood


1:HEROES OF  ROBERT KROETSCH'S  NOVELS stagg"hugely
into myth, roaring across the West in an endless quest that ends in death, or ironic
triumph. The  less-than-heroic  narrators  follow their  progress with  an  analagous search for the words and  form to tell the tale of a Hazard  Lepage or a William Dawe. In  The  Words  of  My  Roaring,  that  double search  for a meaning  and  a mode of expression comes together  in Johnny  Backstrom's narrative,  as he reveals the private,  accidental  and  comic story of how he became a public hero.  It's  no accident  that we last see him searching for words, to speak to the voters of Coulee Hill.
The  double search recurs in Kroetsch's  poetry. In several of the poems written
between  I96o and  I975, collected as The  Stone  Hammer  Poems  (I975), and  in the recent long poems The  Ledger  (I 973,  I 975)  and "Seed Catalogue" (I 977), he seeks his own roots  (which  assume national  and  archetypal  significance)  and an authentic  language appropriate to the reality he discovers. Like Al Purdy hold­ ing a book of his ancestors'  photographs  at the beginning of In Search of  Owen  Roblin,  or  his own  Anna  Dawe  following her  father's  field notes in  Badlands, Kroetsch  begins with  the  artifact,  the  relic. He  evokes the  remote  Indians  who shaped the stone maul, the grandfather who wrote the precise entries in the ledger, as he now shapes the search and  writes the poem. Like Newlove in  "The Pride"  (for whom the search and the poem are also one) , like Purdy in "Lament for the Dorsets,"  Atwood  in  "For   Archeologists,"  or  Bowering in  "Grandfather," he achieves an  intuitive  connection  with  the  past. A  grandfather, a tribe  of plains Indians; an Ontario mill, a prairie  homestead;  a dead Indian, a farm  and  a life abandoned by the now-rootless seeker: it has all become familiar material  in con­ temporary  Canadian literature. What transforms it, for Kroetsch as for the other poets, is the same power which transformed  the stone into a hammer  into a talis­ man:  the power of the imagination. Those poets, like Kroetsch, who can speak to us of the presence of  the past have not only achieved a unique,  personal sense of its importance  in  shaping  their  present lives, but  have also found  the  authentic  language  to communicate that  vision.

KROETSCH'S POETRY


"The Canadian writer  must  uninvent the  word.  He  must  destroy  the  homony­ mous  American  and   English   languages  that   keep  him  from   hearing  his  own tongue," Kroetsch   wrote  in  introducing "A  Canadian  Issue"  of   Boundary  2. 1
What does a given  word,  denoting a given  artifact, mean  for  Robert Kroetsch, grandson of an  Ontario miller  and  an  Alberta   homesteader, teacher  at  SUNY Binghamton, writer  returning to  Canadian settings  in  each  of his  novels?  What does "a hammer/ of stone" mean?

1.

This stone
become a hammer
of stone, this maul

is the colour of bone  (no,
bone is the colour
of this stone maul) .

The  rawhide  loops are gone, the
hand  is gone, the
buffalo's skull
is gone;

the stone is
shaped like the skull
of a child.


2.
This  paperweight  on my desk where I begin
this poem 	was
found in a wheatfield
lost (this hammer, this poem).

Cut  to a function, this stone was
(the hand is   gone -2

The  opening lines of "Stone Hammer Poem" announce Kroetsch's methods and preoccupations. In short,  incantatory lines he repeats  the word  to evoke the object in different  contexts  and  thus  call  up  different   memories  and   associations. The "colour of bone,"  for  example, suggests the  buffalo  skull,  and, in  section  3, the

KROETSCH'S POETRY

squaw  who may  have  "left  it in/  the  brain  of the  buffalo."  The  "retreating" Indians  of section 5, in tum,  suggest in section 8 the sale of the land  (formed  by the "retreating" and "recreating" glaciers), to the CPR which sold it to the pioneer grandfather, who "gave it to my father ... who/  gave it to his son (who sold it.)" The guilt and grief Kroetsch feels, remembering this abandonment, are powerfully suggested in section 10, as he moves closer to his own history, his own feelings. On one level, this section conveys the factual  information  that  the father  found  and kept the stone maul  that  broke the grandfather's plough; on another, it provides a clear picture of an old man, "lonesome for death," and "lonesome for his absent/ son and his daughters."
The  opening  description  of  the  hammer,  too, suggests the  hand,  now  bone,
which cut the stone to its "function," as the poet's hand shapes his words. Tracing the history of the stone hammer, then, involves Kroetsch in a personal  reckoning with his family, with the general  Western experience, and with  his own craft. At first, he is the observer,  seeking  the  words to describe precisely. Yet  the  poet's mind, circling round the word, gradually edges closer into the world of the object, and the emotional associations it calls up. By the end of the poem, after accepting the memory of his father,  old and  alone, he no longer simply observes the stone. Instead,  he has only to touch  it to live fully, imaginatively  in its world, smelling cut grass and  buffalo blood. The  process of association is weblike. Each separate strand   (Indian, German  grandfather, father,  inheritor-poet)  is finally  perceived to be part  of a pattern, with its centre  the inheritance  of life represented  by the hammer: a tool to kill buffalo;  a mere stone impeding another  tool, the plough; a relic; now a paperweight  and  talisman for the modem  poet, suited  to his func­ tion:

Sometimes  I write my poems for that

stone hammer.

This  process of incantation, repeating  the word to invoke visions of the object, is also central  to the ongoing  poem Field Notes, of which The  Ledger and "Seed Catalogue" are the first two books. It is enhanced  by the visual form of the books themselves. The  Stone  Hammer  Poems is attractively designed by Joy Leach and Lilian  Harrison,  printed  by Tim  Chisholm in brown  ink on sepia  paper,  to  re­ semble a treasure  from  the attic.  It  is illustrated  with historic photographs from the Glenbow  Foundation: a plains Indian  encampment  for "Old Man Stories," retellings of the legends of Coyote the Trickster, clearly an ancestor  of  the comic­ sexual Kroetsch hero; and a threshing crew, after "Spring Harvest" and "October  Light,"  vivid farm memories. This extra visual dimension is used even more effec­ tively in The  Ledger, which extends the central metaphor  to our eyes.

KROETSCH'S POETRY


the ledger

itself
 the ledger survived

because it was neither human  nor usefuP


The  ledger  is the  "book  of final entry, in which  a record  of debits,  credits  and all money  transactions is kept," bought  by Henry  Hauck, Canadian-born son of a Bruce  County pioneer,  to  hold  his sawmill  accounts. Grandson Bob  found "the green  poem," and  wove it into another book:

EVERYTHING I WRITE I SAID,  IS A SEARCH
(is debit, is credit)
is a search 		for some pages remaining

(by accident)


the poet:  finding in the torn ledger
 the column straight
the column  broken


FINDING


everything  you write
my wife, my daughters,  said is a search 	for  the dead
 
the book of final entry
in which  a record is kept.


As originally  published  in Applegarth's Folly 1 in 1973, the double  columns of the poem, first, recall the actual ledger  and thus give force to Kroetsch's own account­ ing. "How much  do I owe?"  becomes a refrain. How  much  do I owe to the  past? What debts of gratitude or guilt do I owe to these "specimens of the self-made men
who have made  Canada what  it is?"


Shaping  the trees. Pushing up daisies.
 I'll be damned.
It balances.


Second,  the  double  columns  force  their  own  interpretations and  representations, as the lines can  be read  both  across  (as in Anglo-Saxon poetry)  and  down, with the opposite  column  in ironic  counterpoint. Meanings are  multiple and  intercon­ nected,  as are  the six meanings of the  key word  "ledger," each  unlocking a  dif­ ferent  vision of the  past. The  poet-accountant tallies up his family's  past, our  past, seeking to balance myths  and  realities.

KROETSCH'S  POETRY



bE FINAL,  SINGLE-VOLUME  FORMAT of the  poem, designed by Michael  Niederman  and  Hilary  Bates, adds another  dimension  to this central metaphor.  Two  pages,  flanking  the  titles,  reproduce  pages  of  Henry  Hauck's ledger. The  columns of figures tell of dead men's work and  wages, await balance and interpretation. The  title page, a map of Culrose and Carrick townships, Bruce County,  I88o, extends the theme. A heavy black circle rings the notation "saw m," a red-ink scrawl proclaims, "Yes, that's the place, R.K." The  poet asserts his place as a guide to, and  modifier of, the past. Even the paper is heavy buff ledger stock. Finally, all the resources of different type styles, lovingly hand-set, complement the author's resources of language  by emphasizing  key words, and setting off the  his­ torical material  (quotations, and entries from the original ledger)  from the "green poem" growing around  them.
Some accountings are the obvious ones of modern guilt:

To  raise a barn cut  down  a forest.
To raise oats and  hay;

burn  the  soil.

To  raise cattle  and  hogs :


kill the  bear kill the mink kill the  marten kill the lynx kill the  fisher kill the  beaver
kill the moose
 "As  to the climate of the  district, Father Holzer  cannot praise  it enough. He declares  that  during the first nine months of his residence  here  they  had  only one funeral, and  that  was of a man
84 years old."


Quickly,  the  balance  becomes more  personal.  Ledger  also means  "a  resident." Grandfather Henry  and John  0. Miller, brickmaker, meet:


That they might  sit down a forest  had  fallen.
 to a pitcher of Formosa  beer


Canada Gazette  notices of land for sale, census figures, become individual settlers; a national  accounting  becomes the personal vision of their hopes, and  the failure of hopes.

KROETSCH'S POETRY

CENSUS, 1861,  TOWNSHIP OF  CARRICK:


"Indians if any"






none





Gottlieb Haag's only son grew  up  to be the first man hanged for murder
in the County of Bruce

(I can't believe my eyes.)

having, on a wintry  night, in
a sleigh  box on  the road from
Belmore  to Formosa, clubbed  to death his rival

(I can't believe my eyes.)
 Name: Catherine Schneider
Year  of birth:  1841
Place  of birth:  Atlantic Ocean

Place  of  birth:  Atlantis, the  kingdom sought beyond  the stone  gates beyond  the old  home, beyond  the  ceaseless
wars of the  Rhine Palatinate. The sought continent of fortune lying beyond
your father's recurring
nightmare of the  (forced)
march  to Moscow
(my bones ache) , beyond  the  flight from  the  burning fields. Beyond
the night  of terror
crossing  the closed border.  Atlantis:
the kingdom dreamed


in love

The term "ledger" also  means "a  horizontal piece  of  timber secured to  the uprights supporting the  putlogs in  a scaffolding, or  the  like." As such, it suggests not only settlers raising barns, but  also Kroetsch erecting the  scaffolding of a poem on  that word.  Each meaning becomes the  organizing metaphor of  a  section. As "a large  flat  stone, esp.  one  laid  over  a  tomb," the  ledger suggests  great-grand­
mother Theresia Tschirhart, who


Married three  Bavarians. Buried  three  Bavarians.

What did most men  feel in her  presence?

What did  they do about  it?
 
it  balances

Terror.


Proposed.


She  embodies the  mysterious power of the  unknown new land:

33

KROETSCH'S  POETRY









She was a ringtailed  snorter just the same.
 The Canadian climate:
a short summer
followed by a short  winter followed by a short summer followed by a short  winter

(you must marry the terror)


Dead  of a broken  hip, buried  in a frozen Alberta  grave, she survives  in the  poem, after  every settler  has paid  in full and  Kroetsch  has tried to complete his balances. She, grandfather Henry catching fish in the millpond, Joe  Hauck mangled by the water  wheel, all survive: not  literally, as the ledger  does, but  imaginatively, sum­ moned  to the  present  by Kroetsch's imagination. As timber  supporting a scaffold­  ing, as "a  book that  lies permanently in some  place,"  and  especially  as "the book of final  accounting," the  ledger  becomes  the  living  poem.  As "the  nether mill­ stone," Kroetsch's mind  too is the ledger, grinding the raw  material of names  and figures into  a living account:


you must see
the confusion again the chaos        again the original forest
 
under the turning  wheel the ripened  wheat,  the razed forest, the wrung man:  the  nether  stone


The  grandfather's cold figures from  the  past,  the grandson's passionate search  for the  meaning of the  past,  move  in separate columns,  separate typefaces,  down  the thick  buff pages to their  final balance:

REST  IN PEACE
You Must  Marry  the Terror

Kroetsch's immediate past  cannot be summed up so neatly.  "Seed  Catalogue" is a  more  diffuse  poem  in  form  and  content, with  its central image  forming an ironic  commentary on the  remembered incidents, rather  than  unifying  them.  The seed  catalogue arrives  in  "the dark  of January,"  promising spring, promising miraculous crops:

#339-McKenzie's Pedigreed  Early Snowcap Cauliflower: "Of  the many  varieties of vegetables in existence, Cauliflower is unquestionably one of the greatest inheritances of the
present generation, particularly  Western  Canadians. There is no  place in the world  where better  cauliflower  can be grown  than  right here in the West. The  finest specimens
we have ever  seen, larger  and  of better  quality, are  annually grown  here on our  prairies. Being particularly  a high
altitude plant it thrives  to a  point of perfection  here,
seldom  seen in warmer  climes." 4

34

KROETSCH'S POETRY

Mary Hauck, like the catalogue, came West in January, only to find "an  absence." Similarly  the  poet, following  the truth of his memories  ("This is what  happened," "This is a fact,") finds, at first, very little for his imagination. Where Bruce  County had  trees, fertile soil, history, Heisler Alberta seems to offer no artifacts of  civiliza­ tion,  nothing out  of which  Kroetsch can  reconstruct a past.

How do you grow a prairie town?

The  gopher was the model. Stand  up straight:
telephone poles grain elevators church steeples.
Vanish, suddenly:  the gopher was the model.

How do you grow a past/
to live in

the absence of silkworms
the absence of clay and wattles (whatever the hell they are)
the absence of Lord Nelson
the absence of kings and queens
the absence of a bottle opener, and me with a vicious attack  of the 26-ounce flu
the absence of both Sartre and Heidegger the absence of pyramids
the absence of lions
the absence of lutes, violas and xylophones
the absence of a condom dispenser in the Lethbridge
Hotel, and me about  to screw an old
Blood whore. I was in love.

The  question begins to answer  itself when  Kroetsch  begins  to  remember what
was there:

the girl who said that if the Edmonton Eskimos won the Grey Cup she'd let me kiss her nipples in the foyer of the
Palliser Hotel. I don't  know where she got to

or the local  hero, the Strauss  boy who "could  piss right  clean  over  the  principal's new car." Here,  he seems to be seeking  what  William  Carlos  Williams  called  "a local  pride," expressed  in  its  appropriate idiom.  In  a  recent  interview, he  also acknowledged the debt  Prairie poets owe to Al Purdy, who led the  way in  "aban­ doning given  verse forms  for the  colloquial,  the  prosaic,  telling  yarns  in  the  oral

35

KROETSCH'S  POETRY

tradition."5  Thus while  "Seed  Catalogue" does make  use  of the  double-column structure of The  Ledger, it is less formal,  less consciously "artistic" creation, appro­ priate  to the unromantic reality  it portrays.  In  fact, its primary form  is not poetry at all, but anecdote:

How  do you grow a prairie town?

Rebuild  the hotel when it burns down. Bigger. Fill it full of a lot of A-1 Hard  Northern  bullshitters.

-You ever hear the one about  the woman who buried her husband  with his ass sticking out of the ground so that  every time she happened  to walk by she could give it a swift kick?

-Yeh, I heard  it.

Unfortunately here, and  in other  poems in the Stone Hammer  and  Seed Catalogue collections,  Kroetsch wavers  uneasily  between  the  poetic  and  the  prosaic,  unable to  come  to satisfying  terms  with  either  one.  Unwilling to  transcend the  prairie town  reality,  which  he records  in its flat colloquial  language, he ends by failing  to illuminate it either. We've "heard it"  before;  so what's new?  Similarly  he seems unable, finally,  to find  meaning in his less-than-heroic origins.  The  final  product of Heisler  seems to be  Kenneth MacDonald, the  cousin  shot  down  in I 943  over his great-grandmother's birthplace, Cologne:

He was the first descendant  of that family to return
to the Old Country.  He took with him:  a cargo of bombs.




IT's INHOSPITABLE SOIL  for the growing seeds, or for the grow­ ing boy who fell off a horse that  was standing still, and  remembers, from his child­ hood, the hired  man's jeers. The  "home place"  to which  he returns is  just a junc­  tion of lines on a map, a union  of extremes:

the home place: N.E. 17-42-16-W4th Meridian

the home place:  I 1'2 miles west of Heisler, Alberta, on the correction line road
and  three miles south.
No trees
around  the  house. Only the wind.
Only the January snow. Only the summer  sun.

KROETSCH'S POETRY

The home place:
a terrible symmetry.

"How do  you grow a lover?" the  poet asks, remembering  how  he and  Ger­ maine,  in the  barn,  "were  like I one" -and  remembering,  too, how  the  priest taught  them  that  they  were "playing  dirty."  His friend,  writer  James  Bacque, seems to answer the question when he comments to the adult  Kroetsch:  "You've  got to deliver  the  pain  to some woman, don't  you?" With  the  exception  of the mother, with her understanding and her sweet peas, the rest of  the women in the poem are objects of frustrated  lust  (the Indian  whore, "that girl I you felt up in the school barn,") or uncaring, like the football fan or the woman in the bar who
won't  listen to his story of the  champion  bronco-buster  killed by his horse,  the male destroyed by his pride. The only affirmations of life, in the memories of the past, seem to be the  vanishing  gophers and  the  badger  that  eluded  his father's gun all one summer, in a long game.

Love is a standing up to the  loaded  gun.




Love is also not much in evidence.
 Love is a burrowing.

Brame grass is about  all that survives, in this climate. "Flourishes  under  abso­ lute neglect," the catalogue says. "But  how do you grow a poet?" This  is the cen­ tral question of the poem; and Kroetsch finds no direct answer. His mother  gives him  cod liver oil, sulphur  and  molasses. His father,  busy giving  "form  to  this land,"  gives him appropriate tools-a  crowbar,  a sledge, a  roll of  barbed  wire
-and work:

First off I want you to take that crowbar and drive 1,156  holes
in that gumbo.
And the next time you want to
write a poem
we'll start  the haying.

Defeat seems inevitable:  the only "poem"  is the straight  prairie  road,  "between nowhere and  nowhere,"  with the poet as a porcupine  killed trying to cross it;  or it is the snow-covered  prairie,  with the poet as a  rabbit  leaving  behind  only "a spoor of wording."  Rudy  Wiebe shows him the land,  and  ways to write  "great black steel lines of fiction"  to give it imaginative  shape.  He  and  AI Purdy  get drunk, shout  poems in an Edmonton  restaurant.  He re-reads The  Double  Hook; he looks at a Japanese  print that shows "How  it is," the truth  of everyday reality. Yet he still cannot  find words for the land,  which seems to offer only the  alter­ natives of death or escape:

37

KROETSCH'S  POETRY


After the bomb /blossoms
After the city /falls
After the rider /falls
(the horse
standing still)
 Poet, teach us
to love our dying.

West  is a winter  place. The  palimpsest of prairie


under  the  quick  erasure of snow, invites a  flight.


How/  do you grow a garden?

How  do you grow a poet? The  question is a crucial one. Perhaps  the answer lies in the  poet's inability  to lift the language  and  the town into some universal illumination. The  world of "Seed  Catalogue" remains harsh  to the end. Nothing grows there:

No trees
around the house,
only the wind.
Only the January snow. Only the summer sun.

Adam  and Eve got  drowned­ Who  was left?

Not the  poet, certainly,  whose escape is confirmed  in the  third  section of Field Notes. "How  I joined the Seal Herd" is a sustained fantasy in which the narrator, like some Gaelic ballad-hero,  learns to swim with his seal-lover in the life-sustain­ ing sea. In "Seed  Catalogue," however, there is no final acceptance, as there is in "Stone  Hammer Poem"  and  The  Ledger, unless it is in  the lines:  "We  silence words I by writing  them down."
Kroetsch,  like many  contemporary  Canadian  writers, acknowledges in "Stone
Hammer  Poem" his compulsive need to seek out his past:

?what happened
I have to/  I want
to know (not know)
?WHAT HAPPENED

Yet perhaps his most eloquent  contribution  to this theme is his acknowledgement that the past may not, in fact, have a positive meaning for us. The  Heisler legacy may, in  fact,  be  Kenneth   MacDonald's "strange  muse:  forgetfulness,"  and  his violent destruction of a past which no longer has meaning. The quintessential Kroetsch  hero, then, is the reborn  man  of one of his most eloquent  poems:  "F.
P. Grove:  The  Finding." 6  The  writer Grove, "dreaming Europe 1 if only to find

KROETSCH'S POETRY

a  place  to  be from," creates  a  glorious  past  for  himself;  but  Kroetsch  gently mocks  his falsehoods.  Grove's real  journey  is a forward one,  through the  world­ burying snows of Over  Prairie  Trails  which  lift "the taught man  into  the  coyote self." It is a daring journey  away  from  the created  past, the  civilized self, towards "the sought/ and  calamitous edge    of the  white earth," into  possibility,  and  the new  life  represented by  his  wife.  So  Kroetsch   seeks out  his  past,  adds   up  his accounts-"How much  do I owe?"-and  then goes on to his future, the  poet's  task of "uninventing" the  inherited words in order  to tell new stories.

Not to recover but simply to face/  force the past to discover:

e.g., that  time

is

space

e.g., that  the language itself is a

word

e.g., that  the poet was the morning  of man and

the sun setting.7






1 3, no. I (Fall  I974),  p. I.
 NOTES

2   "Stone Hammer  Poem" in The  Stone Hammer  Poems (Nanaimo: Oolichan  Press, I975), pp. 54-59· The  poem first appeared  in Creation, ed. Robert  Kroetsch  (To­ ronto: new press, I 970),  pp. 44-49·
8 The  Ledger  (London: Applegarth Follies, I975).  The  poem was first published in
Applegarth's  Folly, I  (Summer  I973),  pp. 79-97·
4   "Seed Catalogue,"  in Seed Catalogue  (Winnipeg:  Turnstone Press, I977). Refer­ ences here are to the author's typescript. This collection also includes the third  sec­ tion of Field Notes, "How  I Joined  the Seal Herd."
5  Robert  Enright  and  Dennis  Cooley, "Uncovering  Our  Dream  World:   An  Inter­ view With Robert  Kroetsch," Arts Manitoba,  I,  no. I  (January-February  1977), p. 36.
6   "F. P. Grove:  The  Finding," Stone Hammer  Poems, pp. 46-47.
7  "Sentence,"  Stone Hammer  Poems, p. 6o.

39

POEM
 

EVENING DJIYDREJIM

Alexandre L. Amprimoz

light  winds  caress the plain with  young  lovers'  oaths

as seeds return to their  first field again 	your  lost  words
find  my house
and  the curtains are  moved
by the echo  of your  kind  breath

the walls recall  your  perfume and  I hear  the  photograph your  paper-heart
repeating a known  beat

in your  phantom-voice
I find at  the  bottom of words a secure  shelter -prelude
of a gone  love allowing me to assist at  my own  birth

stripping the land  of its bird songs pushing the  slow voice of bells over  the  waterfalls
to find  a tomb  in my memory the wind  reverberates
like a magic  mirror your  dead  image

POEM


THE  FIN:zllPOEM
 


Irving Layton


I must  go on with  my crazy drives  to the end;
in  time  my compulsions will become  clear  if not to me  then  to everyone  else, to my wife, friends, children and  to all  who thought me a simple  madman sometimes vicious,  most of the time laughter-provoking in my passion to make  rustless steel out of mere  air

It  is too  late  to whisk them  out  of my greying  hair; besides, they're not  like dandruff to make  a semi-halo around my shoulders. The  brush  doesn't  exist
that  will free me of them,  clear  my head
and  make  it  light  and  apostolical like my mother who kerosened  the  lice out  of it when  I was a child

I'm  insane  enough   to love two women
both  ravishing, both  good  in  bed,  both  equally  sure
I'm  that  rarest  of geniuses, one who's  well-hung and  without a trace  of sadism  in his make-up The  trouble starts  when  they  offer  me
two opposing lifestyles, two opposite  destinies

For  the  years still to fall from  the calendar. Take my word  for  it, the disjunction has given my inflamed  pebbles  a turn  for  the  worse.
0 race  of shallow  materialists, shallower  cynics, the  fruits  of love, no man  however  wise
can quite  foresee; and  I'm  a compulsive  Heraclitean

Cruelly  racked  by ambivalences. I  must  have
two of everything: tape  recorders, billfolds,  poetic  visions. I never  leave a store with  only one hat  or scarf.
Such  amassing  must content the self and  anti-self
or were  I toplofty  as William  B. Yeats  I'd  say
the man  and  his mask or something equally  flaunty

For  pedants who  earn  their  chops  decoding
the graffitti  one  writes  on  the  walls of God's  lively ciborium. Well,  they'll  come  for me at  the end
when  I stiffen  in my love's arms-eeny, meeny,  miny  mo­
and  should  an  imp  of Lucifer  hear  me moan  or  pule
I'll  do penance and  write  my final poem  in Hell

WIEBE'S SENSE OF COMMUNITY




Francis Mansbridge








MosT CONTEMPORARY CANADIAN NOVELISTS  are  writ­ ing  within  an  urban context. To  be  more  precise,  their  concerns   are  generally  those of our society in its more  "highly  developed" state -the  problem of aliena­ tion,  a sense of  personal guilt,  the  search  for  basic  values,  the  healing  power  of love -all  are  concerns which   modern  Canadian   novelists  explore,   often  with great  skill and sensitivity. The nature of these concerns  is often shaped by a vision of the  world  in  which  the  traditional feelings of  community have  broken  down; the individual finds himself  in existential isolation, charting his own  fate  with  no exterior  guide  on which  he can  rely, and  no possibility of any  return to a state  in which  the individual can strengthen himself on the  values of those with  whom  he shares  his life.
If not entirely  opposed  to this mainstream of the contemporary Canadian novel,
Rudy   Wiebe's  interests are  certainly divergent. Throughout  Wiebe's   work  is  a strong  sense of  community-a sense of  man  as  part  of  a  larger  context, even though his protagonists often  spend  much  of their  time  trying  to  establish  their identity either  within  or in opposition to their  community. His earlier  work draws on his Mennonite background as a correlative  through which  to express this sense of community. Often, as in his first novel Peace Shall Destroy Many, the negative elements  of repression  exerted  by the  community are  portrayed vividly. But even here  the  feeling  emerges  that  the  community is good  and  will, in some  form  or another, survive.  It is logical  that  Wiebe  should  turn  in  his more  recent  writing to re-create the history  of Big Bear  and  his times. Like the  Mennonite society, the Indian society  of  this  time  possessed a strong  sense of community, although, in Wiebe's  version  at  least,  a greater sense of the spiritual content of life. His  novel The  Temptations of Big Bear is the  most  detailed evocation  of  this society,  but later  writing has  continued to  reveal  Wiebe's  fascination with  this  time  in  such stories as "Games for Queen Victoria" in the March 1976 issue of Saturday Night.

42

WIEBE'S COMMUNITY

A discussion of his first novel will serve to open up some of the central concerns of his work. Published when he was only twenty-eight, Peace Shall Destroy Many remains an unusual achievement, deserving far more than  the condescending "promising" which is often  the excuse for relegating first novels to the  category of better dead than  read.
Peace Shall Destroy Many describes the attempts  of Wapiti,  a Mennonite com­
munity  in  northern  Saskatchewan, to isolate itself from  the  changing  world  of
1944· More particularly,  it relates the growth of Thomas  Wiens to manhood, and his consequent struggle  for freedom in a community  whose repressiveness allows little room for original  thinking  or acting. The  formidable  figure of Peter  Block, (aptly  named,  for  he  blocks Thorn's  growth), is the  major  obstacle  to  Thorn's achievement  of independence. Block, the founder  and  unquestioned  head  of the community, is the autocratic father-figure whom Thorn must confront  to gain the power to release his own character.
The structure of the novel reveals considerable control in the hands of the young novelist. Oppositions  between the old and  the new, between youth  and  age, and between instinct  and  rationality,  are effectively presented.  Frequent   changes  of pace and  the ability to express feelings associated with domestic scenes or  bitter elemental conflicts help give the novel variety and interest. Wiebe's main  problem in this novel appears  to be assimilating a wide range of thoughts  and  ideas into a sufficiently refined form. The  structure  is sturdy,  but  roughhewn.  There  are  too many  passages, such as the long confrontation  between Joseph  Dueck  and  Peter Block in the first section, in which Wiebe indulges in long  discussions of issues. While they have considerable  merit these might have been presented more effec­ tively either symbolically or through  action.
Throughout much  of Wiebe's work there exists a tension between  the mystery of life and the rational; often they cannot comprehend  one another.  In this novel the tension between Peter Block and Thorn Wiens is heightened  by their differing attitudes toward the mystery that exists around  them and within themselves. Peter Block's response to  his instincts is stern Calvinist  repression;  he simply does not acknowledge the darker  side of his nature. But the demons that  lurk  behind  his religious exterior will not be stilled. He has killed a man in Russia, and  threatens Louis Moosomin with castration for having had intercourse with Block's daughter. The  instinctual  fires also erupt  in Elizabeth Block's affair  with  Louis Moosomin, in Thorn  Wiens'  own sexual  feelings towards  the school teacher  Razia  Tanta­ mount,  and  especially in the  climax of the novel, in which  Mennonite  punches Mennonite,  while Razia,  straw  clinging to her dress, is a bemused  spectator.
In the course of the novel Thorn  Wiens realizes that there is more to this world than  is dreamt  of in  the  rigid,  orthodox  philosophy of  Peter  Block;  there  are aspects of his instinctual  nature  which he must recognize and accept. This recogni­ tion lies behind his acceptance  of the half-breeds through  teaching  them  Sunday

43

WIEBE'S COMMUNITY

School. Conversely, Peter  Block's rejection of the half-breeds  is in  keeping  with his suppression of his instinctual  nature. The  half-breeds, because their instinctual nature  is beyond the control of rationality, are feared and rejected  by Peter Block and most of the Mennonite community.
This duality between instinct and  rationality finds a natural expression through the use of the barn to symbolize instinctual nature, in contrast to the rational  order with which the remainder  of the Mennonite  lives is generally characterized. Barns are  traditionally  the  places in  which  or  behind  which  instinctual  things  occur. And in  Peace  Shall  Destroy  Many it is in a barn  that  an  enraged  Peter  Block threatens  Louis Moosomin, and  in a barn  that  the climax of the novel occurs, in which the repressed sex and violence of the young men finally finds some release. But it is in  a  barn  also, we are  reminded  through  the  Christmas  pageant   just before the climactic scene, that Christ was born. Our instinctual  natures have possibilities for good as well as evil.




l:ROUGH SUCH PARALLELS, Wiebe provides a suitable frame­ work for the novel. But the prose in which he does so is often not  as impressive. Wiebe is not a great prose stylist; he is living proof of the strange fact that  a writer may be a considerable  novelist while having a very indifferent  command  of the English language.  One  can admire  the superb prose of such  writers as Robertson Davies, John  Updike,  or  Vladimir   Nabokov,  but  the  novel  also has  room  for those such  as Henry  Miller  or  Frederick  Grove-writers whose frequent  awk­ wardness is tolerated  by most readers. Perhaps we can feel a greater  trust  in their work, as glittering  prose can dazzle the reader  to the point at which he may feel he has been conned into accepting more than  he had really wished. There  is little danger  of this in the work of  Rudy Wiebe.
Wiebe's  frequently  awkward  and  ponderous style recalls that  of Grove.  Mor­ decai Richler has said of Grove that "the  plain fact is he couldn't  write very well." True, yet he is a formidable  novelist, and so is Wiebe. But Wiebe's prose does have its difficult moments.  Consider,  for example,  the following sentence  from  Peace Shall  Destroy  Many:

For him to have another person in the house, one who did not leave hurriedly but peeped into his neat cupboards and fingered the windowcurtains, a woman who had  just been there as slowly he must have grown conscious of her whom, as he had laughingly put it, he had before merely considered as the "Moosomin-girl-who­ gets-the-milk", the  raging storm  must suddenly have  seemed a  thrust  into  hu­ manity.

Even  in context,  this sentence,  with  its tongue-twisting clusters of personal  pro­
nouns, is hardly  a model of clarity.


44

WIEBE'S COMMUNITY

Similarities  in characterization exist between Grove and  Wiebe.  Each  has an ability to create impressive pioneer figures, but a similar faltering  when attempting more "modern" character  types. While Razia Tantamount and  Hank  Unger,  in Peace Shall Destroy Many, are  the least convincing  characters  in this novel, the Mennonite characters  have a deeply realized vitality. And  Wiebe is capable  of a naturalness  and humour  with his characters, as in the scenes in the Wiens' house­ hold, that  Grove rarely achieves.
Yet if Wiebe sometimes writes awkwardly, there  are also happier  times, as in the preludes to each of the four sections of which the novel is composed. They are both  structurally  and  stylistically accomplished,  and  it is hard  to  imagine  that the  writer  responsible for the sentence quoted  earlier should  also be capable  of such evocative prose as the following:

The  man said abruptly, pointing north, "See the geese-beyond the grain­
there."
The  boy stared, fascinated, high into the morning sunlight. The  V of the wild geese wedged through the autumn sky, honking south over the prostrate field that
waited ponderously ripe for harvest.

Each  section is titled  with a season of the year, and  each  prelude  sets the  mood for the actions that are to occur in that section, while suggesting what  the general import  of these actions will be.
Wiebe uses these preludes to both support the structure  of the novel and illumi­ nate some of its central concerns. The first prelude, to spring, describes two young boys playing hookey on a spring day. Though  unnamed,  the two are clearly pre­ sented as white and  Indian; in the course of the novel it becomes clear that  they are half-breed Jackie Labrett and Thorn Wiens' younger brother Hal. Their warm, natural relationship indicates hope in the younger generation for inter-racial har­ mony that  the older and  most of the younger Mennonites cannot  accept.
Jackie and  Hal have skipped school to look for frogs' eggs; at the very end of the  novel Hal says:  "Wish  it was spring so we could go lookin'  for frogs' eggs again." When Thorn  and  AnneMarie Lepp go riding to the  Wapiti  River  on a moonlight  night, they are fascinated  by the frogs' singing. The  frogs, and  nature generally,  embody  a  natural   harmony  that  exerts  a  beneficial  effect  on  those characters  who are open to its influence.
Spring brings the awakening of Thorn's consciousness; with summer  comes continued  growth. The  prelude to this section shows Hal and  Thorn  lying in bed while a prairie thunderstorm rages outside. The lightning's  vivid flashes are des­ cribed  "as  a revelation,"  while the thunder  is like "long  walls breaking" -per­ haps  the  walls between  Wapiti  and  the  outside  world.  The  association  of  the electrical  storm  with  the  mysterious, spiritual  side of life is  understood   by  the Indians,  and  by Hal's  and  Thorn's  mother. Thorn  at  first  counters  Hal's  feeling

45

WIEBE'S COMMUNITY

that  thunder  is God speaking with the standard scientific explanation  of thunder. But he agrees finally with  his young brother  that  the Indians  are  after  all more right with their less scientific explanations  of nature's  phenomena.
The second section shows Thorn  arriving at a greater awareness of the past and of the  Indians' way  of life. In  the second section the  skull of a  wood-buffalo, unearthed  by ploughing, becomes a symbol of the past, encouraging  Thorn's awareness of the country in which he is living. Thorn also recalls a visit to Herman Paetkau,  who has married  a half-breed  girl. While there, she tells Thorn  tales of her  Indian   past:  "Hearing her  tell of Big Bear, Louis Riel,  Wandering Spirit, Thorn  glimpsed the vast past of Canada  regarding  which  he was as ignorant  as if it had never been: of people who had lived and acted as nobly as they knew and died  without  fear."  Looking  ahead,  this is also an  interesting  commentary  on things to come for Rudy  Wiebe.
The  prelude  to  the  third  part,  Autumn  1944,  again  shows  Hal  and  Thorn
talking. Thorn  is now referred  to simply as "the  man,"  an indication  of the ma­ turity he has acquired.  An owl calls, and Hal mentions that  he heard  an owl the night before. According  to Indian legend, hearing  an owl means there will be a death  in the family.  Elizabeth  Block's death  occurs in  this  section-while not in Thorn's  immediate  family, she is in the extended  Mennonite  family, and  her death  affects him  deeply. But  balancing  this omen  of death,  a V  of wild geese flies overhead  on the way to a warmer  climate. The birds suggest a combination of rational  order  with  instinctual  power, as well as the possibility of escape.
The  prelude to the fourth  section plunges the reader into the depths of a bitter Saskatchewan  winter.  Mention  of individual  characters  is passed over in favour of the  creation  of an  ominous  atmosphere  created  by a  blizzard  followed by a cold spell:

The  trough-heaters, under  prodding pokers, plumed smoke into the air;  without them each pail of water had spread solid in the trough. Every breath drew a knife­ wound down the throat.  No one thought of the howling blizzard now. The men, dumping hay in mangers and heaping straw under the bellies of their stock, knew that the silent malignancy was far more deadly.

The  "silent malignancy" reaches vital organs in this final section, as the powerful drives which the Mennonite community has repressed will finally be denied no longer.
Threats to  the  Mennonite community  come  most obviously  from  the  half­ breeds, but  even more  dangerously  from the  new school teacher,  Razia  Tanta­ mount.  Pretty  and  competent, she is able to adapt  herself superficially  to Men­ nonite  ways, while  remaining   a  self-seeking opportunist   totally  devoid  of  any community  sense. At  Elizabeth's funeral  her  face is "like  a  death's-head." Her association with  death  is enforced  in the final scene of the  novel when she gets together  with Hank  Unger,  who has shot down  twenty-seven  Germans.

WIEBE'S COMMUNITY

While the bulk of the novel is more realistic in its approach  than  the more sym­ bolic preludes, symbolic passages enrich the texture of the novel. Imagery of  light and  darkness is particularly  important. As Joseph speaks toward  the close of the first section,  bringing  intellectual  light to the  assembled  Mennonites,  a  lamp  is brought  in. As conservative  Peter  Block and  Progressive Joseph  Dueck  argue,  a moth flutters around  the lamp. At the end of the section, the moth, having "dared all for the light,"  burns itself to death.  Throughout the  novel light  and  fire are associated  with  both  intellectual  enlightenment  and  destruction; the  fate  of the moth indicates the possible destiny of those who seek enlightenment. Later, scraps of the Promethean  legend float through  Thorn's mind, indicating  Thorn's  role as bringer of light and fire to the Mennonite community, and also his possible fate.
The  light and  fire imagery receives greater  expansion  at  the end  of the  third section, which closes with Thorn's spiritual crisis, presented through  a huge forest fire that  both purifies and destroys Wapiti:

He heard a pop! Before his eyes an enormous spark arched through the air to fall at his feet on the tower. He could not stir while he stared in fascination as the glowing spark spread wider and  wider its black circle to leap into flame with a tearing sound. Then the fire surrounded him on the tower he had thought limbless, and he could only grip the peeled-poplar rail blistering in the heat as the holocaust caught him. As his heart balked in terror, he was wiped away.

While the fire wipes out the barriers between Wapiti and the outside world, Thorn is shaken by the intimation  that his new freedom may involve his own destruction. The references to fire in this passage recall the Holy Ghost, whose evangelical associations are antithetical to the insularity of the Mennonite  community,  but in accordance  with Thorn's  efforts to bring Christianity  to the half-breeds.




ILE               enrich  the  texture  of the novel, Wiebe's main achievements are in those standbys of the novelist's trade, narrative  and  character. Peter  Block is his greatest success. Although  Block has murdered  a man before coming to Canada,  is responsible for the unhappiness  and eventual death of his daughter  Elizabeth, is a hypocrite and bigot, Wiebe manages to gain most readers' sympathy for him. Block's chequered  background  and  sub­ sequent mental anguish are revealed in considerable detail;  we see him as a driven man, motivated  by his efforts to create a society in which his son may  find the mental  peace he has been denied.  His ultimate  failure adds  to the  pathos  of his situation.
With little opposition from  within his own family, Thorn's  rebellion naturally focuses on authoritarian Peter Block. The  fact that  Thorn's  chief mentor,  Joseph Dueck, leaves Wapiti to join the army's Restricted  Medical Corps isolates Thorn,

47

WIEBE'S COMMUNITY

shining the spotlight clearly on his own development. This growth is viewed largely in intellectual  (but  not abstract) terms. A romantic  attraction exists between AnneMarie Lepp and  Thorn,  but development  of this relationship  is foregone in favour  of Thorn's  definition  of his relationship  with  Peter  Block and  the  com­ munity.
As Thorn grows stronger, Peter Block's grip on his people and on himself begins
to weaken. Block is shaken, although  unable to cry, when he finds that  his daugh­ ter  Elizabeth  was the  instigator  in  her  brief  illicit  relationship  with  half-breed Louis Moosomin. He is even more deeply shaken when Thorn  loses his temper  in a subsequent  argument with  Block, bitterly  criticizing  him  for  his  treatment  of his children. But the third and mortal blow comes at the climax of  the novel when his son Pete, who is in love with Razia, flattens his rival Hank Unger.  Pete's justi­ fication,  "Pa,  you have  to do what  you think  right,"  is a  rejection  of the  non­ violence and mindless obedience  his father  had sought in order  to perpetuate  his own ideals:

The Deacon bowed his scarred grey head to his hands, and the men of Wapiti community, Metis and  Mennonite, standing in an old barn, heard the sobs of a great strong man, suddenly bereft and broken. They heard, terrified.

Rudy Wiebe's later novels are generally more accomplished as works of art, but Peace Shall  Destroy Many  has an  unusual  appeal.  While he was born  a  Men­ nonite, it is neither  possible nor  relevant to know the extent  to which  this novel might  be based on recollections of his early life. It is relevant,  though, that  the novel has a burning  urgency  not shared  by his later  works to  the same  extent. Peace Shall Destroy Many  is a rough work. The style is often awkward,  the char­ acterization  uneven, and the didactic elements often obtrusive. But it is borne on­ ward  by a  rare  driving  passion. Wiebe  conveys  the  feeling  that  he  cares  very much about  his characters  and  what happens to them.
As a form  which  from  its origins has been closely associated with  the middle class, the novel has always had the old puritan  problem of "how  to live" closer to its heart  than  has any other  literary genre. Yet an  intense moralistic concern, as expressed in Peace Shall Destroy Many, became less fashionable by mid-century, as novelists tended  to veil their concern beneath  layers of coolness and sophistica­ tion. Perhaps  Wiebe's stronger sense of community  enables him to keep the prob­ lem of "how  to live" closer to the forefront of his work. One  has only to think of Wiebe in conjunction  with such  novelists as Matt  Cohen or  Margaret Atwood, who are only a few years younger than  he, for the difference in their viewpoint to be apparent. Cohen and Atwood are products of an urban consciousness in which detachment  and  restraint  are not only valued but  perhaps also necessary for sur­ vival. Wiebe, on the other  hand,  is not afraid  of  committing  himself-not  even at the risk of appearing a fool. And sometimes the results are, indeed, strange, as in

WIEBE'S COMMUNITY

his second novel  First and  Vital Candle. But  this  ability to  let  go  can  also  create an  impressive splendour  which shines  through in  such   accomplishments as  The Temptations of Big Bear or  Peace Shall Destroy Many. His  willingness to  try  the unusual makes him  one  of the  most  individual novelists  writing in  Canada today.













TROPICJIL FLOWERS

Irving Layton


Beyond  the window
pussytail and  neighbouring cereus
0 lovely  Cinderella among  flowers!
And  the  heart-shaped anthurium, deep  red.

Sweet-scented frangipani, Turk's fez
Napoleon's button, blue petrea, golden  trumpet the spectacular poinsettia
flaming in  the  distance, tiger's  claw and  the  passion  flower
haloed  stand-in for my brother Jesus.

Bloom, flowers, and  blaze
with  bright  persistence. Tendril by tendril ignite  the  encircling air
and  by your  rooted  sprightliness  disgrace the shivering decadents
too frail  for  the squalls and  windstorms of this world,  the quaggy sentimentalists with  planned  utopias
in  their  sick livers.

St. Lucia
December 18, 1977


49

WIEBE & RELIGIOUS STRUGGLE




R.P.Bilan







W.
Wiebe  relates  the  history  of  a  group  of Russian  Mennonites,  forced  to  flee
Russia at various times because of restrictions on their religious freedom. The most conservative, committed  Mennonites left Russia in 1870 and came to Canada, but when their freedom to use German  in the schools was threatened, they emigrated once again,  this time to South  America. A second, more secular  group  of  Men­ nonites stayed in Russia until  1929, departing  only when their land  was collecti­ vized and they faced compulsory  military service. Wiebe's main concern was not simply to  re-tell this  history, for  as he explained  in an  interview  with  Donald Cameron, "in one sense historical novels are not really historical at all. You could call The  Blue Mountains of China  a historical novel, but it's about  people strug­ gling with exactly the kinds of things that we struggle with, except for a slight shift in time and place."2 For Rudy Wiebe, and the Mennonites he presents in his novel, the  "kinds  of things  that  we struggle  with" are  primarily  questions  of religious belief. However, the struggle for faith and a truly Christian  way of life is beset by many difficulties:  the suffering  in life, the attractions  of the secular  materialistic world, and,  particularly for the  Mennonites, the temptation  to isolate themselves from the rest of the world.

so

WIEBE & RELIGION

Wiebe  tells the  Mennonites' history  and  explores  his central themes  in  a  book with  a very unusual and  complex  structure. Many  of the  thirteen chapters of the novel  read  as almost  self-contained stories,  but  Wiebe  connects them  in  part  by an intricate series of cross-references that  help explain  previous  chapters and  look forward to  the  ensuing  ones.  Also,  the  central characters in  the  novel-Jakob Friesen  IV,  Elizabeth Driediger, and  John Reimer-appear  in  more  than   one chapter; Jakob, for  instance, is introduced indirectly in  the  second  and   fourth chapters, the  eighth  centres  on him, and  he and  John  Reimer are  the  key figures at the end  of the novel. The  primary source of unity  and  continuity in the  novel, however,  is provided by the four  chapters narrated by Frieda Friesen. In remem­ bering the  main  events  of her life, Frieda recounts  the  central  experiences of the conservative Mennonites who twice emigrated for religious beliefs. Frieda herself, in fact,  provides one of the touchstones in the novel; she has the kind  of faith that  makes a truly  religious acceptance of life possible.
Wiebe  begins the  novel with  Frieda's story  because  it takes  us farthest back  in time-to I 879  when  her  father Isaak  Friesen  came  to Canada-and it  estab­ lishes the  religious  theme.  Frieda's opening words,  as she  remembers her  earliest years in Manitoba, reveal  her complete  reliance  on God:

I have lived long. So long, it takes me days to remember even parts of it. . . . What I tell  I remember  only through  God's  grace.  I  never wrote  anything  down  and didn't  have  more  than  the  usual  Mennonite  village school. ... But  the  Lord  led me through  so many deep ways and of the world I've seen a little, both  north  and south. If your eyes stay open and  He keeps your head clear  you sometimes see so much  more than  you want of how it is with the world. And if you don't  you can thank  Him  for that,  too.

Frieda's trust  in  God,  is, in  a sense, normative, and  stands  as a  contrast to  the increasing lack of faith  and  acceptance shown  by Jakob Friesen.  For  Frieda, de­ spite the hardships she endures, the advice from her father sustains  her throughout life:  "But  think  always like this, he said, 'it does come all from  God, strength and  sickness, want  and  plenty'."
The  normative implications of  Frieda's life are  touched on  again in  chapter three  where  she recalls  the  years in  Manitoba from  1903 to  1926. She  describes her wedding to Johann Friesen, and  the success of their marriage almost  seems the blessing they  receive for their  faith. Once  when  Johann is away,  however, Frieda faces a moment of temptation:
It was a little later,  November,  rgo6 when  we already  had  two nice children, Johann  and Esther, that God sent me great temptation  and doubt.  My nerves were very bad;  I could not be alone. The devil stood right beside my bed with red horns and said, 'Do it, do it!' though  he never said what. Twice the elders had  to come to pray. Then  I learned  to know our Lord Jesus. Through  many prayers and sleep­ less nights and God's grace I found forgiveness of all my sins and  came to the true quiet faith.

51

WIEBE & RELIGION

This scene has a crucial structural and thematic significance in the novel. Frieda's faith is strengthened here, and, of equal importance,  the nature  of her temptation is deliberately left ambiguous, for what is being emphasized is her resistance to any temptation. But in much  of the rest of the novel Wiebe examines the experience of Mennonites  who succumb  to various "temptations." The  main structural prin­ ciple of the first half of the book, in fact, is to alternate  the presentation of  Frieda's faith  with  a  chapter  showing  a  Mennonite  struggling  with  the  confines  of  the religious tradition.
Jakob  Friesen IV is in many ways a contrasting figure to Frieda. At the end of the  novel, as an  old man,  he claims he no longer "believes,"  but from  the  very beginning Jakob  docs not adhere  firmly to his faith.  When  we first meet him, in the second chapter "Sons and Heirs," he has already succumbed greatly to the temptations of materialism  and, unwilling to give up his possessions, has remained in Russia. He  has  become  a  rich  kulak  with  the  biggest operation  in  Karatow colony and we find out indirectly, through  the reflections of his son Jakob V, that while other Mennonites  were trying to get out of the "communist  paradise":

His father, face black with rage, said he was not moving, let the whole village run if it would. He would
let them  run 	can't  fit in when a little changes or some stupid communist  says
don't  preach so much  let them  run 	won't  take this  from me 	they  can't  do anything  without  me  and  they'll  have to  keep 	exile  pooh I'm  no  preacher buy it up and run it all by himself. He almost had.

Jakob is a secularized Mennonite who has abandoned much of his religious tradi­ tion;  nonetheless, he apparently is still a believing Mennonite  at this point. How­ ever, the decisive event in his life occurs when the communists take Jakob V away in place of him, and  assuming his son is lost, Jakob  flees to Moscow with the rest of his family.  Jakob  never  recovers from  the  guilt  of  abandoning his son  and comes, unlike Frieda,  to doubt  God's justice.


As THE EXPERIENCE of Jakob Vis described, the complexity of Wiebe's attitudes  towards  the Mennonites' religious tradition  becomes evident. Jakob  Vis held in a cell for six weeks by the communists and  is dazed and  dis­
oriented  by the experience, but an even greater shock awaits him when he returns home  and  finds everyone  but  Escha,  the  Russian  peasant  who  worked  for  his father,  and  Muttachi, his grandmother, gone. Wiebe uses a stream-of-conscious­ ness technique  to present Jakob's  innermost thoughts, and the first thing we sec is that  his sexual  desire  is in  conflict  with  his religious  training:  aBlessed  savior make  me  pure that  in  heaven  I may."  Through  Frieda, Wiebe shows the positive aspects of the  Mennonite religion, but  here he begins  to examine  its restrictive

52

WIEBE 8t RELIGION


features. Jakob  regards sexuality   as  a  temptation  and   a  possible  sin,  and   his religious  tradition stresses the  need  for confession of sins:

the  Russian girl in the  water  naked squatting  and rising I  never  confessed that  I saw my  sister when    and  wet  playing with    jesus has come  again  he  will  come again will  you be ready when  the  trumpets  sound six times  I  was not ready with all my sins he has come.

Jakob's religious  upbringing has inhibited the free expression  of his sexuality, and Wiebe  implies  a criticism  here,  even  while he obviously  does  not  approve of  the loose sexuality  represented by Escha,  who  is paying  a  Russian  girl  to sleep  with him.  Escha  offers the  girl  to Jakob, who  is repulsed  and  yet at  the  same  time  is struggling with  his desire  for  her: "blessed savior make  me  pure." But  Jakob is ensnared  by his desire and  while talking  to Muttachi about  the  fate  of the  fleeing Mennonites, he thinks:

Runners  and  hiders and  liars. There  was lying here she had  no inkling of, thank god. Everything  seemed acrawl  in him; control  of mind  and  body he had  fought for and  he thought  held, sometimes so very  precisely in that  stinking  cell seemed now, when he placed  a finger against it, almost moldered  away that  he was home in  the  huge,  empty,  house.  He  had  been  trained  well, a  good  Mennonite  boy; learned  quiet  joy and  denial  and  prayers, sat between parents  in church  or, later, in front  with  the  other  boys, decently  and  quietly  had  been  taught  his sins and cried over them  and  asked the Lord Jesus forgiveness, and  his parents  too.... He prayed also, as always, as always all he had pushed aside and  gotten round  though he knew it wrong, rose in the  praying blacker and  heavier  than  sin and  he asked forgiveness, crying. There  was such comfort  in  cleanliness. Runners   and  hiders; liars.

The  Mennonite emphasis on sexual  purity  has  just  brought Jakob torment and left him incapable of either  resisting this temptation or responding freely.
Instead of pursuing his family  to Moscow  Jakob remains  at  home  in a kind  of
daze,  held  by  the  girl.   Wiebe   captures something of  the   disoriented  state   of Jakob's mind  when  he first goes to her;  she apparently draws  him  into  a sexual dance, which  results in a fight  between  Jakob and  Escha.  When  Jakob leaves  the barn  he reflects:

He had been taught  man is not a carefree brute.... 'Thou  shalt not.' He had  been taught  his sins. But now, like then on the studfarm,  he had  played with  himself; alright, wanted  himself to be played with, and he was beyond control.

He  returns to the  barn  and  kills Escha,  whom  he seems  to  blame  for  his "fall," then  he sleeps  with  the  girl.  Jakob is quickly  apprehended and   as  he  is being taken  away  he hears  that  his "mother and  sisters are out,  Germany, the  25th,  but your  father - they're  shipping  him -."   His  information  mingles   with   his thoughts about  what  he has done; he realizes he experiences  a certain  relief, and

53

WIEBE  8t RELIGION

feels "blessed alone out the 25th  and shipping him blessed alone." When Serebro, a former  Mennonite who has become a communist, offers to help clear Jakob  of the murder,  Jakob  begins kicking him, bringing  on his own death: "The  com­ missar sank to the ground  screaming,  and  Jakob  was laughing  so hard, laughing  so dry and  hard,  he did  not stop  when  down  into  his face  the  first  gun  barrel smashed."  Apart  from  his obvious distaste for Serebro, Jakob  kicks  him  because Serebro  is tempting  him to get away with his crime. Nonetheless, Jakob,  I take it, has broken  down  completely at  this point, and  while the  experience  of being imprisoned  by the communists  and  being left alone by his family  have  unsettled him greatly, it is also clear that  much of the strain on him has been caused by his religious training.




l:E FOURTH CHAPTER, "Black Vulture," is a pivotal point in the book, for, as Franz  Epp  tells John  Reimer  of the night  in Moscow in 1929, when Jakob  Friesen IV was taken away by the communists, we are introduced  to all the other central  characters: the Epps, the Reimers  (out  of consideration  for John,  Franz  disguises Samuel  Reimer Sr., calling him Ernst Balzer), and  the Driedigers. One of the main points of Franz's  tale is the implied contrast  between his father  and  Jakob  Friesen. Franz  tells John: "If I was drafted, Pa  wouldn't leave if they chased him, which wasn't likely. He was like that: he wouldn't  leave one child behind. God had given them to him and he would not leave one in the godless country  Russia  had  become."  And  Franz  speaks of another  father  who acts badly:  Balzer is concerned  solely for his own family and  is indifferent  to the fate  of Jakob  Friesen -and  to  the  grief of  Mrs. Friesen. The  implications  of Balzer's selfishness are explored  by Wiebe in the last part of the novel, and in a sense Wiebe sees the narrow self-regarding concern enacted by Balzer as the ulti­ mate form of moral failure  and the central temptation  facing the Mennonites.  In the immediately  following chapters,  however, Wiebe examines the  more specific kinds of temptations  that  the Mennonites  must confront.
In  leaving  Russia, and  their  villages, the  Mennonites  are  exposed  to a more materialistic  way of life. In  chapter  five, "Over  the Red  Line,"  Wiebe describes the crossing of the Driedigers,  Epps and  Friesens to the new world,  but  focuses on the experiences of the young Elizabeth Driediger  (whom we encounter  at the end  of  the  novel  as  the  forty-seven-year-old,  disillusioned  professor).  At  first
glance this chapter  appears  slight, providing, in W. J. Keith's  words "a  welcome
relief from the harrowing  tension of the earlier episodes."3  But in fact it explores one of the central  concerns in the novel:  the difference between  the  Mennonite and  the  secular  world.  Like Jakob  V,  Liese! (Elizabeth)  is attracted to  some­ thing outside the Mennonite tradition -here the secular life on the Class A deck

54

WIEBE & RELIGION

aboard  ship.  Unlike  Joseph,  Liesel does not  feel remorse  for  turning   towards another  world, for the hold of the religious tradition  on her is already slight. We are told that:

After crossing the barrier Liesel suspended thinking on what she had heard so often: the badness that a Mennonite child must never see or hear or think about to keep its eternal soul clean.... she had finally decided that her soul, since it was so im­ portant  despite its elusiveness-perhaps because of that-must  be  prepared  at certain times to take care of itself.

The  tone of this is lighthearted, but the issues are serious.
Liesel sneaks  up  to  the  A  deck  where  she  encounters  a  way  of  life  totally unknown  to her. She sees a woman who "from  her hips [showed]  a hand-width of glittering  leg above  the  knees." and  Liesel comes across a  man  and  woman engaged in a rather  furtive sexual act. Wiebe seems to present  these people criti­ cally, but to Liesel's eyes at least "they  were all so tall and  fine, so elegant, their movements  so free,  dignified....  Such  laughing;  like a  grace.  She  had  never heard such happiness or imagined there could be so many people together laughing in the whole world." While Liesel may be deceived, Wiebe does suggest that  these people  possess qualities  lacking  in  the  more  restrictive  Mennonite community.  Nonetheless, he presents her attraction to the secular world as a form of a "fall."  Leaning  against a double railing,  Liesel watches a  pageant  presenting  a scene of guilt and  confession-which has a direct  relevance to her own  actions. But, as she watches, "at  that  moment,  like a new world opening, the double  rails swung into space and she fell." Although  Wiebe's depiction of the scene is unnecessarily confusing, she appears  to fall into the sea, and  the fall symbolizes the danger  of her  attraction to secular  life. Further,  Leisel's fall into  the sea,  and  away  from the Mennonites, contrasts with Frieda's baptism, in the opening  chapter, into the Mennonite faith.  Significantly,  Liesel is  rescued from  the  water  not  by a  Men­ nonite, but by Mr. Adolf, one of the men she was attracted to. The  closing scene between Liesel and her father reinforces the sense that she has been lost. The ship has now  passed over the  red  line into  the free world,  just as Liesel herself has passed over to the secular world. Her father, recognizing his, and realizing that she will return  again to seek out the A deck, comments:

'And next time, at least leave the shawl'. She stared, suddenly aware of his tone. He did not go in to switch on the light. 'We can't  lose everything beautiful at once,' he said. He stood at the open door; standing aside, waiting.

To the father's  conservative religious point of view Liesel has been lost, and  while we can't  simply identify Wiebe with the judgment implied here, the way in which he presents the scene -the father's  comment  concludes the  chapter-suggests that he is in fairly close agreement.
But Wiebe's attitude  towards the Mennonites and the modem  world is complex,


55

WIEBE & RELIGION

and  can't be ascertained from  any single chapter. "The Well," which  is in certain ways complementary to  "Over the  Red  Line,"  examining the  same  issues,  pre­ sents a different picture. As "The Well" is the seventh  chapter it literally  is at  the centre  of  the  book  and, again, carries  more  significance  than   might  at  first  be apparent. The  trip  made to the  well by Anna  Friesen,  Frieda's daughter, drama­ tizes the choice  between  two kinds of life. And  now for the  first time Wiebe  criti­ cizes the  conservatism of the  Mennonites who have  come to South America. The  Indian women  they  encounter have  a  freedom  and  naturalness  that   the  Men­  nonites  distrust. Their women

did  not come like the  Lengua  women, one  pot  balanced  on  their  head  and  the other  in  their  hand,  staring  wherever  their  eye strayed;  their  pails hung  from  a wooden yoke, the  weight of which sat mainly on the back of the shoulders. As a result,  though  Lenqua   women  always walked  about  like stallions  in  spring,  the women of Schoenbach  stooped  forward  whether  they carried  water or not. Which was a  becoming  posture  for  a  woman,  according  to  Elder  Wiebe  the  Younger. Humility  is required.

It is not, however,  primarily the  Indians that  cause the  conservative Kanadier to  worry,  but  the  Russlander Mennonites-those who  have  become  "modern" and  those who, like Jakob Friesen,  had stayed  in Russia  until  1929: "They spoke the same  Lowgerman as the  Kanadier, though  with a very different accent, with some  unheard-of  words.  And  they  had  emigrated only  once  for  their  faith.  Not that  the  Kanadier were  Proud." The  Kanadier reject  totally  any  modern  ways and  we begin to sense that  Wiebe is not uncritical of their decision to leave Canada because  they  could  not  run  their  schools  in  "the   German biblical   way."  Elder Wiebe   the  Older, who  led  them   from   Canada, preaches   a  fairly   rigid  tradi­ tionalism-rather like  that   put  forth  by  Deacon  Block in  Peace  Shall  Destroy Many. Elder  Wiebe

intoned  that  the  Bible,  the  Catechism  and  the  Kirkenbuch, the  plow  and  the shovel were the  faith  of their  fathers.  It  was enough for  them,  and  it is enough for  their  children  and  children's children,  now and  for  evermore.  To  have  too much is to want more. New ideas, book learning, singing in several voices are unnecessary  and  dangerous.  The  desire  for  knowledge  leads  to  pride  and  self­ deception.  To  long for  change  is to fight one's destiny. Fighting  one's  destiny is rebellion against  God. Man's  duty  is to obey, pray, work, and  wait  in  terror  for God's wrath.

Not  a very cheerful  picture. In  contrast to Frieda's open  faith  and  trust  in God, the  Elder   Wiebe  is committed to  a  set  of  dogmas  that   are  not  the  essence  of religious belief.
The   more  modern  Russlander  are  not  as  dour   and   their   relaxed   ways  are viewed critically  by the  Kanadier:

WIEBE & RELIGION

They could sing Highgennan  and Russian in different voices ... and  laugh and quarrel far into the night. And crazy to laugh! Hearing this, Anna knew without being told, as did every Kanadier  girl, that  despite their  Mennonite  names and talk, these men were too different, too wrong and-obvious -to even think about.
. . . They would not get into heaven.

Yet when Anna  encounters  one of the Russlanders, Joseph  Hiebert,  at  the  well, she quickly forgets about  her fiance, Abraham  K. Funk.  We already  know that Hiebert  has moved away from the Mennonite faith,  but Wiebe's attitude towards him is somewhat  ambiguous.  There  is a vague suggestion that  the  drink  Joseph gives Anna  has an  alcoholic content-"yerba and  unheated  water  gave terere"
-and  if so it  would  imply  that  we are  to  regard  him  critically.  However,  it seems more likely that  the drink is strange to Anna simply because it was "outside regulation," and  that  Wiebe's criticism is aimed at the narrow  restrictions of the conservative Mennonites.  Joseph  has lost the seriousness of the  Mennonites,  and while he may  be  becoming  simply frivolous -he plays  practical   jokes on  the Kanadier  boys and teaches some of them to sing "Kommt ein Vogel geftogen" in four  part  harmony,  which is forbidden-there is a certain  attractiveness  about him. Years later Anna hears that  he is in Buenos Aires. "It was said someone had seen him eating and drinking at a table with a painted woman."  He has abviously ceased to be a Mennonite at all, and, to that  extent, he represented  a temptation to Anna. The  chapter  concludes with Anna,  now married,  remembering  the day at the well: " 'I last remembered, oh, it must be almost three years. I have almost forgotten.'  And she would smile a little at her baby of that  year, a quietness she knew as joy moving within her." Wiebe presents a fairly balanced, complex view of the issues here. Anna  has achieved a joy by staying within  the confines of the traditional  Mennonite  community,  but she has a vague sense of other possibilities, and perhaps even of loss.
The  ultimate temptation  that  confronts a Mennonite,  however, is to lose faith because of personal suffering. Jakob  Friesen IV,  whom  we encounter  again,  in chapter  eight,  "The Cloister of the  Lilies," as a  prisoner  in Siberia  in  1932,  is unable to accept  his suffering without  misgiving. As Jakob  and  another  prisoner are being moved they stumble onto a cloister; within they discover a picture  of a row of lilies hidden  beneath  the grime on a wall. This seems to symbolize Jakob's own relation to his faith;  it is buried, hidden, indeed almost lost. As they wait out the blizzard  a man  arrives with his wife, who is dying, and  they are  desperately trying to reach home:  "But she cannot last a month as God is good and she wants to see the children  at last." The  woman is raped  by the guards,  yet she and  her husband  endure,  and  his advice to Jakob  is "Survive."  In  the face of the man's grief, Jakob  reveals what  has been tormenting  him:  he abandoned his son. The man replies:

A man could endure ten years.... There is the possibility. But he cannot afford

57

WIEBE & RELIGION

thinking what  you keep  thinking; then  it is impossible.  You  must  survive.  That  is
all. Survive  as God  is good.
'You  keep saying  that,' Friesen  whispered.
'Yes.'
'Then why did all this happen? To  us?'
'To  live, it is the most necessary  possibility.'
Friesen  was never  sure  to what  question the man  gave this answer  ... the  faceless
immobile   man   whose  name   and   place  he  never  knew,  before   whose  immobile accepted suffering his own  had  finally  broken  between  his teeth.

Unlike Jakob,  the  man  not  only accepts his suffering but  is able  to affirm that "God is good." Jakob is at the point of losing his faith entirely, or at least doubting it; at the end of the novel he claims he "believes nothing."  Yet Jakob  is obsessed with the man's  ambiguous  statement: "Whatever the man  had  said ... seemed for an instant  to blaze with a kind of holy wisdom that was." Jakob's  attempts  to understand  the statement  show that  he is still struggling with  his faith,  and  it is because of this struggle that  later, as an old man, he is attracted to John  Reimer.




HAVING EXAMINED  vARious MENNONITES  in  conflict  with their faith,  Wiebe  begins to emphasize more directly, in  the second  half of the novel, the kind of Christian  response he himself admires. David  Epp,  whom  we meet in chapter  nine, "Drink Ye All of It," represents the ethical ideal in Wiebe's religious vision. David  and  his family, with a group of Mennonites,  escape from Russia into China,  but David fears that the Mennonites left behind  may be pun­ ished for their act. He decides, therefore, that  he must leave his family and return to Russia to see if he can  possibly exonerate  the other  Mennonites.  He  is giving up his freedom, and  probably  his life, in what may be a quixotic gesture. But the heroic nature  of his act reverberates  throughout  the rest of the novel in  the lives of those who come after  him. David's  selflessness contrasts with  the narrow  self­ seeking that  we saw represented  by Balzer (Samuel  Reimer Sr.)  on  the night in Moscow in  I929· Oblivious  to the fact that  Jakob  Friesen is taken  away, Balzer leaps for joy that  he and  his family are spared by the communists:  "Oh God, my God how marvelous  are Thy  ways, how He answers  prayer!"  But old Mr.  Epp, David's father, quietly admonishes him:  "Ernst,  I think Mrs. Friesen was praying too." Balzer's selfishness is even more clearly  placed by David  Epp's  selfless act. In his radical concern for others and in his willingness to sacrifice himself, David Epp shows himself to be a true follower of  Christ.
Frieda and her husband, as I've said, also embody a positive religious response,
and  in the following chapter, the  tenth,  we get her last narrative,  which  covers the  early  years  in  South  America,  up  to  the  present,  I959·  Despite  Frieda's troubles-a child has died, there is sickness in the family, and she has repeated

sB

WIEBE & RELIGION

operations for cancer-she reaffirms her trust in God. But the main  point of the section is the  affirmation  her  husband  Johann  makes as he is dying.  He  insists that  their decision to leave Canada, giving up an easier life, in order  to practice their religion freely, was right. Whatever the children may feel, he advises Frieda: "And  don't  let one  of them,  not  one, make  it hard  for  you. We  did  what  we believed." His statement  has a normative bearing in this novel; the lives of some characters -even  Samuel  Reimer -are  finally a  failure  because  they  do  not act on what they believe.
Frieda  and  Johann represent  the  best of the  old  ways and  Wiebe's  attitude towards  them  is highly approving. Nonetheless, Wiebe  knows that  their  way  is no longer viable in the modern  world and this seems to be part of the reason why Frieda's  final story is placed  at  this point. After  Johann dies, Frieda  comes to Canada  in 1959 to visit her daughters,  but the secularization  she sees appalls her. Dennis Willms, her  daughter Esther's husband,  has changed  his name  to  "Wil­ liams," largely abandoning his Mennonite  heritage. And  the congregation gener­ ally has lost the deep religious faith  that  led the Mennonites  to seek new  lands:  "I went to their church.  They  prayed and sang and  read from  the Bible; it was all English and not Mennonite but the most people there came from us and to me it sometimes looked they were stretching themselves around for what they weren't." Frieda  chooses to  return  to  the  more orthodox  and  traditional ways  in  South America, but, as Wiebe  knows, the younger Mennonites  must  learn  to  live and act in the modem  world she rejects.
The  problem of the lack of religious faith  in the modem  world is confronted directly by Wiebe in  the  last  two chapters  of the  novel. Here  he examines  the radical  responses of two  men  appalled  both  by the  materialism  of modem  life and  by the  insularity  of other  Mennonites.  "The   Vietnam   Call  of Samuel  V.
Reimer" is accurately described by W. J. Keith as a "biblical  parallel-cum-parody
(I  Samuel  3)  which succeeds in  being both  humorous  and  serious at  the same time."4  Samuel  is called  by God  to go and  proclaim  peace  in  Vietnam.  Wiebe apparently  wants us to believe in the authenticity  of Samuel's  voice, but,  in any case, in showing  the  resistance  to Samuel  and  his  mission, Wiebe  presents  his critique  of the modem  world. There  is a total lack of faith  and  an  inability  to believe in  the very possibility that  God  would still speak  directly  to  man.  The pastor of the Mennonite  Church  ludicrously wants "evidence" and  asks Sam  to tape the voice. And Wiebe is even more critical in his presentation  of the institu­ tion of the Mennonite  Church: "[The]  Inter-Mennonite Church  Service Society, Peace Section ... had ruled  his plans were too likely to raise derision  and suspi­ cion among both church  members and government agencies for the Society to be able  to support  him,  in  any  way."  Facing  disbelief in  his  voice  and  hostility towards his plan, Sam explains why he would still like to go to Vietnam: "If ... [my children]  could see, when they're old enough to see, that  I  was doing some-

59

WIEBE&: RELIGION

thing needed. You know, that  had  to be, for others, not just so our  family has it softer."  He has the image of David  Epp's  heroic act in mind;  he does not  want to be like his father,  and  he recalls old Mr.  Epp's  words:  " 'Samuel,' he said to my father,  'I think Mrs. Friesen was praying too'." A true Christian  is responsible for all of his fellow men, and Samuel  argues that even if something  were to hap­ pen to him in Vietnam,  "so what?  I'd  have been doing a Christian's  job-not sitting  here  just  talking,  growing  fat  on  the land."  Samuel  Reimer  achieves a sense of what, in Wiebe's view, a truly fully Christian life involves, but the opposi­ tion to his plan proves too much for him; unlike David Epp,  he fails to act on his belief. He gives in to despair  and  dies, and the story ends on an  ironic note with the triumph  of the material  values he abhorred.




IN THE   FINAL  CHAPTER,  "On   The  Way,"  Wiebe  explores further-particularly through  Elizabeth  Driediger, Jakob  Friesen  IV, and Den­ nis Willms-the problem of the loss of faith among the Mennonites,  and  he sets against  this the  Christian  view of John  Reimer,  Samuel's  educated,  and  more articulate, brother.  The section opens with the accidental meeting, in the Toronto  airport  in I g67,  between  Elizabeth  Driediger,  now a  forty-seven-year-old  pro­ fessor, and Jakob  Friesen, now an old man, who has come to Canada for the first time, to visit his daughter. They  both claim that they are  no longer  Mennonites, but, for Jakob at least, the matter  of belief is clearly still predominant. The  main question  Jakob  has  to ask Elizabeth  is:  "Are  you still a  Mennonite?" He  very briefly tells her the story of his life, then states:

'Yes, I  have a strong  body. That  is why I  survived. And  because I  believe nothing.'
'You believe .. .' for an instant she doubted her knowledge of the word.
'Yes. Like you, I have no longer anything with the Mennonites.'
That  was not what she had meant, but she understood his expression exactly.
Like some little grandmother  who had never been beyond her darp  street, despite
his lifetime wandering there was for him still only one thing to believe or not be­
lieve. Well, she did not believe it any more, either. In that one and  only way.

But without some openness to faith it seems unlikely that Jakob  would have had the strength  to survive his ten years as a prisoner in Siberia. Questions of religious belief are  never entirely  closed for Jakob,  which is why he, and  Elizabeth,  seek out  John  Reimer,  who  is walking  through  the  West carrying  a  cross, bearing witness to Christ's  presence in the world.
Before presenting John,  however, Wiebe brings Dennis and  Esther  Willms into
the story, and through  them shows the defeat of the Mennonite  tradition by ma­
terial  values. Esther  is Frieda's  daughter,  but  she and  her  husband   have  long

6o

WIEBE & RELIGION

since lost Frieda's  strong faith. Dennis is almost totally assimilated into  the secu­ lar  modern  world;  he is a successful businessman with  narrow  concerns.  Wiebe characterizes  him, emphasizing  his narrowness, by a reference to the  mountains,  symbol of the quest that  the  Mennonites  have  pursued throughout  their  history. Relaxing in his Cadillac, "Dennis stretched out, foam rubber cushioning his cheek against  the  window.  He  would see the  mountains  a bit  longer  across the  rising land. Odd; he had never thought  much about  them, one way or another." When Dennis and  Esther stop at the side of the road to speak to John,  they find Jakob and  Elizabeth  already  with  him, and  there  is an  unravelling  of family  relation­ ships. As the various conversations take place, John's  voice becomes increasingly dominant as he  presents his social vision and  his view of Christ.  But  Dennis  is unwilling to listen, and only feels that  John  is making a fool of himself by "run­ ning across the country, like that"; he hopes that  John  will give up his walk and take a "worthwhile" job. Dennis and  his family leave, but  they are  late, and  in hurrying  to Edmonton  they are  apparently killed in a car  accident.  (In  fact,  it is not entirely clear whether  Dennis has had  a heart  attack  and  they are  taking just him to the hospital, or whether the whole family is being rushed to the hospi­ tal:  in either case Wiebe's point would be the same.)  The  accident  (or  Dennis's death)   is a symbolic representation  of the destructive tendency  of a materialistic secular civilization, and the speeding, hurrying  that  causes it is in direct  contrast with  John's  more relaxed and  reflective state of mind.
John  puts forth a view of Christianity which radically challenges the basic assumptions  of the  conservative  Mennonites-and of many  other  Christians  as well. He  insists that  a wide social concern is of the essence of Christianity   and that  "the  whole idea of Jesus just telling about  people being  'saved'  and  feeling good about  it is wrong. Quite wrong. He was alive, on earth  to lead a revolution! A revolution  for social  justice."  And  John  is especially critical  of  the  position taken by the Mennonite  church,  for he argues that Jesus didn't  intend  to achieve his revolution  "by setting up a church  that can never change no matter  where on earth  or  in  what  century  it is." He  redefines what  the  real  church  should  be: "No! The  church  Jesus began is us living,  everywhere, a new society  that  sets all the old ideas of man living with other men on its head."  The  new society is built by our "thinking different"  about  everything.
In articulating this view of Christianity  John is quite obviously a spokesman for
Wiebe himself. In  the interview with Donald  Cameron  Wiebe explains:

I would like to think of myself as someone who's trying to live what the original Anabaptists were about. They're  very contemporary, in a way, because they felt that  the social structures that had evolved in the west had no sanction. To be an Anabaptist is to be a radical follower of the person of Jesus Christ-that's really what it's about-and Jesus Christ had no use for the social and political structures of his day; he came to supplant them.5

WIEBE & RELIGION

There  is little separation  between what Wiebe believes and  what  John  advocates, and as Wiebe is largely using John to assert his own view, rather  than fully drama­ tizing it, the novel comes close to being overtly didactic at this point. Elizabeth, it is true, objects to John's  position, insisting "there's  too bloody  much  sacrifice in the world already.... We need a world where everybody can live for himself, just be himself." But John  replies decisively, "You  want everyone except you dead?"  In the final section, however, where John  attempts  to explain  his views to Jakob Friesen,  the  professed  unbeliever,  Wiebe  is more  successful  at dramatizing his religious beliefs.
John  re-affirms his desire "to  live the concern  for others  and  love that  Jesus showed"  and  when  Jakob  asks how he is doing this by walking along the  road, John  explains that  he is simply trying to relate-show  warmth  and  concern­ to all of his fellow men. And  the main  point he makes is that  unlike most Men­ nonites  he is "not  going  anywhere"; by simply walking on  the open  road  he is challenging  the  traditional goals of the  Mennonites -those  symbolized  by the title of the novel. The  title comes from the  appearance of the Greater  Khingan  Mountains  of China  which David Epp, as he led his people out of Russia, saw as "black and  jagged  from here black in the  heartless cold nothing  like the  thin  blue sketch, beckoning  from  across the  river  the  beautiful mocking blue."  The  blue mountains symbolize the hope of the Mennonites that somewhere they will find a place where they will be able to lead  their lives and  religion in total  peace and freedom. But the blue is "mocking" because the goal is unattainable, and, in the eyes of John  Reimer-and Rudy  Wiebe-it  is finally undesirable.  The  Men­ nonites'  dream of isolating  and  insulating  themselves from  the  world involves a failure of  true  Christian  responsibility, which is shown  by being involved in  the world.
John  had been walking west towards the Rocky Mountains, but he realizes that
they too represent  a false dream.  "They  look so nice, I  thought  sitting on those hills outside Calgary,  almost like a new world, sharp,  beautiful, clean. But usually when  you get over  there's  always more of what  you climbed  them  to get away from." Instead, he heads north, but, unlike the conservative Mennonites who have moved into the north to "get away from everyone but themselves," John  is neither withdrawing from the world nor hoping to set up a separated  place. He criticizes the  Mennonites  for  wanting  to build  their  own  private  land,  for,  he claims, it isn't anywhere on earth.

That's  the trouble with Mennonites; they show it clearer than  most other  Chris­ tians, especially Protestants. They wish they were, if  they could only be Jews. On the mountain Moses said 'Go over that river, there's the land God has given you forever,' but Jesus just said, 'I'm  going to make a place ready for you  and  then I'll come and get you. You wait.' Moses gave his people manna to eat  when they

WIEBE & RELIGION

were  hungry, and  Jesus  did  that  a little  but  then  he  changed. Then he  just said,
'I'm bread  enough for  you. Remember me.'
'That's the big trouble with  Jesus,' said the old man.  'He  never  gives you a thing to hold  in your hand.'
The  other answered, 'There are  things,  many  things  that  you can't hold  in your hand.'

Jakob is sceptical to  the  end, but  John has  the  last  word. And  while  he  redefines the  nature of the  religious struggle that  the  Mennonites, and   modern man, must face,   he  makes it  clear that in  religious matters  there  can   be  no  easily  found answers; an  act  of faith is always necessary.

NOTES

1 "Introduction" to  Rudy  Wiebe,  The   Blue  Mountains of China, 1970  (Toronto: McClelland & Stewart, 1975), p.  I.
2  Conversations with  Canadian Novelists  Part  Two  (Toronto:  Macmillan, 1973),
p. 159·
3 Keith, p. 4·
4  Ibid.
5  Conversations with  Canadian Novelists, p. 148.




FOX
 


Ron Miles


Or  Dog?  No.
Fox, half  rusty  tail beside  the sage ahead and  I guarded by wind for once,  briefly his
superior, amazed he follows my daily  path,  briefly mine.

Across the ravine  construction has ended for  the  day. He sniffs the distant  buildings senses me behind  and  runs
faster  than  I could,  even in my mind
down  into  the  ravine  disappearing while  I dog  his footsteps,  down. But up  the other side
where  only houses grow daily  in our  path.

LA CHAINE  TENUE
Roads & Railways in the Prairie Novel



T.






LARGE-SCALE SETTLEMENT  of the Canadian pmiries is bound  inextricably  with the existence of railways, which  played almost  precisely the same vital role for the farming  communities as did the major  rivers for those earlier white settlements,  the fur-trading posts. Their  importance  lay in providing the means of access to the  new "colony,"  in serving as the main  artery  for both transport  and  communication, and  in forming  the link between  these colonizers and  the centre from which they had originally come. Roads, apart  from  the few which developed from historical trails, were a by-product rather  than an initiating factor  of settlement; their  role was different,  but  no less vital, and  their  impor­ tance grew as settlement increased. Because the homestead pattern  of  development led to widely-scattered  districts  rather  than  villages, roads were  essential for  all contact  within the community; they also provided the connection with the nearest railway-station  and  served a valuable  function  as boundary-lines. In  view of the extreme importance of these facilities in the historical existence of settlers, one is not surprised to find, in fiction which deals with the period of settlement  and post­ settlement farming in the prairie provinces, that roads and railways are frequently­  recurring  motifs.
Prairie  roads  as seen by writers may  be divided  into  two kinds  according  to
their physical appearance. A few are in an almost natural state like the one which, in  rgrg, links  Avenir  with  Blueberry  Lake  in  Marguerite Primeau's  Dans  le Muskeg  ( rg6o), following the lakeshore and  the meanders  of a stream,  or that which Nipsya and  her family take to Lac Ste. Anne  (in Georges Bugnet's  Nipsya
[ 1924]), a path gradually  developing from a game trail. Gabrielle Roy's track to the island in the Petite Poule d'Eau  river is barely distinguishable from  the grass around  it;  and  Monge,  the central  figure in Constantin-Weyer's Un  Homme se penche sur son passe, dispenses with roads altogether, riding over the open prairie. Most of the roads are far from  natural,  however-the new road  to Avenir, for example:   "C'etait une  route  large  et droite  avec de profonds fosses de  chaque
cote pour  le drainage.  Il  n'etait  plus question  de  jouer a cache-cache,  la route
allah droit devant  elle comme quelqu'un qui se respecte."

LA CHAINE TENUE

Marguerite Primeau  uses the straightening of the road to represent  a change in the  whole  outlook  of  the  village,  from  a  place  where  no-one  hurries -"on
arrivera  bien a Noel en meme temps que les autres !" -to one where time is im­
portant. In  Grove's  Fruits  of the  Earth  the  unnatural straightness  is used as a
mark of man's presence, a reflection of the attitude  revealed through  the thoughts of Abe Spalding  as he drives towards  his homestead  for  the  first  time:   "This immense and utter loneliness merely aroused him to protest and contradiction:  he would  change  this  prairie,  would  impose  himself  upon  it,  would  conquer   its spirit."  By completing the road into town, thus ensuring the firm establishment  of the Spalding  community, Abe marks his conquest. However, as soon as he relaxes his vigilance,  nature  retaliates,  attacking  the road at its weakest  point,  where it crosses a patch  of bog, and showing its superiority by converting  the road  into a dam  which floods surrounding farmland.
The concept that man is at war with his environment is, of course, not confined to Fruits of the Earth, for Northrop  Frye's notion of a "garrison" outlook, of being surrounded by a hostile frontier,  is to be found in most western Canadian fiction in English. In  French  prairie  novels, too, there are  traces of an  attitude similar to Abe's-the original  inhabitants of Avenir are described  as "une  poignee  de colons seulement,  accroches  aux  homesteads   qu'ils  continuaient   de  disputer  au muskeg,"  and  Cleophas,  the  old  "Bonhomme" in  Bugnet's  Nipsya, draws  the contrast  between  the new farming  way of life which his son has adopted   (with almost Abe-like determination) and that  of the Indians  and  the  voyageurs, who "savaient  vivre sans gripper  tout  ce qui  leur  tombait  dans  les mains."  On  the whole, however, the "garrison" attitude  is not prevalent  in the  French  writing, and the people, like the roads they travel along, are usually in harmony  with their natural  surroundings.
This  basic difference in outlook,  the contrast  between a willingness to  accom­
modate oneself to nature and a desire to impose one's rule upon it, is demonstrated clearly  in  Nipsya  in  the  Metis  reaction  to  the  new system of  dividing  up  the countryside  into seemingly arbitrary rectangles:  "Ca  n'a  pas  de  bon  sens. Ou seront les chemins alors? Faudra-t-il passer dans les muskegs et ete? ... Ca  peut etre beau sur le papier, mais c'est idiot." It is worth noting that  the one occasion when Abe's household for a short  time approaches  the idyllic state  which  reigns on Luzina's  island in the  Petite  Paule  d'Eau  river is during  the  Christmas  Day blizzard,  when the straight  lines of the road are obliterated  by snowdrifts.
The  anti-nature roads are  not only straight; they are also graded,  raised  two or three feet above the level of the surrounding  land. Laurence  Ricou has pointed out that "the image of man as a vertical intrusion in a horizontal world is primary" in prairie novels: 1 to place people on a raised road is to emphasize their verticality. Grove in particular  often equates the use of the road with exposure, to the extent that  much  of Abe's life seems to be lived on a stage. The  concept  of man's  ex-

LA CHAINE TENUE

posure to nature on the prairie is present in the metaphorical figure of Frau Grappentin, for whenever  Abe travels along the road to town  he is observed by this witch-like old woman  who lives beside it. At best her reaction  to his coming and going is indifference,  as when she "dully"  watches his arrival  at the scene of Charlie's  death.  Mostly, however,  her commentary  is malevolent,  as she mocks Abe's lordly attitudes and  predicts  his downfall,  in  a  terrifying  voice "like  the voice of  the  prairie." The   natural roads,  like  those  which  Christine's  mother knew as a child (in Roy's La Route  d'Altamont), drawing the traveller on to find new hidden places, or like the path through tall reeds to Luzina's island, offer pro­ tection rather  than  exposure.



JUST AS  THE  APPEARANCE of the prairie road becomes, in the hands  of the  writer,  a  reflection  of the  outlook of the  inhabitants of the  com­ munity, so the function  of the road, the reason why people use it, takes on varying significance in the  different  novels. Historically, the  most important  function  of roads in the  prairie  provinces  was to  join together  the main  distribution  centre
and surrounding points. The  English writers under  discussion succeed in turning this simple fact into a device to represent monotony, fragmentariness,  and a sense of imprisonment. Since most of the people in these novels go only into town and back again, they are familiar  with a very limited portion of their neighbourhood,
and travel in such a form offers no possibility of escape from what R. J. C. Stead
in Grain describes as the "interminable furrow."  In some ways Grain is a special case amongst  the  novels in English, since nature  is not portrayed  as the enemy, and the author's main concern is with the struggle between two valid moral posi­ tions, a conflict which  is by no means limited  to a  prairie  setting.  However,  a feeling of being  unable  to escape is basic to  the subject,  and  Stead  makes ex­ emplary  use of the road  motif. All through  the war years, while Gander  Stake is fighting  his personal  battle  between idealism and  unimaginative  common  sense, his only travel is the repeated  journey from his home to Plainville, usually "hauling wheat." When the end of the war brings him a feeling of release, as if he were a returning  soldier, he begins to wander farther afield.
A similar  sense of  captivity  prevails in  Sinclair  Ross's  As  For Me  and  My House, for whenever  Mrs. Bentley travels by car, it is to go only to Partridge  Hill, a desolate little community  of people whose acceptance  of the "grim  futility"  of their  lives makes one  almost  thankful  for the "false fronts"  of Horizon.  On  the one occasion when she and  her husband succeed in leaving for a vacation,  Ross is able to heighten the impression of fragmentation, and of the imprisoning isola­ tion of Horizon, by simply placing the group in a car a few hundred  miles away from  home, with  no indication  of how they left the town  which  had  previously

66

LA CHAINE TENUE

seemed to be roadless. (Apart  from Main Street, of course, but streets within  the towns deserve a special treatment of their own.)
Christine,  the narrator in La Route  d' Altamont, whose words often appear  to be a commentary  on what  is demonstrated  in other  novels, recognizes the "frag­ mentary"  possibilities of prairie  roads, as she describes the intersection  of  two of them-"je me rappelle leur accolade muette, leur etonnement  a se rencontrer  a repartir  deja et vers quel but?  car d'ou elles viennent, ou elles vont,  jamais elles n'en disent mot." She sees portions of roads, with no origin and  no goal, meeting at  a  crossroads perhaps  similar  to  that  at  which  Gander's  Willow  Green  was located,  or  Spalding  school,  giving  the  impression  of  being  lost,  "perdu  dans l'eloignement." Roads which do actually link places other than those forming  the route from a particular farm  to a larger community -are rarely found  in these English  prairie  novels. One  exception  is the  Somerville  Line  in  Fruits  of The  Earth,  "running in  a  straight  line, from  Somerville  in  the  east  to  Ivy  in  the west," and, it passes through  the village of  Morley, "hesitating  on its way, form­ ing something like a node in the stem of a plant."  This continuous line, however, has the effect of making a settlement like Morley seem very insignificant, so man's  attempt  to make his mark or, in Henry Kreisel's words, to "define  himsel£,"2   has become a contributory  feature  in his diminution  by the landscape.




RAILWAYS EVEN MORE  THAN ROADS  intrude  upon "nature's softer architecture," but  that  particular  aspect, though  usually implicit,  is not a major  part of their value as a symbol to the prairie writers. It is noticeable, how­ ever, that the tracks for themselves, apart  from their function, may be important, and as such Sinclair Ross uses them to full effect in As For Me and My House. To find one's pleasure in walking along railway tracks, as do the main  characters  in this novel, is deliberately to choose sterility (since they are a place where nothing grows), fragmentariness (for one can never complete the journey), and a sense of captivity between the "double  line of fence." E. A. McCourt, who, incidentally,  uses the motif of the baseball diamond  for a somewhat similar  effect in Music  at the Close, has obviously not appreciated  the full implications of  the railway track when he criticizes Ross for  providing "a  fairy-godmother  kind  of escape" at  the end.3   Those  inveterate   track-walkers,  Philip  Bentley  and   his  wife,  are  clearly destined never to live life to the full.
Like roads, the railway track may be used to make communities seem insignifi­ cant-the line through  Morley, for instance, was "strung  with towns at intervals of ten or twelve miles. From  a distance all looked alike...." However, such  an image as "beads on a string" is valid only from an above-the-ground  perspective;  at ground  level, the track, like "the  Sao Line of  the C.P.R." in W. 0. Mitchell's

LA CHAINE TENUE

Who  Has Seen the Wind, tends to disappear  into "the  prairie's  flat emptiness." Thus  there is a feeling of isolation which is not entirely justified by the remoteness of communities  one from the other, and  an impression of their  individual loneli­ ness rather  than  of their  being linked together.  That  the track  is in some sense a physical barrier  augments  this feeling of isolation -Morley  is typical  of  many small towns:  "the  growth  of the settlement  was arrested  by the right-of-way,  no buildings  but  the  grain  elevators  having  been  erected  beyond  it."  Sometimes, however, the barrier  of the railway is within the town, contributing to what  Frye calls the "multiplying of garrisons,"  as it does in the town in Who  Has Seen the Wind.
On the whole there is little in these English prairie novels to justify the assump­
tion that  the primary  importance of a railway track is as a link with the outside world, or even as a means of travel at all. The few trains we see are mostly freight­ trains, and  their  artistic function  in the novel is usually to represent  the machine
-in reflecting the mechanical  side of Gander  Stake's personality, for example, or as a sign of destructive  progress in connection  with Abe's daughter, Frances.  It will be recalled that,  for all Mrs. Bentley's talk about the railway, her only train­ ride  during  her  residence in  Horizon  is on  a  handcar.  Railway  tracks  without trains add  to the sense of imprisoning  isolation which characterizes many of the novels, and  even  when  trains  exist they  have the effect of making  one feel left behind,  like those in Philip  Bentley's youth "roaring  away to the world that  lay beyond."
Although  the  feeling  of imprisonment  is fostered  by apparently   fragmented roads, and train-tracks which lead nowhere, it is generally seen to be a mental con­ dition  projected  onto  the environment,  with the  prairie as the equivalent  of the world outside. Mrs. Bentley, whose life is inextricably bound  with  her  husband's  failure,  gives expression  to such  an  outlook  as she  watches  the  departure of a freight-train: "It was like a setting forth, and  with a queer kind of clutch  at my throat,  as if I  were about  to enter  it,  I felt the  wilderness  ahead of night  and rain."  Neil Fraser's  prison  (in  Music  at the Close),  of  which  first the river and then the mountains  seem to mark  the edge, is similarly  within  himself, the result of his inability to balance dreams and reality. Although he claims to have travelled all over  the  continent, he  is still  mentally  tied  to  the  prairies,  as  we  observe through  the scene at  the  bus station  in Calgary, and  only his death  in  the  war brings mental  escape. The  condition of mental imprisonment  is even stronger  in Gander  Stake,  who cannot  bring  himself to go  to become a soldier because old abstract  values like heroism fail  to overcome  his  modern  mechanical  and  com­ mon-sense outlook. The  war between these two concepts is fought on the prairies
-to the extent  that  Grain has many aspects in common with  First World  War novels4  -and Gander  can leave only when he has finally resolved his dilemma.
The  sensation  of being  unable  to escape is rarely found  in  the  French  novels

68

LA CHAINE TENUE

under  discussion, for one of their most striking aspects is the amount  of travelling which occurs. Monge, in Un  homme  se penche sur son passe, travels constantly, by all means and in all directions;  in fact, his tragic mistake seems to be that  he temporarily  abandons  his travelling  way of life and tries to become a settler. The different  stages  of  Nipsya's  spiritual   development  are  separated  by  journeys; there  is constant  coming  and  going around  Avenir and  the  Petite  Paule  d'Eau island;  and  travel is the element  which unites the separate  sections of La  Route d'Altamont.
The  roads and  railways which these travellers use, far from  being fragments  in the middle of nowhere, are obviously parts of a continuous  system, and  because of such connectedness the sense of isolation of the remote community  is reduced. The  technique  used by several authors-Roy, Constantin-Weyer, Primeau-to introduce  the reader  to the settlement,  relying on those same travel  facilities, has similar  effect. Portage-des-Pres  may  be  a  "petit  village insignifiant," far  away "dans Ia melancholique region des lacs et des canards sauvages," but we are shown how the village is linked with Rorketon,  the end of the railway-albeit only by "un  mauvais trail raboteux"-as well as the four stages by which one reaches the even more remote island. Monge's  journey to the settlement  where he meets Han­ nah  is less clearly specified,  but  one follows his general  route  over  prairie and bushland.  The  effectiveness of this overland step-by-step linking  of  one  place to the next may be appreciated through  its contrast with the aerial approach to loca­ tion  which  Mitchell  uses in Who   Has Seen The  Wind, the  gradual  narrowing  from a view which encompasses "land  and sky" to focus on a boy's tricycle on the sidewalk. One  has the  impression  that  the  possibility of  ever  finding  this  town again, having left it, would be remote, particularly since it  has no name.



E                 and  railways offers the chance  both to depart  and  to return;  Luzina goes gladly, knowing  that,  like the  birds, she will come back,  just as the  Capucin,  for  all  his wide  travelling, always returns to the island where he feels at home. Similarly, many of the young people who leave Avenir-Tommy and  Lucette, Frank  l'Hirondelle, Antoinette
-return, and all, incidentally,  bring with them a new air of confidence. On  the
other  hand,  in the English works journeys out of the community  are  mostly one­ way, into some kind of oblivion. Young people leave for the  city and  are hardly mentioned again, or they depart  for the war, and die. Although  Luzina's children leave their nest never to return,  they do at least continue to exist and she is able to maintain  contact with them. One need only compare the consolation which she gains from locating them on the old map with Mrs. Stake's futile attempt to find Jackie,  to appreciate   the  difference  between  the  two  groups  of  novels  in  this respect.

6g

LA CHAINE TENUE

A remote  community  immediately  loses some of its isolation  when  it may  be reached  by outsiders, and visitors play a significant part in the lives of the French settlers. Travelling   priests, who  are  prominent  in  most of the  novels, help  con­ siderably in destroying any feeling of being lost, partly by the fact  that  they  pro­ vide  human  contact   under  the  most  extreme  circumstances,  and  partly,  also, because they indicate  that  even  the smallest and  apparently   most  insignificant settlement  is worthy  of attention, but  primarily because they respect  a vital link with the cultural  tradition. Thus  the road which brings the  Capucin  to Luzina's island, or le Pere  Letournec  to  Avenir, serves as a  reminder  to  the  inhabitants that,  in spite of their remoteness, they are still a part of a religious unity.
A similar sense of belonging  results from maintaining  contact  with the secular aspect of the cultural  heritage,  the tradition  of the early French  colonists. Monge goes to Quebec and studies the history of French Canada; Mlle. Cote, on her first day in the Petite Paule  d'Eau school, introduces Luzina's  children  to the tales of the early explorers, and  Lormier,  newly arrived  in Avenir, reminds  the  villagers of their cultural  heritage. Dans le Muskeg demonstrates, however, that  adherence to the tradition  must be natural and voluntary, rather  than  something  arbitrarily enforced, for the future  is also important. It is noticeable that, as soon as Lormier and  his supporters  talk of preserving the culture, garrison  words appear  in their vocabulary-entrer instead  of arriver, murs, entourer, defendre,  serrer les rangs.
. . . Nevertheless, there can be no doubt about  the pride which the French settlers feel in their forbears, the early explorers and the voyageurs, and  especially about their  pleasure in knowing that  they are following a similar  pattern.
Unfortunately, neither  the  secular  nor  the  religious heritage  may  be looked upon as a unifying factor in the English novels. Religion is seen, on the whole, to be of little importance in the lives of the settlers; when it plays a larger part, as in Who  Has Seen the Wind  or As For Me and My House, it is equated  with bigotry and  hypocrisy, and  with fragmentation rather  than  unity. Interest  in the secular tradition  is similarly lacking, and  almost the only reference to the country's  past, in  Stead's  description  of  the  schoolroom  at  Willow  Green,  suggests  a  divisive rather  than  a  unifying function : "on  the west wall . . . was a lithograph  of Sir John  Macdonald, for many years Prime Minister of Canada, but now sufficiently dead to have his portrait  displayed in a schoolroom without suggestion of partisan designs upon the young minds exposed to its contagion."
It is clear that  any newcomer  is unlikely to find the security of a familiar  and unified tradition  in the English community. His only hope for a sense of  belong­ ing is therefore  through  the awareness of a personal heritage,  of the sort which links Christine  with  her mother  and  her grandparents, or like that  of  Monge  at the  beginning  of Roy's  novel, content  with  his past  and  unconcerned  about  the future.  Marguerite Primeau   uses Lormier's  train-journey   to  Blueberry  Lake  to provide just such a link:

LA CHAINE TENUE

Berce par le roulement du train ... il remontit le cours des dernieres semaines. Sa decision de venir dans l'Ouest, sa demande d'emploi aupres du Ministere de !'In­ struction publique d'Alberta, ses adieux aux grand-parents qui l'avaient eleve, tout
cela se confondait avec les peripeties de }'interminable voyage a travers les villages
quebecois, le long des forets et des lacs de }'Ontario, jusqu'au fin fond des immense
plaines de l'Ouest.

Here the railway track serves not only as a physical link across the country, a fila­ ment  joining the place the protagonist  has left with that  in which he is arriving,  but also as a connection  between his past life and  his present. In  the final stages of his journey Lormier meets several people who will be important in his new life, so the continuous  line also extends to his future.
Since almost  the  only exception  to the  "no  train-travel" rule  in  the  English novels is in the fact  that  several of the main characters  arrive  in their  new  com­ munities by rail, one might hope to find there a similar kind of  connecting  with the past. However, the reader is usually brought onto the scene too late;  the hero
-Abe, for example,  already  arranging  for the  unloading  of his possessions, or Neil Fraser, riding in his uncle's wagon-has left the train, so even that  tenuous link is severed and  no possibility for continuity  remains. As a result, most of the people in English  prairie  novels seem to  be simply "there," having  come from nowhere, and  Mrs. Bentley's feeling of being "lost, dropped  on  this little  perch of town, and abandoned" may well be generally applicable.
Without  the security of some kind of continuity,  the newcomer  to the  prairies
is subject to a loss of confidence. Even the intransigent  Abe, deliberately  choosing to abandon his past and to live only with a future, a "clear  proposition," has momentary  doubts when he appreciates  the totality of his commitment. For  Neil Fraser, cut off by circumstances  from his former life, and  arriving  on the  prairie as a twelve-year-old orphan, the loss of confidence is complete. He looks in vain for anything  familiar,  and  "because  the  word  river suggested something  of the world he had left behind" he is anxious to see the one his uncle talks of. But the Saskatchewan,  "black  lookin' and  black hearted," has little in common  with  the rivers he knew in Ontario, and the sight of it offers no consolation. As he goes to bed on his first night, his attempts  to conjure up a vision of his mother  fail before the "immensity  of darkness" of the prairie night, and  he knows that  the vision is gone for ever.
By contrast,  confidence is almost a key-word in the French  novels. The  village where Lormier goes, "ce lapin de terre perdu au bout du monde," is at the farthest point of civilization, but its inhabitants,  even a newcomer like Lormier,  are little troubled  by its remoteness. Far from being made uneasy by the "vastes horizons" and the "sombre opulence" of the muskeg, they simply accept  them, feeling, like Poulin, that in this community one is "chez soi, libre et independant." What dis­ tinguishes Avenir from a place like Horizon  or Pine Creek is that  "les Avenirois

71

LA CHAINE TENUE

avaient le regard clair  et le rire facile de ceux qui  ant  confiance." The  same con­ fidence is to be found in the  personality of Monge  on the  prairie or in the  North, in  the  whole  atmosphere of  the  Petite  Paule  d'Eau island,  in  the  "tranquillite sereine" which  Nipsya  finds,  and  in the  manner in which  Christine  happily  and  deliberately loses her  way on the  prairie. When  confidence  prevails, it seems, the need  to  look  upon   the  landscape as  a  hostile  frontier   disperses  in  a  mutually acceptable relationship with  nature.
The  basis of such  confidence is the awareness  of having  connections. Roads  and railways  here  provide   the  physical  links  which  encourage one  to  travel  and   to return, permitting one  to  maintain contact   not  only  within   the  community but also with  the  world  outside.  At  the  same  time,  they  represent  non-physical  con­ nections -the  knowledge that  one  is not  cut  off from  one's  past  or  from  one's family, and  the sense of being part  of a tradition which  extends,  in both space and  time, far  beyond  the  remote  community. Marguerite Primeau's words, explaining the eagerness of the Avenirois  to attend the monthly  Mass and  the social gathering which  follows,  will  serve  as  a  summary: "C'etait  une  fa<;on de  maintenir leur solidarite d'etres humains en  face  de  tant  d'elements etrangers,  de s'assurer que  Ia chaine  tenue  qui  les liait  tenait  bon."  To  know  that  one  belongs,  that  one  is connected to the  rest of humanity, even if by a "chaine tenue," places one in an entirely  different situation from  those  who,  leading  their essentially  lonely  lives with,  perhaps, material success but  in spiritual  poverty,  feel that  they  have  been dropped on a perch  of a town  in the middle  of  the  prairie  and  abandoned.


NOTES

1 Laurence   Ricou,   Vertical   Man/Horizontal  World   (Vancouver:  U.B.C.  Press,
I973)' p. I8.
2  "The Prairie: A State  of Mind."  Transactions  of the Royal Society  of Canada, 6, Series 4 (June  1968), p. I79·
8   "Prairie Literature and  its Critics,"  in A Region  of the Mind, ed. Richard  Allen, Canadian Plains Studies  I (Regina,I 972).
4 For  example,  the  conflict  between  civilians  and  soldiers  (the  latter  represented here by the  non-soldier,  Gander); the  brutalizing  effect of the  tension caused  by
war  (seen in  his relationship  with  Jo) ; nature  as an escape from  confrontation;
the ridiculing  of military drill;  in general, the prevailing sense of being compelled
to stay at or near  the scene of battle. All of these aspects are  to be found  in that
conglomeration   of  World  War  Iliterary  motifs,  Remarque's   All  Quiet  on  the
Western  Front, and  individually  in other  novels.

DUMPLINGS & DIGNITY




Danald R. Bartlett







IN CONVERSATION WITH  DONALD CAMERON, W. 0. Mitchell stated: "To  me the only justification for art is that  this particular narrative, these particular  people, shall articulate  some transcending  truth...."1  The "transcend­ ing truth" of The  Vanishing  Point is that the rights of others must not be violated, and that  authority  must be tempered  with compassion if the delicate web we call civilization is to remain  intact.  But Mitchell  knows that  the  word  must  become flesh; and his imagery contributes  significantly to this incarnation in The  Vanish­ ing Point. It helps the theme to evolve not as overt didacticism  but organically out of the whole matrix  of character  and situation.
The action begins when Carlyle Sinclair, a thirty-six-year-old widower who acts
as teacher and agent on the Paradise Valley reserve, awakens one fine spring morn­ ing and prepares to drive into the city to spend the afternoon  with Victoria Rider, a former student of his now training to be a nurse. Upon his arrival at the hospital, Sinclair  is dismayed  to learn  that  Victoria  has disappeared. He  begins a frantic  search for her, at first in the wilderness and later in the city  itself. When  at  last he does locate her, he learns that  shame over "failing"  both  him and  her parents has prevented her from returning  to the reserve, and that she has been obliged to solicit and is now pregnant.  Sinclair is shattered.  He leaves her in the street. But later his instincts triumph over his vanity and over the values imposed upon  him by an impersonal  white society. He dances with  her, sleeps with  her, and  deter­ mines to marry her.
This summary  indicates  little more than  a quest and some measure  of  attain­ ment. It reveals nothing  of the humour  and seriousness, the satire and sympathy, the conflicts and ironies which inform the novel. Nor does it indicate much about the theme or values, the  "transcending truth" which  Mitchell  wishes  to convey. But  it does, I  hope,  provide some context  for  my subsequent  comments  about Mitchell's imagery.
The  Vanishing  Point abounds  with images which relate significantly, and some­ times quite subtly, to idea and  mood, and hence become in varying degrees sym­ bolic. The  categories from  which  these images  are  drawn   are  indeed  diverse.

73

W. 0. MITCHELL

Places:  Beulah  Creek,  Paradise  Valley, Storm  and  Misty;  objects:  mirrors,  re­ versed hearts, oatmeal  biscuits, artificial birds and  animals, drums,  a magic lan­ tern,  a white  nightgown,  an  oil company's  coloured  markers,  Archie  Nicotine's truck,  Ian  Fyfe's conservatory;  natural things:  a male grouse, a bee, an  osprey, orchids, sloughs;  the senses, especially of smell, sight and sound;  even  character  or  caricature where  an  idea  or  value  and  not  psychological depth  is  primarily imaged: Ian  Fyfe, Rev. Dingle, Rev. Really  Richards,  Aunt  Pearl, Old  Kacky, Old  Esau  Rider,  and  Victoria.  These and  other  minor  images interact  with  the three controlling symbols or thematic  images in the novel: excrement,  the vanish­ ing point, and bridges.
Human dignity is an issue in this novel. Sinclair recalls an early episode in which
he had  affronted  and  hurt  Old  Esau by boiling carbolic in the classroom, osten­
sibly as a disinfectant.

"It's  medicine, Esau," he'd lied defensively. "For the germs-it kills the germs
-the ones in the air."
Esau sat silent, his eyes on the oilcloth of the kitchen table, and Carlyle cursed
the disinfectant's authority, bringing bitterness right into the kitchen, even though
the door to the schoolroom was closed. How much sharper in Esau's nostrils after the outside winter air.
"Hey-uh,"  Esau said, the Stony sound clipped off in the throat.  It could mean almost anything: yes-no-maybe-you're right-you're wrong. "White people
smell too." "Do we?"
"Hey-uh." That  was affirmative. "How do you mean, Esau ?"
"To us people, you know." "We smell to you."
"Cow."
"I don't ..."
"Quite strong."
"Oh -milky. You mean we smell milky to you?"
It was several deliberate seconds before Esau lifted his hooded eyes. "Hey-uh."
This time he meant no.

What  do whites smell like? It is an easy step from this question and Sinclair's re­ flection on "the  disinfectant's authority" to the first of the thematic  images I men­ tioned.  Like Sinclair's  deliberate  misplacing of the  Oil  Company's  markers  but more consistendy so, excrement as image is used to symbolize defiance of irrespon­ sible and  abused  authority, to symbolize a  response to  some  affront  to  human dignity. One of the most amusing anecdotes in the novel illustrates this. It occurs when Sinclair  recalls the time he failed to obey Old  Kacky's instructions  during a lesson in perspective drawing.  As a result he was ordered  to Old  Kacky's office and strapped. Then,  left to regain his composure in the office, he defecated among the papers in Old Kacky's drawer. Old Kacky endured the indignity of living with

74

W. 0. MITCHELL

the smell for a week before discovering its source.2    Years later  Sinclair  himself affronts the dignity of Harold  Lefthand  by bullying him over the poor attendance of his children at school. Lefthand  retaliates by putting horse manure  in Sinclair's water  supply. Sinclair  suffers the  indignity  of having  drunk  the  water  for  two weeks before discovering the ruse.
Another  important example  of excremental  imagery relates to Sinclair's  Aunt
Pearl,  who produces white stools-"little white dumplings." There  is an  incon­ gruity  in  Aunt  Pearl's  "purity": her stools are  white  but  she burns  string  after each  bowel movement,  presumably  as a deodorant.  Her  absolutes are  arraigned implicitly in the following exchange between Sinclair and Doctor Saunders:

"I  never  did  get  a  professional explanation  from  you-what  about  Aunt
Pearl?"
"Her  white stool? Oh - soppy -sippy-bland  diet, I guess. You get it with
older-no-more likely mucous colitis." "Whatever that is."
"Anxiety-not ulcerative but-God,  now wouldn't that  be funny!" "What?"
"Your  anal  erotic  Aunt  Pearl-responsible  for  the  whole  mechanistic  mess we're in."
"No. Not very."
"Sent us all to play in the technological toy room-she's still burning her string
you know-in that great bathroom in the sky!"
"I agree."
Sanders lifted a cupped hand, the thumb crooked back; he made a broad pass back and forth, depressing his thumb. "Haaaaaaah -haaaaaaaaah - sssssssssssit
-pressurized cans of flora green-oh-oh, if only she'd toilet-train  the hydro and  pulp and gas and oil and  the little automobile boys-before they do it all over the whole wild green broadloom!"

There  is also something anaemic  about  Aunt Pearl that stands  in sharp  contrast to the red and raw vitality of the Stonys -or at least in contrast  to the image of the Stonys before they contracted  the white man's  diseases. Mitchell  apparently intended a similar negative connotation for Rev. Heally Richards who is described as a "photograph negative" and "the negative-man," and whose penchant  for pea­ nut butter  makes Archie Nicotine shudder at the thought of a man eating all  that "squirrel shit."




E             is also an image of negation. The  vanishing  point, in perspective drawing,  is the point towards  which  parallel receding lines appear  to converge. But the main function  of the vanishing  point in  this novel is human  rather  than  art  oriented.  The  image  does remind  us of different  ways of perceiving -not  just objects but the human  condition  as well;

75

W. 0. MITCHELL

and  it does allude  to guiding  lines in art  and  in life, where man  draws lines of authority  for himself and,  often more destructively, for others. But the really sig­ nificant thrust of the image, as Mitchell uses it, is towards a nothingness to which the species seems inexorably  drawn  because of the greed and  callousness and  in­ tolerance of its members.
Disillusioned with Fyfe's attitude  to the Indians as "terminal cases" and with his
band-aid  measures of helping  them,  disillusioned alike with  what  Sanders  terms "the  reserve-system slough-tepid with paternal  help" and  "the  crowded, noisy, concrete and glass and plastic and asphalt slough," disillusioned with Rev. Dingle's "absent-minded masturbatory loving kindness that has borne no fruit," disillusioned with his own efforts, Sinclair by extension sees the whole human spectacle as futile. All is being "sucked into the vanishing point." "Despair like me ... ," he tells Fyfe; "Right  from  the  beginning  the  whole human  race  has  been  one  God-damned mess!"
Alone at home, he recalls the premature  death of his wife.

For  a moment there  came  back  to him the  profile of a woman  seated  in a window bench,  her knees  drawn up  and  arms  clasped  around them-and  oh,  the  sad and shallow  curve  of her  neck with  head  tilted  down.  So still-so still for  hours!  Once more,  on  an  institutional counter, he signed  away  all  happy  days;  he  accepted a big  Manilla envelope with  its  tiny  silver  wrist-watch, engagement  ring,  wedding band. Then a  train  was  being  sucked  into  the  prairie   vanishing point. He  stood alone  on  a platform on  a friendless  planet.

But Sinclair,  no matter  how depressing the moment,  refuses to say a permanent "No" to Life. Mate,  his boyhood friend,  had argued  with  him years earlier that the vanishing point is an illusion: "It only comes to a vanishing point.... " In the end the truth of Mate's  remark is symbolically affirmed through  traditional images of spring-new  leaf, bird's  song, soaring osprey, water, especially the "rebirth" of Beulah Creek -and  in the working of Archie's  truck.  But this affirmation  of life is made  plausible through  what  I believe is the most important image in the whole book-bridges.
In  the  physical sense, bridges are essential links in communications  and  trans­
portation  systems : and  one thinks immediately of the suspension bridge over the Spray,  an essential link between  the two worlds of this novel. But far  more im­ portant  to the revelation  and affirmation of The  Vanishing  Point are the  psycho­ logical bridges which must be erected among people if we are to escape extinction as human  beings.
On  the spring morning  on which the action begins, Sinclair  recognizes himself as a "thirty-six-year-old adolescent ... starved for the thrust from self to the centre of a loved one."  Later  that  morning,  while crossing over the Spray,  the need for positive contact among  human  beings prompts him to comment:  "That was what

W. 0. MITCHELL

was  needed  really;  some  sort  of suspension  bridge  that   could  carry   hearts and minds across and  into other  hearts  and minds."
Mitchell makes it clear,  through his men of the cloth,  that  the  Church has not erected such "bridges." Rev. Dingle's attempt at reaching the Stonys through their language provides a delightful little irony;  and  for all the Biblical  texts referred  to by clergy or layman, no mention is made  of First  Corinthians, Chapter Thirteen! "Had he  ever  made  it  across  to  any  of these  people?" Sinclair  asks  himself. Occasionally he  had -when  personal  and  spontaneous good  will  rather than institutionalized charity had   prevailed. There had  been  a  genuine and   mutual "thrust from self" in the giving of gifts on that  first Christmas in Paradise Valley; even  more  sustaining had  been  that  memorable August  afternoon when  he  had
taken  Victoria, then  twelve  years old, into  the city to have  a tooth  capped:

As they walked through  the crushing flow of people, she had  taken  his hand  and held it as they walked. For the first time two worlds had  merged, and  he knew it. He and she were no longer so vulnerable on this concrete  and  asphalt  planet.  The memory of her  hand  in his could still surprise  him  with  the  dry, sun  heat  of its own.

Memories such as these, and  Sinclair's initial faith  in good works, help to articulate the thesis that  mankind can escape  "being  sucked into  the  vanishing point."
But there is an Antithesis in his moments of depression,  when  he fears that com­ munication among  human beings  might  be  just a dream: "What a weak  bridge  emotion  was for people  to walk across to each  other -emotion swinging, unable  to hold the heavy weight  of communication."3 And in his realization that the lines of authority which  man  draws  do not ensure  justice and  dignity  for his fellowman. Above all, he himself had  dynamited a "bridge": he had  failed Victoria when she needed  him  most.  Out of  these  antithetical states  of  mind  arises  the  Synthesis  which  is incipient in  his admonition of Fyfc, in his glass  world,  amid  his hybrid  orchids,  and  away  from  reality  and  nature.

"You're  trying to-for  something  that  hasn't  got anything  to do  with what  the orchid wants."

"Listen to the orchid,  Fyfe-let her tell her own delight and  need...."

Fyfe's imposition  of his own will upon  the orchid  parallels  what  the white author­ ities are  doing  to the  Indians, and, ironically,  what  Sinclair is doing  to  Victoria. Later,  he will fully recognize  that  authority must be tempered by compassion; and that  one may improve social conditions,  but  only if one has a sympathetic under­ standing of the  human condition. People like Rev. Richards and  Aunt  Pearl  lack the "compassion halo" and  force other  people into  moral  boxes. He,  too, had  not experienced  the suffering and  loss that  help to build character, nor  had  he always

77

W. 0. MITCHELL

taken  into  account the  dignity   of  others.  "They perished  and   he  taught  them arithmetic; they  thirsted to death on their  time  desert  and  he gave  them  reading and spelling lessons.... without twinning pain his compassion  had  been specious."




l:E WHEEL  COMES FULL CIRCLE. It was the  drumming of a male  grouse  that  had  aroused Sinclair to new life on the  morning he had  set out to visit Victoria in the city. Near  the end of the  novel, the dance  (and drums) - primitive ritual of transcendence and  symbol  of unity-finally  lifts  him  out  of "the home  envelope  of self."  He  seeks out  Victoria, and,  dancing with  her  amid that  great  tribal  wash  of passion  that  obliterates all  but  the  Now,  he  rediscovers what  he and  Mate had  discovered intuitively long ago:

They  were both  alien  from  and  part  of a living whole. The  dry husk of a dead gopher,  an  abandoned garter-snake  skin, magpies, undertaker  beetles, had  taught them the terror of being human. But they knew that they were accountable to each other; the badger,  the coyote, the kill-deer, the  jack rabbit,  the undertaker beetle, could not share their alien terror.  They  were not responsible for each other.  Man was.
Man  lifted bridges between  himself and  other  men so that  he could  walk from
his own  heart  and  into  other  hearts.  That was the  great  and  compensating  dis­ tinction: man  did-the  jack  rabbit,  the  badger,  the  kill-deer,  the  weasel,  the undertaker beetle, did not. How could he have forgotten  that!  How could he have
left Victoria  on that  city street. Archie hadn't; Archie had  not destroyed a bridge. But  he  had  turned  away from  her-from  all of  them,  lost sight  of  their  vivid need. Victoria  had  not truly failed, but he had....
He danced  again  with Victoria....

Who cared now -who cared  now! Only the now remained  to them -the now so great  that  only death  or love could greaten  it. Greater  than  pain, stronger  than hunger  or their  images paled  with future-dimmed with  past. Only  the  now­ pulsing  and  placeless-now! Song  and  dancer  and  watching   band  were  one, under  the  bruising  drum  that  shattered   time  and  self and  all  other  things  that bound  them.
Her hand  took his as they stood up, held it as they walked to the tent flap. The
drum  followed them all the way to Beulah Creek bridge, then with one lambasting
sound, it was stilled.

This  is the  philosophical and  emotional climax  of the  novel. Sinclair  is, in  Eliot's phrase, "At  the  still point  of the  turning world," where  all opposites  are  harmo­ nized. His subsequent sleeping  with Victoria merely re-emphasizes symbolically his triumph over his own vanity,  and  his defiance  of intolerant authority. Next  morn­  ing, waking  once more  to the drumming of the grouse, and looking  tenderly upon Victoria lying there  without an "overlay of lace" and not "daisy-white," he reflects

W. 0. MITCHELL

that, until now, life "had  given him the wrong commandments: be loved-don't love; tell-don't ask; take-don't give." But far from being "a separate  peace," as was Frederic's relationship with Catherine in A Farewell to Arms, Sinclair's love for Victoria symbolizes universal kindness -the only solution possible in a world where  Old   Esau's  Storm   and  Misty  magic  is  obsolete, where   Fyfe's  welfare measures are demeaning, and where the miracle healing of Richards is just another form of prostitution.4
Three  images -excrement, the vanishing point, and bridges -carry the bur­ den of Mitchell's commentary  on the delicate web we call civilization, and on the importance of compassion and responsibility in keeping that  web intact. However, a word must be said about  the minor images which twinkle in and  around these controlling  symbols and  help to illuminate  the  theme, and  to  intensify  the  psy­ chology of defiance and negation and abnormality, failure and  despair,  hope and affirmation which informs the narrative.  (Here, a few examples must serve for the many.)   Magic lantern,  dead little Willis's toy-room, the three-balled  bronze lion in Aunt  Pearl's living room are images of the abnormality and  artificiality  which cramp the individual and help to negate all that we mean by such terms as "spirit" and "Life Force." Gloria Catface,  the Indian  prostitute, appears  to have parallels in  Miss Rossdance's  girls. And  "white" is almost  always associated  with  excre­ ment.  But  there  are  also  images  which  are  positive. The  reversed  heart  image occurs at least twice in the novel:  once, as a metaphor  for the cloven-hoof prints near the beaver dam; and again, in the black comedy of the eccentric  Dr. Dabbs at  the  hospital. The  heart  must  be right:  that  message pervades  the  narrative. Bird's song, water, and soaring osprey symbolize love, generation,  and the resilient spirit and contribute  likewise to the motif of rebirth.
The little Powderface  boy, playing with his battered  toy truck or floating  chips on his tiny canal system, reminds us that  boys are one at  heart,  regardless of the colour  of  their  skin.  As he  watches  that  "little  bare-bum   shaman,"  Sinclair reflects:  "I want  to mirror  you so you may be more nearly true! ... I  promise you I won't destroy you with distorted image. I will not turn  you into a backward person.... Let's you and  I conjure  together. ... do our marvelous  human  tricks together!" The mirror  image or metaphor,  at various places representative of the Indians' shame  and  confusion,  is, at  the  end,  directed  towards   promotion   of human  dignity. Finally, there is "the little phrase," which may or may not consti­ tute an image but which, by repetition and variation, contributes  to the motifs of the  novel and  helps to  provide  rhythm: Fyfe's "see what  transpires"; Archie's "that  is the whole situation"; and Sinclair's "Little  lost lamb, Victoria!"
But W. 0. Mitchell is no romantic: he is not promoting  images of "the  noble savage"  or  the  wilderness utopia.  And  the  artificiality  and  bureaucracy of  the white  administrators   are  balanced   by the  filth  and  inefficiency of  the  Stonys. Mitchell  is a lover of life for whom the "irresponsible"  is often  irresistible;  and

79

W. 0. MITCHELL

his humour and  irony  help  him  to  avoid  the  prejudice, sentimentality and  con­ descension  to which  literature about  ethnic  and  native  minorities is so susceptible. He  is a humanist who  anchors his narrative in a milieu  he knows well, the  more  convincingly to articulate a truth which  transcends that  milieu. The  principle  of love  and  compassion   as  the  panacea for  a  troubled world  is  not new:  what  is important is that  a man  who  is neither  a cynic nor  a sentimentalist can  affirm it in  our  own  time,  and   how  that   affirmation  is  made  from   experience  filtered through a sensitivity  and  imagination unique  in our literature. "[T] he main  justi­ fication  for  art  is that  it  grows  out  of the  unique  and  individual human being, and  that  when  the art  experience happens between  a creative  artist  and  a creative  partner [the  reader], it is probably the  closest a  human can  ever  come  to truly crossing a bridge  to another human ... ,"5   Mitchell has claimed. His handling of image  and  idea in The  Vanishing  Point  makes good that  claim.


NOTES

1 Conversations with  Canadian Novelists, ed. Donald  Cameron  (Toronto:  Macmil­
lan, 1973),  Part  Two,  p. 51.
2   Heather Robertson,  in a review of The  Vanishing Point,  recalls being told that  the Indians  of one Saskatchewan reserve used to steal into the  R.C.M.P. detachment and deposit human excrement on the Corporal's living-room couch as a means of destroying the enemy's dignity without  taking his life. (See "W. 0. Mitchell:   Pain Beneath  the Laughter," Saturday Night, January  1974, vol. 8g, pp. 31-32.)
3 Later  Sinclair  reflects on  the  absence  of real  intimacy  with  his father: "It   had been as though  his father  had  decided  that  emotion  was waste" and  "He  guessed that  was the way it had  been with him and  his father: 'you in your small corner and  I in mine'."
4  Cf.  Mitchell's  skillful  juxtaposition  of scenes from  Gloria  Catface's   prostitution and  Rev. Heally Richards'  evangelism.
5   Conversations with  Canadian Novelists, p. 51.








DISPROPORTION
 


Ralph Gustafson


Chalk  this up:  never before
Has such praise been given
Snow on the limbs of trees shaken
In  a shoddy  wind,

8o

POEM

Have  sparks  exploded In  a  stardom of glory Thus from  logs ... Two  instances will do Of  the  prodigiousness As I sit here,
The window  on my left on winter,
The fire on my right
Burning where  the  fireplace  is. Sprawl banners,
Slogans  raise to the  turn  of events, Psalteries and  song even,
To  all sorts,
To  the  procedures of
Being  here,  to knowledge  of Progressions, to imposed  goings even. The snow falls,
The fire burns,
I engage  prodigies.









]IT THE  C]l' PES]IRO




Music,  modest  as in this palazzo, At the  piano  here,  theCa' Pesaro,
Canale Grande. And in how  many  places  ... Madame's handkerchief before  she  plays,
Seta  pura the low-cut  gown
As thought of as the music, Brahms, Berg and  his nerve-ends; rubbish
In the  canal, rinds,  zucchini  tops, Yesterday's soaked  news floating
Where Byron swam  and  Browning loved.
Out  through the windows: 'Intermezzo' For the  passing  world,  Brahms  drinking His coffee,  Madame rendering, impervious To  the  vaporetto's thump.
 


Ralph Gustafson



















81

STATES OF MIND
Henry Kreisel's Novels



Robert A. Lecker





IN ms ESSAY  ENTITLED "The  Pnllrieo  A  State  of  Mffid," Henry  Kreisel  examines  the  relation  between  the  prairie  environment and  the prairie consciousness as it is manifested in writing. Significantly, the essay takes as
its  point  of  departure Kreisel's  own  response  to  a  landscape   which  he  came gradually  to know in the first years he spent in the Canadian west. Kreisel is at pains to point out that  the assimilation of the prairie consciousness frequently pre­ cedes the objective recognition of the forms that  consciousness can take and their deliberate  expression in writing.  For example, a short story Kreisel  published  in I g66, "The Broken Globe," is full of the images of prairie man that he only later recognized as recurrent  in prairie literature: "These  were in fact the images that came  to me and  I should  myself have regarded  them  as purely  subjective,  if I had  not afterward in  reading  encountered  similar  images in  the  work of other writers who write about  the appearance of men on the  prairie at certain  times." As the essay makes clear,  Kreisel  had  come under  the  prairie  influence  almost immediately  upon going west prior toI 948. Even then, he was "awed" by a letter
to the Edmonton Journal "in  which the writer ... asserted with passionate con­ viction that  the earth  was fiat."  In  the  Ig68  essay, Kreisel notes that  "even  as I write these lines, the emotion evoked in me by that letter that appeared in a news­ paper more than  twenty years ago comes back to me, tangible and palpable."
The  prairie  which  has had  so potent  an  effect upon  Kreisel is of course real, but it is also the author's metaphor. He is more concerned with a state  of mind than  he is with a specific place. He implies that we are all prairie men who carry within us the prairie consciousness. Above all, it is Kreisel who displays that con­ sciousness-the men he writes about  in his essay are very much  a part  of  him­ self. The critique is as much a "romance" as his novels, a theoretical formulation  of his own quest fictionalized in his work. Thus  the essay functions as a displaced example  of his deepest  themes imaged  in terms of the  prairie  landscape.  As he studies other  prairie fiction, Kreisel finds the symbols of his own  sense of self. In turn,  he transforms  the  prairie  into  a field of symbolic  images  which  comes to represent  the landscape  of the modern mind. Thus  the essay actually serves as a

KREISEL'S NOVELS

key to Kreisel's own  novels, for  it  provides us with a statement of the  images, themes, and archetypes that  reappear  in The  Rich Man  and  The  Betrayal.
Kreisel likens the prairie  to a sea:  "Only  the other kind of landscape  gives us the same skeleton requirements,  the same vacancy and stillness, the same  move­ ment of wind through  space -and that  is the sea." In actual  fact, Kreisel con­ nects not  one but  three  landscapes  with  the  prairie.  He  refers to  Ross's  Philip Bentley drawing  scenes of the  prairie  as a desert, "scenes  that  mirror  his own frustration." The   "barren  sea"  which  Philip  Grove's  horses   hurl   themselves against is synonymous with "those  drifts of snow" characteristic of Arctic desola­ tion. The  prairie,  the sea, the  desert, the arctic-for  Kreisel  these "lonely  and forbidden  spaces" combine  to form a metaphorical  modern  wasteland,  a  moral wilderness devoid of signposts and  heedless of individual identity.
Kreisel also sees man's  response to the  wasteland  in  metaphorical terms.  He becomes the  archetypal  wanderer  "driven  to follow a  dream," or  the  mythical frontiersman  "pitted  against  a  vast and  frequently  hostile natural  environment that  threatens  to dwarf  him." Man  the conqueror-explorer  is frequently  a victim, both of the elements and of loneliness. Again, the "extraordinary sense of confine­ ment"  which plagues the prairie settler takes on universal significance; "the  theme of the imprisoned spirit" is the theme of modern literature.
Kreisel reminds us that  the fate of the individual  usually represents  the fate of society at large. In its search for security, the prairie community  often shuts out the world, but in so doing shuts itself in. The settlements become "islands  in that land-sea,  areas of relatively safe refuge from the great and  lonely spaces."  Ideals and dreams are constantly thwarted by the presence of the real:  "Man, the giant­ conqueror, and man, the insignificant dwarf always threatened  by defeat, from the two  polarities  of the state  of  mind  produced  by the sheer  physical  fact  of the prairie." As Kreisel says, "there  are moments when the two images coalesce." The result may be a doppelganger motif, the ultimate expression of  alienation.  Or  the divided spirit may be confused and self-deceiving, an escapist  living in a private dream  and  pretending  that  the outer  world is absent. Another  may  be an  actor performing on a private stage -his artificial interior reality. A third  may venture boldly into the wilderness to defeat  the ambiguity of  fate.  Clearly,  these are  all attempts  to deal in some way with the surrounding sea. Kreisel is writing about  a quest for order, stability, and  reason. He is describing the tactics men employ to guarantee their very existence. Kreisel presents the same themes and  characters  in his novels.
The  Rich  Man  tells the story of Jacob  Grossman, an  older  Jewish  man  con­ fined for thirty-three  years to the routine  job of a clothes factory  presser. In order to visit the family he has left behind in Europe, Jacob  decides to leave work  and the daughter  he lives with for a six week trip to Vienna. Squandering his meagre savings, Jacob  manages  to impress his relatives as a wealthy  man  by  their  stan-

KREISEL'S  NOVELS

dards. But when a desperate  situation forces the family to ask Jacob  for financial help, the truth comes out. Jacob  returns to Toronto shaken, unhappy,  and exposed for the poor man  he really is.
From  the beginning  of the novel, it is clear that  Jacob  remains an imprisoned spirit, an alien in his adopted  homeland.  The  Toronto  which Jacob  has lived in for more than three decades is presented as an essentially barren  urban  wilderness. The  more we follow Jacob  in his movements at home or overseas, the more we realize the extent  to which he has either denied his environment, or coloured his view of it so as to reinforce  a contrived sense of security. The  first scenes of the novel are  interesting  in  this respect. We are introduced  to Jacob  as he emerges from  the  cocoon-like safety of his bed. Before the first line of the  book is  com­ pleted Jacob is not only awake but already seeking out the clock which will assure him  that  events are still well organized  and  proceeding  on  time as  planned.  In the  first paragraph Kreisel is careful  to emphasize the  extent  to  which  Jacob's survival depends  upon  organizing  the day to come. Repeatedly  we are  told that Jacob's  existence is a matter  of what  "should  have been," what "he  would say," how he "would  go on,"  how he "would  get down to the factory."  The  obsession with  maintaining a sense of time  and  place continues  throughout Jacob's  day, magnifying the significance of his need for an almost hermetic  isolation. Leaving his own room, Jacob  makes his habitual  moves from the kitchen, to the tramcar,  and  into the factory.  Although  Jacob  has decided to  upset the order  of the day by speaking to the factory  manager,  he reassures himself by entering  through  the workers' side entrance. Before the door has even  closed Jacob  begins to look for the familiar  symbols of stability: "He  swung open  the door. There,  against  the walls, were the time clocks, and instinctively, his eyes wandered  to the rack where his own time card  was. It  was there,  No.  1003, standing  lonely in the left-hand rack beside one of the clocks." Clearly,  Jacob  is firmly entrenched  in that  nco­ Calvinist  "work  ethic"  framework  that  Kreisel  refers to  in  his  essay. Having laboured  for more than  half his life in the same building, Jacob  has managed  to insulate  himself completely  from  life  in  the open.  It  is important to  note  that Jacob's  alienation  is chosen as  much  as it is imposed-it  is essentially a means of defence.
When  Jacob  moves from  the  safety of Canadian enclosures  to  a  European setting, absolutely nothing  changes  in terms of the exterior  landscape.  Overseas, as in Toronto, Jacob  is equally  at odds with everything  outside.  He  (as well as every other character) does all he can to block out the surrounding world. After leaving the ship, Jacob  completes the route to Vienna  by train.  Later,  when he "tried  to recall what the Belgian countryside looked like, he found that his memory was blurred  and  hazy."  In  actual  fact, Kreisel informs us, "he  paid  no heed to the beautiful scenery.... Jacob  saw nothing."  Indeed, Jacob sees little during his entire visit. Retreating with his family from the atmosphere  of anti-semitism and

KREISEL'S NOVELS

political repression which surrounds  them  in the  European  city, Jacob's stay in Vienna  becomes a series of interior  adventures designed to deny the real hostility of  the  environment   beyond  the  doorway.  Correspondingly,  spatial   structures generally describe hidden, withdrawn,  or highly enclosed areas. Upon  his arrival, Jacob  hustles the family into a taxi which in turn  moves swiftly to their  meagre rooms. The  next  day,  Jacob  visits the  public  bath.  The  image  of  the  tomb  is obvious here, for "the semi-darkness in which it was shrouded  and  the beckoning couches gave the atmosphere  an extraordinary degree of restfulness and  peace." Another  excursion  brings  Jacob  to Albert's  book shop,  "wedged  in  between  a grocery on one side and a butcher shop on the other." The  culminating enclosure scene, and  the novel's finest representation  of the attempt  to retreat  from  a  dis­ ordered  world occurs when Jacob  accompanies  his nephews to the  "cave"  they have discovered in a nearby area. In their naivete, the children give voice to what Jacob is reluctant  to admit:

when  you're  in  the  cave  you can  see everything that's going  on  outside, but  any­
body  that's walking  around outside can't  see you at all  when  you're  hidden  inside.




JACOB's IDEAL woRLD is described in the child's  words about the cave. Throughout the novel Jacob  is concerned  with establishing  a selective vision, one which will enable him to recognize the "outside"  only when he chooses
.to, and even then, only from a governing perspective. At the same time, the cave metaphor  is appropriate to Jacob  because it represents his own need to hide from the  outside  at  will, simultaneously  substituting  for  exterior  reality  an  artificial interior  milieu. Kreisel underlines  the negative qualities of such a synthetic exis­ tence. No sooner has man framed  himself within protective boundaries  than those boundaries  begin to weigh him down. What was to be a zone of freedom  is trans­ formed into a narrow  cell. Jacob's  sensations at the close of the cave scene make this view explicit. He felt that  "all  the air seemed to  have  been cut  off. It  was almost like being in a small, windowless room, pressed against a  narrow  corner."  Life in The Rich Man may be generally described as windowless. Here,  man is
not interested  in the true  picture so much  as in imposing his own  picture  upon
the  landscape,  altering  it to suit  his needs, and  refusing to  recognize  it  except within the framework  he himself has chosen. It is for this reason that  Jacob's rare glimpses of Vienna  tell us much  more about  Jacob  and  what  he  refuses to see than  they do about  the city itself. His first impressions, caught  from  the security of the taxi, are revealing:

The  streets  were  alive  with  people; old  men  and  women  promenading slowly  up and  down, sitting  on benches  in the mellow evening  air, young couples  walking ann

KREISEL'S  NOVELS

in arm. The  cafes were full of patrons, some sitting outside in  the  improvised gardens and vine-hung terraces, chattering and drinking coffee.

This is the romantic  Vienna  that  Jacob  has always dreamed  of. Only later do we realize the extent of Jacob's  self-deception. The streets are full of people, Reuben explains, because  in  a  city of two  million, three  hundred  thousand  are  unem­ ployed. The men sit drinking  coffee because "as long as they have a few groschen left they would rather  do this. This way at least they save their shoes." Even the music performed  by the street singers "is only another  way of begging."
It  is appropriate that  the most important pages of The  Rich Man  should  be
those  devoted  to  the  actual  voyage from  Canada to the  Old  World.  The  sea Jacob  crosses is metaphorically  that  "vast land-sea" which Kreisel spoke of. Upon this featureless expanse,  Jacob  sets himself as the explorer in search  of his past and  the innocent  values associated with childhood.  He has yet to learn  that  the age of innocence is irrevocably lost. In his own eyes, and in the white alpaca  suit he has purchased  for the occasion, Jacob  becomes the mythical  rich man  of  sta­ ture  and  strength-a transformed  conqueror,  the  physical sign of his  country's growth  and  prosperity.  Jacob  finds  himself in  pursuit  of  a  dream,  but  he  is repeatedly  forced  to confront  the futility of his ideal and  the  reality  of  his own spiritual  isolation. In  an  interesting  way, this dichotomy  has been  foreshadowed from the first scene in Jacob's  bedroom. As he shaves, "The Blue Danube  Waltz"  plays over the radio, but the waltz is preceded by a recording of  a  Negro quartet singing  "Swing  Low,  Sweet  Chariot." Throughout the  novel,  we  find  Jacob  searching  after the lost ideal of the waltz:  "He  wanted  a lot of  violins, hundreds  of them,  the way it was always done in movies about  gay  Vienna." Again  and again Jacob asks to hear the piece, but never does he hear it properly. The  music is always disrupted  by some intrusion of the real. The  Negro song is in fact much more suited  to Jacob  than  the  waltz -the  never-changing form  of his employ­ ment  amidst  "the  steam  of the  Hoffman  presses and  the  sweat  of hundreds  of workers" marks him as enslaved to a system that  reduces men to strictly mechani­ cal activities.
The  ironies of Jacob's  position are  readily  apparent: while  he may  be a  big man in his own eyes, and  perhaps a giant in the eyes of his European  relatives, he is in fact a dwarf,  a victim, not a victor. To survive, Jacob  must involve himself in a dangerous game of role-playing. He can maintain  himself only by assuming a false front  that  gives him a controlling sense of power. As Kreisel tells us, "there was indeed a great  deal of the showman in Jacob  Grossman."  However, there is a very serious aspect to Jacob's  acting, one which is crucial to the sea experience in general, for Jacob's  quest for an appropriate identity coincides with his search for values, for an acceptable  frame of reference through which he can see an unexplored  world. Repeatedly  in The  Rich Man Jacob  tries to find or purchase

86

KREISEL'S NOVELS

physical objects which act as co-ordinates in relation to which he can  place him­ self and  his attitudes.   Nowhere  is this more  apparent than  in  the  meeting  on board the ship between Jacob  and  the French artist Tassigny. Tassigny  has com­ pleted an abstract  painting  entitled  L'Entrepreneur, "remotely  suggesting a  hu­ man figure, though  this was not at first easily apparent because a geometric  con­ struction  built up of spheres and  rectangular  planes obscured it. The  figure had a long fteshless neck, but  no face. Where the head should  have  been, there  was a thick,  cylindrical,  megaphone-like  contraption,  painted   jet-black,  and   pointing sideways." The  picture suggests Jacob's  own adopted  role as the entrepreneurial gross man.  As his exaggerated  stories and  countless lies make  clear, Jacob  is all voice, but faceless.
In  contrast  to Jacob,  Tassigny  maintains  that  whether  or  not  his expressions are  understood  is inconsequential, "so long as I have always told the  truth,  the way I see the truth." Tassigny's  reasons for  creating  the  painting  are  therefore diametrically opposed to Jacob's  reasons for purchasing it. The canvas gives Jacob a false sense of power  and  wealth.  He almost begins to like the  painting,  "not because he came to appreciate Tassigny's art,  but  because he fancied  that  with the purchase of the painting  he had become, not only Tassigny's  equal, but even his superior. He felt his ego grow, and become inflated like a balloon. For was he not now a patron of the arts?"
When at the story's end Jacob  comes face to face with  the futility  of his own self-deception, it is appropriately Tassigny's painting  which is angrily  discarded; for in  casting away  the  image  of the entrepreneur, Jacob  symbolically  kills the myriad  impressions which  have  governed  his overseas life. Although  the  novel may seem to describe a progression from innocence to experience, or from falsity to truth,  it is clear that  in the end, by rejecting the painting,  Jacob  symbolically rejects any  truths  he has  discovered in his journey through  the  external  world. Having  experienced the hostility of the wilderness around  him, Jacob  retreats  to the  safety  of  a  framed   lifestyle-he  returns  to  that  windowless  complacence which blocks out the violence of the real. We are left with the nagging sensation that for Jacob, very little has changed.




KREISEL's SECOND  NOVEL,  The  Betrayal, also deals with  a man who attempts  to deny the threat  of external experience by entrenching  him­ self and  his perceptions  in a well-ordered but  narrow  sense of  place. From  the comfort  of his high-rise  apartment living room in  Edmonton, Mark  Lerner,  a Canadian-born professor of history, recalls the story of Theodore  Stappler, who has  relentlessly pursued  to  Canada Joseph  Held,  the  man  responsible  for  his mother's  death  ten years earlier  in Auschwitz. Through their  mutual  interest  in

KREISEL'S  NOVELS

Held's  daughter  Katherine,  Lerner  finds  himself  involved  with  Stappler   and playing  the  role of  his confidant,  constantly  asked to  judge  and  identify  with Stappler's need for  revenge and  the  potential  guilt arising from  Stappler's own inactivity in the face of Held's  betrayal  of his family.
Like Jacob,  Lerner  is confined  within  a  punctual  routine  and  imprisoned  by his lifestyle. The  habitual  reading  of essays merely replaces the endless pressing of garments that Jacob  devotes his life to -both duties are the rituals around  which these men structure  their daily experiences. Lerner is a bachelor  living alone two thousand  miles from  "familial  love." Daily, he moves from  his snug  apartment ("though the sound-proofing could be somewhat improved") to a university office equally  removed  from  life in  the streets. Outside,  there  is always snow, or  the frozen river, or "a light wind which made it seem much colder than it was." Lerner himself is antiseptically intellectual,  as cold and sterile as the environment he shies away from. But he is not immune  to the sense of prairie loneliness described  in Kreisel's essay. Emerging  from  the Victoria  Hotel towards the end  of the novel, the landscape  presents itself to him thus:

Whiteness in darkness. It had very nearly stopped snowing. Only a few perfunctory flakes were still drifting down from the black invisible sky....
For a moment I felt as if I had stepped out onto a strange and unknown street. The  landscape seemed curiously unfamiliar, like a landscape in a dream. The buildings were sombre, forbidding shapes, rising from the white pavement into the darkness above. There was very little traffic on the road. I did not know what time
it was. It seemed the dead end of night.

The  disorienting  landscape  which Lerner confronts reflects his own inner con­ fusion. Lost in a timeless foreign  world devoid of human  fellowship,  Lerner ex­ periences the dead end vision of existential despair which marks him as a modern man. In his response to this metaphorical glimpse of the desert Lerner is identical to Jacob.  He reveals his desperate  need for stability and  control  by becoming a collector of paintings, seeing himself as one who can frame experience by purchas­ ing it pre-framed  and  pre-packaged.  Considering the three "distinguished" oils in his possession, particularly  a scene by Emily Carr, Lerner boasts proudly  that  "I rather  fancy myself a patron  of the arts." The  painting  is indeed  valuable,  for it provides us with a key to Lerner's  personality. By using the painting  we can open those doors that Lerner has tried so firmly to bolt. Lerner's approach to the canvas is similar to his appreciation of  history-what the professor wants is an intellec­ tualized  existence, the vitality and  dynamism of life without  its pain, its involve­ ments, or its crises. Repeatedly  he returns  to the question of Charlotte Corday's potential  guilt, presenting it as a universal example of the need for moral  choice. But never does Lerner  apply  the  problem to his own very questionable acts. He admits  that  he is "prepared to grant ... a certain validity" to his colleague's sug­ gestion that "I like the study of history because it involves me in the acts of suf-

88

KREISEL'S NOVELS

fering  humanity  but  at the same time allows me to keep involvements  at  arm's length." Although  Lerner  might  try to convince himself that  in the course of his encounter  with Stappler  he manages  to shed this protective  intellectualism, it is clear that  he remains forever preoccupied with rendering the fluid static and  with containing  the shifting sea. We need only observe Lerner at the end  of his story, as he continues to sit behind  that  ever-present living-room window  which acts as his frame around  the world. There,  in silent isolation, he can  "look down on the magnificent  river winding its way through  the city, and watch  the changes of the seasons." Instead  of participating in the exterior flow of nature,  Lerner  remains content  merely to view life from a distanced and controlled perspective.
In  keeping with this attitude, it is only natural  that  for Lerner,  human  action itself is denigrated  to the status of an objet d'art, something to be toyed with and forgotten.  The  "meaning" of Joseph  Held's  life can  therefore  be  consigned  by Lerner  to some dingy corner, out of the way, but available should  the occasional need for it arise:

Sometimes, wrestling  with  some  intractable moral  problem  that  history  raised  for me, I thought of Joseph  Held  and  tried once more to come to terms  with  his action, but  I could  never  settle  the  matter in my own mind,  and  it  remained one  of those loose ends  which  dangle  somewhere in the attic  of one's  mind,  untidy and  uncom­ fortable, but  fortunately out  of  the  way, safely  hidden  amid   the  bric-a-brac that  gathers dust  there.

Just  as L'Entrepreneur in  The   Rich  Man  was an  abstract  representation of Jacob, so in The  Betrayal the Carr  painting describes the real Mark  Lerner  who hides within a deceptively stable frame -a violent, terror-stricken individual  torn by moral ambiguity  and fear of an irrational  universe. When  Stappler  comments that the work "expresses tangled emotions," he speaks unconsciously about Lerner's essence. Yet Stappler  must still grasp the fact that those emotions are skilfully hid­ den. Within  a page, he understands the relationship between surface  and  content characteristic of the book at large:

"Everything seems  quiet," Theodore Stappler said.  "But  that   is only  on  the  sur­ face.  Below, everything is in  motion.  The  landscape is static,  but  the  colours  are dynamic. So everything is still, and  yet everything moves."

In stressing the fact that  everything  seems quiet, Stappler  touches  upon  what  is perhaps the most important feature of the painting: it is deceiving, and it demands a second viewing. Again, the emphasis upon deception must be applied  to Lerner as well, and  we find, not surprisingly,  that  he is in another  way very much  like Jacob Grossman-he is an actor, and the classroom is but one of his many stages. From the very first page of the novel, Kreisel asserts this fact. "There is something in  me, I  think,  of the  actor,"  Lerner  confesses. He  complains  when  "the  high dramatic moments" of his lectures fail to excite the entire student  audience.  Later,

8g

KREISEL'S  NOVELS

speaking in his role as narrator, Lerner makes it plain that  given the chance, he would cast himself as the hero of his play:  "We  are all heroes in our  mirrors, or think  at least that,  when  our  moment  of testing comes, we would  not  miss the chance  to give a true,  perhaps  even heroic account  of ourselves." Lerner's  men­ tion of the mirror  is interesting  on another level. His inability to effectively isolate himself from his surroundings is signalled by the fact that regardless of his will, he begins to take on and reflect the qualities of everything that  is put in front of him. Thus  he tries in futility to stop the "tangled  roots" of Carr's  painting from "com­  ing out  of the  canvas  and  spreading  into  his brain."   In  a  similar  manner   he attempts to detach  himself from  the events of Stappler's  life, but  is eventually forced  to admit  that  "the  more I tried to detach  myself, the more involved, the more entangled  I became."  The  "entanglement" metaphor begins on the canvas and  spreads right  through  the theme of the story. Both Lerner  and  Stappler  are caught between the image of what they should be and the image of what they are.




IN THIS RESPECT, PERHAPS THE MOST INTERESTING feature of the novel centres on the way in which Lerner and Stappler  subtly exchange  roles as the  narrative   progresses. Stappler,  the  encyclopaedia  salesman,  becomes the giver of knowledge, ironically replacing the professor, who in time becomes a true learner,  the recipient  of Stappler's "lesson of life." Early in the story, Stappler's own words anticipate the doppelganger motif. Realizing that  he and Lerner  were fated  to  meet,  Stappler   cries  out  Baudelaire's  phrase,  "Mon   semblable!  Mon frere!" It  is primarily  in  their  approach  to existential responsibility that  Lerner and Stappler  are  twins. For Lerner  has consistently refused to act for the benefit of anyone but himself; he is guilty of complacence and apathy. His selfishness and lack of commitment make him a fine example of Sartre's  mauvaise  foi. Stappler's story attracts  him because it is so like his own. Lerner would  prefer to resist the truth, yet he is perversely fascinated  by what is essentially the story of his own acts of betrayal:

For he had involved me, subtly and in a sense against my will. He had disturbed the order of my life, and I found myself once again resenting his intrusion. Then, too, a part of my consciousness whispered to me that the events of the past had perhaps best be forgotten.... Yet there he was, this stranger who had suddenly burst in on me, and  he wouldn't allow it. He dug it all up, like a dog suddenly uncovering a mouldering bone.

Lerner's academic  study of "intellectual  cross currents"  in European  history represents his own attempt to place his life in a rational well-defined context. He is fearful of the chaos implied by any form of ambiguity. In this respect, Stappler's tale appears terrifying:

go

KREISEL'S NOVELS

I found  myself reflecting that  the most terrible thing about  the kind of situation he was describing -complete social upheaval  and  the  tearing  away  of all moral sanctions, a situation  not unfamiliar to me from my own study of European revolu­ tionary  history-the most terrible  thing  about  such a situation  was that  simple, black and  white  distinctions  between good and  evil were all  blurred. There  was just a grey range of evils, all of them morally corrupting.

Stappler's "situation" forces  him  to flee from  a twentieth century reign  of terror in search  of a more  tranquil place. In the Arctic  wilderness  he eventually finds "a kind of peace  and  a sense of unity  with elemental forces." His descriptions of the Arctic  makes it clear  that  he found  Kreisel's  prairie. Stappler was "struck by the immensity  of the landscape, by its great  silence, by its timelessness."  In  his letters to  Lerner   he  noted  that "it takes  some  time  before  you  become  aware of  any variation in the landscape at all," and  he added  that  "time does not exist. Particu­ larly  here,  in the  great  silence,  in the  great  stillness."  For  Stappler,  the  frozen wilderness  represented an ideal freedom  because it existed  beyond  time -only in timelessness could  he liberate himself from  his past. However, Stappler's ultimate "freedom" led  him  only  to  death. As the  victim  of an  Arctic  avalanche he sur­  rendered to an environment whose desolation  overcame him. This  final encounter with external reality cannot help but remind  us of similar confrontations described by Kreisel in his discussion of the prairie  man  as the conqueror and  the conquered. Stappler has  always  been  the  uprooted wanderer  of  Kreisel's  essay. Throughout the novel he follows the dream of an ideal community secure from  exterior  threats. Soon  after  we meet  him,  he  relates  to  Lerner  a dream  which  effectively  restates  many of the images which  Kreisel mentions  in his critique. The  dream itself is such a potent  metaphor for Kreisel's view of the human condition that  it deserves to be quoted  in its entirety:

The  landscape  was always the same, strange  and  yet familiar.  It was evening, always evening, and  there  was something  baleful  about  the  evening.  A deep  red sun  poured  heat  down  upon  a  barren  landscape.  There  were  rocks like massive obelisks, and  dried-up cactus  plants,  but  also, scattered  about  here  and  there,  a few green trees, like weeping willows. Suddenly huge black clouds appeared in the sky, like the  outstretched fingers of a  gigantic  hand,  and  advanced   towards  the sun and threatened to engulf it. In this desolate landscape  the figure of a man with a knapsack on his back and an alpenstock in his hand  was stumbling  from rock to rock. And as if, like Moses in the wilderness, he were looking for water,  he struck each rock with his alpenstock and  turned  away again each  time, for there  was no water. He looked up into the sky and was terrorized  by the cloud that  was moving slowly towards the sun, and  in his terror he sought refuge in the shadow of a red rock, but the rock threw  no shadow, and so, stumbling on, at last he found a cave and crawled into the darkness of its black, gaping hole, and  there squatted  on the ground, his knapsack still on his back, his alpenstock still in his hand. Thus squat­ ting, he pondered,  but  without  any real hope, how he might  ever get out of this desert, live again  like a human  being in a rational society, stop being agitated  and

91

KREISEL'S  NOVELS

terrorized by weird manifestations, cease to flee from rock to rock, grow roots anew, like the willow tree, and have his place again among men, in a universe that was not entirely unfriendly.

Stappler  sees Eliot's  symbolic  wasteland,  and  it is this  "desolate  landscape" which he must traverse in search of permanent  values. He becomes the mythical explorer in search of the promised land,  just as he is the original settler seeking out shelter  and  food.  Like  a  primitive,  but  also like Jacob,  the  man  of  Stappler's dream is drawn  towards the safety offered by the cave. Most important is the pro­ found sense of isolation which  permeates Stappler's dream. To  "live again like a human  being in a rational  society" would be to construct  amidst  the  wilderness the social domain  of the prairie community  or homestead, it would be to find "a little schoolhouse standing  lonely and defiant in a landscape that  is like a desert." The  vision which  appears to dominate  Stappler's life also affects  Lerner.  He consistently looks for signposts which will direct  his journey into  the  unfamiliar  territory  of Stappler's tale, and  in response to the  perils of that  journey,  he too hides in  a  series of well-structured   cultural  retreats.  Eight  years  after  his  first contact  with Stappler, Lerner  is still collecting art. Of his recent acquisitions, the most valuable is a Lawren  Harris,  "one of those silent peaks, all white, rising out of a blue sea, all still, serene, and  yet curiously tense, as if at any time the white mass would  shatter  and  break  itself." The  Arctic  which  Stappler   managed   to confront  in the raw is imported  by Lerner in the form of a painting.  Again,  the canvas reflects Lerner's  personality, also "curiously tense" and  close to its break­ ing point. He  admits  that  "in  a way  which I find hard  to express, the  painting seems to go together  with  my Emily Carr." Accordingly, he hangs them  side by side facing the bed, so that  they can be seen in the morning and  just before sleep. The  final position of these paintings signifies the fact that  for Lerner,  nothing  at all  has  changed -the  original  vision is fundamentally   the  same  as  the  vision which completes  the  book, and  so the  two  paintings, like the  novel's beginning and end, can be put side by side. Lerner remains in his rooms, trying to convince himself that life can be purchased and the real world denied. He tells us that "the  walls of the apartment  are glowing and alive" with art.  But we know that  these walls are  the  barriers  which  he has erected  to shield  himself from  the  universe beyond the high-rise. Although  he hides in a kind of paralysis from life, when it comes to his  paintings Lerner  believes that  he "responded  to them  immediately, spontaneously." Unlike Jacob,  he cannot  cast away the art  which enables him to feel secure,  yet  the  fate  of  all  these  paintings  makes it  clear  that  life in  The Betrayal is no less futile than  it is in The  Rich Man. Both novels describe a failed quest for freedom. In  the end, the actors return  to the physical and  mental fort­
resses they have been building  all along.
Kreisel maintains  in his essay on the  prairie  that  "the  knowledge of the  vast space outside brings to the surface  anxieties that  have their  roots elsewhere and

KREISEL'S NOVELS

this sharpens and crystallizes a state  of mind." The  critical  statement reflects upon Kreisel  himself  and  also  upon  his  fiction.  His  characters are  filled  with  a  deep sense of angst  and  worry  about the  irrational world  around them. They  are  in­ tensely conscious of their  loneliness  and their  need for a genuine friend. The ques­ tion is not so much  whether they are prairie  men, salesmen, or professors, but  how they  are  human in every  modern sense of the  word.













MEDUS]IS
 


Irving Layton


Flourishing  nature's oriflanune her gonfalon of hurt
medusas drop  from  wavecrest and  white foam

In cities they wear fawning smiles speak only to deceive
and possess two eyes
out of which look cruelty and lust

Observe:  among  them only poets and saints are kind, having  been born cross-eyed

Listen to the feral cries
of the wild-eyed medusas:
I'm  a christian,  I'm  a maoist, fascist, marxist,  nationalist
I believe in progress and the rights of man

Foamblobs
time's ever-ready spike deflates and smears like the brown scum on the rocks below my feet

In  Greece  jellyfish are called medusas.

93


review articles


A LEGACY OF PLACE

Susan Jackel


DICK  HARRISON,   Unnamed Country. The   Struggle   for a Canadian  Prairie  Fiction.
University of Alberta Press,  $12.50.


UNNAMED couNTRY, by Dick Harrison, is one  Westerner's response  to a  persistent dilemma facing cultural  his­ torians  in Canada, the  dilemma posed by the  phrase   "Western  civilization" when applied to  prairie  society,  past  and  pres­ ent.  That  society  is Western, to  be sure; but  civilized?  Describing his  boyhood  in Estevan, Eli Mandel has recently written, "Mentally,  I  was  being  brought up  as a genteel   Victorian  boy,   with    a   quaint though serious  touch  of middle-European gentility  to  boot.  Physically,  emotionally
... I  was  a  sensuous   little   savage.  The
contradictions didn't strike  me then,  only later,  only  now."  The same  sense of  dis­ junction  between  education and  environ­ ment  prodded another  Westerner, W. L. Morton, into  a  life-long  commitment to historical  writing. In  a  Mosaic  article  of
1970, Morton wrote:

Thus  my   actual  landscape,  the    one    my neighbours had   made and  worked in  with apparent content, and  my literary landscape, from  the  banks  and braes  of Bonnie Doon  to the  long  beaches of  Coral Islands, were  in conflict. I had  no single  vision  for  both, but had   to  re-focus   like  one  passing from   dark to  light....  The  difficulty was  to  reconcile a  landscape  actually  seen   and   realistically experienced   with     an    internal    landscape formed  by   reading.  How  could  these    be brought  into   a  single, authentic  vision   in which neither would  deny, but  rather clarify, the  other? How  was one  to see with  a single eye  that would  do  justice to  a  total  experi­ ence  of daily  vision  and  literary  perception?

94
 
The  problem  is far from  new. It haunts the  members   of  any  colonial   society  as they  attempt  to  arrive  at   precise   and realistic  definition of their  relation to the parent   culture;  and   it  comes   as  small solace to Westerners to know, on the authority of such  respected scholars  as Morton himself,  that  the  prairie  West  is a  colony   not  of  Britain  or  the   United States,  but  of  Ontario. In  Unnamed Country, Dick Harrison speaks directly  to this issue when  he writes  of "the spirit  of empire, with its tendency to impose the culture of the dominant Ontario-British minority  on the West." And he continues:
Long  after Connor's The  Foreigner has been forgotten, the   prairie school   child   of   Ger­ man   or   Ukrainian  extraction  is  still  being  presented  with   English  literature   to  study as  his  own.  It is  neither his  nor  his  ances­ tors'   nor   the  literature of  the  place  or  the  people   about him  but   the  literature  of  the  ancestors of  a  minority of  his  companions. What   Wallace  Stegner   once   said    about learning  in   his   small-town   Saskatchewan school  that history and  geography extended no farther West  than  the Great Lakes  is still almost   universal  prairie experience.

In   the  main,   Harrison's  approach  to this dilemma is to argue that  writers  in Western  Canada have  been aware  of con­ flict   from   the   outset:  thus   the   word "struggle" in his sub-title. He sees "pain­ ful  incongruities" both  in  the  experience of  early  settlers,  and  in  the  attempts by early  writers  to find  words  for  this expe-

REVIEW ARTICLES



rience.  With  incongruity as his theme,  it is understandable that  he should  feel the need  to  widen  the  usual  concerns  of  lit­ erary   history   to  include  such  aspects  of emergent Western  culture as survey  pat­  terns,   movements in   pictorial  art,   and even  the  occasional  allusion  to that  most neglected    of   cultural   components,  the actual settler.  It takes  a  very  elastic  ap­  proach  indeed  to  literary studies   to  ad­  vance Lizzie McFadden's diary as a factor  in   the  region's artistic  maturity,  yet  in doing  so Harrison has  a  point  to  make: that  Lizzie  McFadden's problem- "the lack of an imaginative framework to point the  order  and  keep  out  the  chaos" -is also  the  problem  of  the  aspiring literary artist.   The  early   fictions   are   weak,   he claims,  "partly because  the  novelists, like the   settlers,   are   encumbered  by   their Europeanized culture. As Tennyson says,
'every man sees in nature that  which he brings  eyes to  see.' Later novelists,  from the  time  of Frederick Philip  Grove,  take this cultural blindness  as a  theme,  but  it never ceases to be a problem  of the writers themselves."
One  thing  to emerge  clearly from Har­ rison's  study  is  that, compared to  other  regions of agricultural settlement in North  America,  the  prairie West of  Canada has been  blessed   (I hope   that  is  the   right word)   with  a  high  incidence  of  literary  ambition among   its  anglophone  inhabi­ tants.  This   was  Edward  McCourt's ob­ servation,  too,  when   he  wrote   in  The Canadian  West  in  Fiction  that   "in   the Canadian West the first community insti­ tution  seems to have  been either  a church or  a  police  barracks; the  second,  one  is tempted to feel, a Literary Society." Hard on  the  heels of  the  first  Riel  resistance,  in   r87r,  came  Alexander Begg's  Dot  It Down; within weeks of the second Metis uprising,  the Canadian reading public was
treated  to  J. E.  Collins'   The   Story  of
Louis  Riel,  a  rabble-rousing travesty  of
the   Metis   cause.   Collins   still   has   the
 power to raise hackles, it seems, for Harri­ son condemns him  not merely  for literary ineptness,  but  for  "wilful  misrepresenta­ tion  of  the  West,  catering  to  an  outside  audience's prejudices about what  was go­ ing on there." More  to the point,  perhaps, is  Harrison's observation that   the  popu­ larity  of  writers  like  Collins,  Luke  Allen and  to some extent  Ralph Connor, points to  prevalent attitudes among Canadians of the  time-at  once  ignorance of, and contempt for, the prairie region's resident population, both  before  and  after  the on­ set of settlement.
I am stressing  Harrison's comments on early writers  here,  because  I think  his in­ clusion  of all  levels of prose  composition is right  and  proper for a study  of literary evolution. But  the question of forebears is only  part   of  his  concern.  His   ultimate purpose   is  to  provide an  overview   of  a whole  century  of  fictional   treatments of the  prairies, and  he  does  not  linger  long over ancestors. After  two eclectic chapters on   eighteenth- and  nineteenth-century origins,  Harrison  moves  on  to  more  fa­ miliar   names:  Connor,  McClung   and Stead    as   proponents   of   "the   garden myth";  Grove,   Ostenso,  Ross   and   the Stead  of Grain as prairie realists; a chap­ ter entitled "Archetypes of Ruin," dealing with  recurrent  symbols  in  prairie fiction which  bespeak,  to Harrison, the failure of the imagination; some remarks  on adven­ ture   romance  and   sentimental  comedy; and  a final  chapter on contemporary fic­ tion -primarily, Laurence, Kroetsch and Wiebe. All in all, then,  an  ambitious pro­ gramme.
In   his  preface,  Harrison  openly   dis­ claims the role of literary critic, seeing his study  rather as a bringing-together of the wider  cultural influences  that  provide the context  for   literature.  Contending  that "universal critical  standards, even  within  one  language  and   one  century,  are   an abstraction convenient to the academic mind," he  focusses on  "the unique  chal-


95

REVIEW ARTICLES



lenge  the  plains  environment presents  to the  writer's imagination,"  while   at   the same  time  taking into  account "the  in­ fluence of culture on man's reaction to the landscape." "Wide-ranging" is the  word Harrison himself  applies to his approach, and   the  comprehensive and  admirably­ organized bibliography at  the  back  bears him out. Having advanced the plea, how­ ever,  that  the very scope of his study  pre­  cludes  his offering  "the  carefully argued critical  judgements  which will  be  neces­ sary  before  the  central canon  of  this fic­ tion can be confidently established and  its value  assessed," Harrison places  a  rather large  burden of trust  on his readers. The  trust  is usually  merited; but  not  always. The exceptions are  to be found  in certain minor  misreadings of  writers   whose  re­ marks   are  less  useful  for  his  argument than   Harrison  would   like   them  to  be; and,   in  rather  more   basic  fashion,  the occasional  failure to recognize when care­  fully   argued   critical  judgments  might  have strengthened his case.
As an  example of the  former -and  I freely  admit to the  usual  intransigence of the specialist  in these  remarks- I  think that  the travel  writers and  publicists  have not  been  well  handled, even  within the terms of Harrison's own argument. W. F. Butler  was no less culture-bound-in­ deed, more so, I would argue -than his Britannic contemporaries, when  in The Great   Lone   Land   he  offered   those  de­ scriptions of  the   prairie  landscape  that  Harrison  (and   to  be  quite   fair,  a  good number of other literate Westemers)  find so evocative; while  Milton and  Cheadle, Harrison's  unequivocal   statements  not­  withstanding,  were  aware   of  what   they owed  to their  Metis guides,  and  they  did describe  the  terrain  through which   they travelled, although  not  in great  detail  or in   emotive   language.  The  evidence is there,  in  the  text  of  North-West Passage by   Land.  And  in   the   same   vein,   why

g6
 Picturesque  Canada   but   not   Ocean   to
Ocean?  It seems an odd choice.
But  these  are details.  More  germane is
Harrison's success in placing individual works of fiction within  the cultural frame­ work  he  has  been  reconstructing -that is, his ability  to  make  history  and  litera­ ture   at  least  appear  to  exist  in  a  con­ tinuum  of   experience,  and   not,   as  the comments of  Mandel and  Morton imply,  in total separation from one another. This  is an immensely difficult  undertaking, and  once  again  the scope of Harrison's study complicates his  task. Titles, authors, themes  and   images   jostle  somewhat  in­ discriminately  together,  and   it   takes   a nimble   reader   to  make   all  the  connec­ tions. Furthermore, there  are issues raised about  the relation  of fiction to society that  phrases  like "must have" and "may  have" do  little  to resolve. The  following  quota­ tion gives an extreme, but  I hope  not  un­ fair, example  of this style of argument:

"Realists" like Begg, Hayes, and  MacLean probably did  not  speak   for  the  people   who were  settling  the   West   any  more   than  the Mackies or Collinses. Possibly  not  as much. Writers  like  MacLean  and   Hayes   seem   to have  come  nearer to  speaking for   the   new land  itself, but  the  Mackies and  Collinses probably spoke for  a people  who  were them­ selves  out  of  touch   with  the  land.  Mackie's and   Collins's  perspective on  the  settling of the  West  would  not  be popular  today, but  it may  well  have   reflected the  state of  mind  and  imagination of  the  bulk  of  the  settlers.

By the time  we sort  out  the  probabilities, possibilities,  seems  and   may  well  haves, we don't have much  left in the way of certainties.
Nor  are  the  connections between, for
example, the systems of land  holding fa­ voured   by  Mennonite  and   Metis  com­ munities, and  the  larger  argument extol­  ling adaptation to prairie conditions, fully explored and  cemented  in  place.  I think,  for instance, of the work of John W. Ben­ nett,  the  sociologist  who  spent   ten  years charting "adaptive strategy  and processes"

REVIEW ARTICLES



in  southwestern Saskatchewan. Bennett, reading   Harrison   on    adaptation    and alienation among Westerners, would won­ der-with  some  justice-whether  they were  both  working   in  the  same  prairie West;  might  even  wonder  whether  Har­ rison  really  has a subject  here,  or  merely some fairly forcefully expressed  intuitions, backed  up  by a  skewed  sample of  docu­ mentary  evidence.  Although I find  Har­ rison's comments on the fiction  of the last two generations perceptive on most counts, I  remain unconvinced that  economic and psychic man  have to be so sharply  divided.
In  short,  I would  be inclined to argue
that   the  problem  of  critical standards is at issue after  all-that is, the question of how  appropriate and  useful  critical  stan­ dards  can  be  drawn   out  of  the  particu­ larities   of  time  and   place.  That a  sig­ nificant   adjustment of  prevalent critical  opinion can  and  should  result  from   the kind   of  new   perspective  that   Harrison offers  here  is scarcely  to be doubted, and I  fully  sympathize with   his  feeling   that certain stereotyped judgments of Western Canadian writers  have  persisted  too long, for  want  of a  more  informed  viewpoint. But  Eli  Mandel is surely  right  when  he says that  "the  theoretical basis of literary regionalism is weaker  than   the  historical or geographical" -and as historians and geographers will tell you, even  their theo­ retical  basis is none  too strong. There is a  temptation for  the  regionalist  critic  in any field to fall back on the nativist  rally­ ing-cry,  "I was born  and  raised  in  these territories, and  I  know."  In undertaking a work of the seriousness of  this one, while
 still reluctant to grapple with critical prin­ ciples, Harrison has left a rather large and  inviting flank open  to the assaults of more theoretically-inclined  readers.
These  reservations aside,  there  is clear
gain  from  the  presence of  Unnamed Country on  the  scene.  Harrison's  sensi­ tivity  to a specifically  Western  viewpoint results  in  probing readings of  several  es­ tablished  classics in Canadian fiction,  and  deft assessments of dozens of  lesser-known novels and   romances. At  the  same  time, his purposeful forays  into  broad  fields of speculation, in search  of  that  distinctive­ ness which  is the  sine  qua  non  of region­  alist  study,  effectively  conveys   the  close personal  engagement which  accompanies an  individual's discovery   of  tradition­ not  only  his own  tradition, but  the  com­ plex web of legacies from  the past that  go to make up a collective  heritage. For Har­ rison is above  all alive  to the challenge of history. "Like contemporary novelists else­ where," he notes, "prairie novelists of the rg6o's and  '7o's  seem  to be exploring the relationship between  history  and  fiction,  between  the  fictions  of  the  historian and  the  other   fictions   with   which   man   at­  tempts  to order  the chaos  of experience." Harrison  would  agree,   I  think,   that   the technical competence is higher, the imagi­  native reach  immeasurably greater, when prairie  novelists   think   of  themselves   as writers  first  and   Westerners second. But to  the  extent   that   regional   loyalties  take their  place  in  the  mental and  emotional formation of  those individuals as writers, we will continue to need and  benefit by studies such as his.











97


b::ks in review



RIEL & DUMONT

RUDY   WIEBE,    The  Scorched-Wood    People.
McClelland & Stewart, $r2.g5.

ONCE  UPON A   TIME,  when   the   world seemed  stable  and   secure,   the  historical novel  was  a  fashionable kind  of  fiction, for  adults and  children  alike.  Victorian ladies  and  gentlemen  welcomed glimpses into  past  worlds  that  seemed  to  confirm the  superiority  of  their   own; in  novels about  the  heroic  deeds  of men-mainly British  men-in  the  past,  they  thought to  develop  the  characters and  the  ambi­ tions  of  their  sons.  If Hell   did   not  lie about  us   in   our   infancy,  as   Graham Greene    has   suggested,    Henty   and   his valiant world  certainly did.  And  those of us who are  old enough to have grown  up on   the   fraying   margins  of   that   era  of stability  remember now with a slightly in­ credulous nostalgia  our  enthusiasms at  a slightly  later   age  for  Ivanhoe  and   The Last of the  Barons, for Old  St. Paul's and The Three Musketeers. How  colourful­ and  yet  how  safely  distant-they  made  the  past  appear! The  re-emergence of a real  Dark   Age  in   Europe  under   Stalin  and  Hitler put an end  to the great  vogue for that  kind of  historical novel;  the pres­ ent  was  more  violent  and  more  dreadful and   in  its  own  way  more   adventurous than  any  nineteenth-century novelist  had made the past appear.
Of course,  there  were  always  other writers about the past, whose historical instincts were more sophisticated, whose insights  were  tragic   rather than  formu­ laic,  and  who  remembered that  we  are really free  neither of our ancestors nor of our  descendants. History  is a  continuing process, such  writers know  without need-

g8
 ing Marx  or Spengler to tell them  so; the past  has  lessons for  the  present, even  if they are  sometimes  misleading ones, and
-little as we may  think  so-our actions will be used as lessons for  the  future. So in  the  nineteenth century there  also  ap­ peared   another kind  of  historical  novel, often  ironic  in its insights,  like Stendhal's The  Charterhouse of Parma, which  used the intrigues of a little  Italian state  in the age  of Napoleon   to  teach  us  the  perma­ nent   realities   of   political   power.   The grandest effort   in   this   direction-and perhaps also in  the  most  noble  failure  of all historical  novels-was Tolstoy's  War  and Peace, which intermingled splendidly  evocative personal dramas set in a Russia of the past with  tedious  didactic passages in   which    Tolstoy    developed   his   own theory of history-a matter of great  men being  even  more  the  puppets of  history than  the  little  men  they  conscripted into death.
I  thought of  War   and  Peace  when  I
read  our latest Canadian  historical novel, Rudy  Wiebe's  The Scorched-Wood  Peo­ ple, which  too, on  a very  different  scale, is about  war and  defeat  in a vast country. Rudy  Wiebe, whose ancestors lived many generations in  Russia,  has  always  struck me as being similar  in many ways to Tol­ stoy,  not  in  any  way  the  equivalent  in stature or in sheer artistry, but on his own smaller   scale  irradiated  with   the  same kind   of   rather   primitive  religious   con­ cerns,  and   just  as  as  prone  as  the  great Leo  Nicholaevich  to  subordinate his  in­ nate sense of form  to a compelling didac­ tic motive.
This is what  happens in The Scorched­
Wood  People, which  I found disappoint­ ing   in  comparison  with   earlier  Wiebe books. The scorched-wood  people  are,  of course,  the bois brutes, as the  Metis  were originally  called.   In   his  novel  Wiebe  is not  concerned, except  for  a few  reminis­ cent  references  to  the  pre-r86g past  that  are   necessary  for  background, with  the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



entire span  of Metis  history. He  has writ­ ten   a  tale  about   the  two  rebellions,   of I86g-7o   and   I885,  in  which   the  Metis unsuccessfully     defied    the    centralizing power   that   entered  Canada  with   Con­  federation and  is  the enemy  of all Cana­ dians   who  believe  in  personal   freedom. The  present of the  novel  begins with  the halting of  William   McDougall,  prospec­ tive   Canadian   Governor  of    the   Red River,  at   the  international  boundary in
I 86g, and  except  for a very brief epilogue
relating to Gabriel  Dumont, it ends  with the hanging of Riel  in 1885.
Unfortunately Rudy  Wiebe has been unable  in The Scorched-Wood  People to separate the  purpose  of historical fiction, which  is to give us a plausible  image  and feeling  of  the  past,  from  that  of the  his­ torical   moralist,  which   is  to  apportion blame, signal  merit  and formulate lessons. He  feels  too  deeply  about   his subject to detach himself  in  the Flaubertian man­  ner, yet at  the same  time he seeks to give some  plausible  fictional   rendering of  his feelings.  He  tries  to  do  so  through  the device of a committed narrator who com­ ments   on   the  events   as  they  occur,   in fairly regular chronological sequence. But this very device,  used  to achieve  a degree  of  verisimilitude, turns  out  to be the least convincing  feature   of   The   Scorched­ Wood   People. The  narrator  is  a  Metis oral  poet,  and  we are  led  to identify  him with  Pierre   Falcon,   the  most  famous  of the  Metis  bards,  who  was  present  at  the skirmish  of Seven Oaks in  I 8 I 6, when  he composed  his famous  song which  became  something  of   an   anthem  of  the   Metis "nation."  Unfortunately Falcon   died  in I876,  nine  years  before   the  events   that mark   the   end   of  The   Scorched-Wood  People, and  the idea  of his continuing as a spectral  narrator strains  one's  credence to the wrenching point.
But it very soon becomes evident  that Wiebe is little  concerned with  the history of  the  Metis,  which   he  deals  with  very
 cavalierly,  and  much  more  with  the  ini­ quity   of  their   fate.   However,  the   real heart  of the  book, which  creates its  curi­  ously  frenetic atmosphere and   provides an  unstructured continuity far more  com­ pelling   than   the   narration   line,   is  the personality of  Louis  Riel,  whose  role  as a   religious   visionary   clearly    fascinates Wiebe.
The  publicity relating to The Scorched­ Wood   People  presents   it  as  an   epic  of
Louis Riel and Gabriel Dumont, but  little
justice is really done  to Dumont, either in terms of historical  accuracy or in terms of a sympathetic portrayal of  the  man.  For some  reason  which  is not  evident,  Wiebe has  thought it necessary  to have  Dumont present  at  the  Red  River  throughout  the period   of  Riel's  ascendancy,  which   was not   the  case,  and   Gabriel  is  shown   in attendance at such  events  as the  turning­ back of McDougall at  the border and  the trial   and   execution  of   Thomas   Scott.




And  then there is Alberta's KENNETH  DYBA author of
LUCIFER  & LUCINDA
"Dyba  has the flair for  vivid  language too rarely found in children's books.... one  of  the   few  Canadian  children's books that  makes fantasy  delightful and fun."-Quill & Quire
$6.95 cloth. and
SISTER ROXY
" ... the  most   extravagantly  original novel  to  hit  the  bookstores  in  years."
-Calgary Herald
$7.95 cloth.

Published by
NOVEMBER HOUSE
1004 Hamilton St., Vancouver, B.C.



99

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Since there  is no record  of Dumont's pres­ ence   on  these   occasions,   and   he  could obviously  not  be  given   leading  roles  in them,  he is relegated to a role something like that  of Shakespeare's attendant lords, and  even when  he moves into centre  stage in  r884-85  he is still a  diminished figure. His  influence   and   his  following   on  the Saskatchewan are shown as small, his role in creating the quasi-republic of St. Lau­ rent  in the early I 87o's is minimized, and the  clash  between  him  and  the  Hudson's Bay people inI 870, which  became  an im­ perial  issue with  repercussions in  White­ hall,  is turned into  a  very  minor  affair.  Finally,  almost as if Rudy Wiebe intended to  make  him  a  foil  for  Riel,  Dumont is represented as a crude and  violent  figure (a  "savage" as  he  calls  himself   in  the book   but   never   did   in   history),  with physical  size  (actually he  was  a  man  of medium  height)  as  an  intrusive feature, while  he  was made to speak  like a  badly educated  Canadian, whereas  in fact  Du­  mont  was a man  of considerable subtlety of expression,  and  in his own way a highly sophisticated as well as a great  and coura­ geous  man.  Only  the  courage  emerges  in The  Scorched-Wood People;  the  intelli­  gence and  the grandeur are somehow  lost. Dumont emerges  as a  muscular oaf,  and that    is  neither   fictional  nor   historical  justice.
Yet at the same time Rudy Wiebe, the chronicler of Mennonite religious agonies, has convincingly projected the  spiritually tortured and  divided  Riel, and  as a study of Riel as visionary  hovering on  the edge of insanity  The Scorched-Wood People is often   profound  and   always  understand­ ing.  But  the  failure to  portray convinc­  ingly a whole  man  like Dumont mars  the book  from   beginning  to  end,   and   The  Scorched-Wood  People  is a disappointing book for  those  whose  expectations are  at the   level   of   The   Blue   Mountains  of China.
GEORGE WOODCOCK


100
 CALLAGHAN CINEMA

MORLEY  CALLAGHAN,  Close  to  the  Sun  Again.
Macmillan, $4·95·
IT IS DIFFICULT TO SPEAK of a writer  who has lived  long and  written much  without referring to his total  work. His books have had  their  youth  and  middle  age and  ma­ turity: or sometimes  they have  remained static,  frozen  in  time,  a  series  of  echoes out of a given bag of tricks. In either  case the  writer   can  never  again  simply  pro­  duce this book or that. He has created, as the French say, an oeuvre and it is by that  oeuvre  that   we  judge  him.  Morley  Cal­  laghan's eighteenth book Close to the Sun  Again  is very  much  of  a  piece  with  his total work. He long ago reached a distinct  and  accomplished level  of  performance; and  he  has  remained at  that  level  for  a good many years. When  he sits at his typewriter forty professional  years control his mind and  his fingers. He has never changed  his style;  but  he has greatly im­ proved  it. The  substance of his work  has always  been  the  same.  He  has  not  wan­ dered   nor   experimented,  nor   has  there  been  anything but  the  love  of  a  certain kind of story and a desire to tell it straight and  to  tell  it  well. These  are  admirable qualities. To have  done  this in Canada, a country in which  writing  has come  hard, and  the writer's audience has always been comparatively small,  amounts  to  a  very distinct  kind of  achievement.
Callaghan  has  known   from   the   first how  to  capture an  environment with  a few quick  strokes:  he delights  in a world you can  see and  touch  and  feel.  He  ob­ serves  a  great  deal  of  external  detail­ how  people  look,  human  furniture, hu­  man  decoration, how  the  body is clothed
-"a  funny  tweed  hat  and  an  expensive camel-hair jacket"-"his expensive  dark suit  and   black  Irish-linen hat." Or  sky­ scrapers   viewed   from   an   airport   "the



BOREALIS PRESS LIMITED
9  ASHBURN DRIVE,  OTTAWA, ONTARIO  K2E 6N4
TELEPHONE  224-6837  or  829-0150

POETRY
FLUX, Elizabeth Jones
110  pp.    Illus.  cover     1977
ISBN  0-919594-69-7 	$4.95
FLOWER AND SONG, George Amabile
50 pp.    Illus.  cover     1977
ISBN  0-919594-63-8 	$3.95
THE SNOW HORSES, John Ferns
85 pp.    lllus.  cover 	1977
 STANDARD AUTHORS
LAMPMAN'S KATE: Late Love Poems of Archibald Lampman, ed. Margaret  Whitrldge Previously unpublished lyrics.
52 pp.    Illustr.  cover 	197 5
ISBN  919594-33-6     paper 	$3.95
LAMPMAN'S SONNETS: The Complete Sonnets of Archibald Lampman,
ed. Margaret  Whitridge
200 pp.    Illustr.  cover     1976

ISBN  0-919594-65-4 	$4.95
NOT HAVING  CONSTRUCTED MY  ARK,
 ISBN  919594-50-6     paper
919594-60-3    cloth
 $9.95
$14.95

Gordon Gilhuly
75 pp.    Illus. cover 	1977
ISBN  0-919594-67-0 	$3.95
PROTECT MY HOUSE, Joseph McLeod
64 pp.    Illus. cover 	1977
ISBN  0-919594-68-9 	$3.95

NOVEL
SONG AND SILENCE, Darlene Madott
A  novel  about   women,  love,  and  music.
160 pp.    Illus. cover    1977
ISBN  0-919594-76-X    soft cover 	$6.95

SHORT STORIES
SELECTED STORIES  OF ERNEST THOMPSON SETON, ed. Patricia Morley
168 pp.    Illustr. 	1977
ISBN  0-7766-4339-8 	$6.00

PROSE
 HUGH AND ION:  An Unfinished Narrative
Poem by Isabella Valancy  Crawford, ed. Glenn Clever
52 pp.    1977
ISBN  0-919594-77-8     paper 	$3.95

LITERARY CRITICISM
ON E. J. PRATT, Glenn Clever
80 pp.    1977
ISBN  0-919594-72-7     paper 	$4.95
ARCHIBALD LAMPMAN: Canadian Poet of
Nature, Carl Y. Connor
A reprint  of this biographical study.
180 pp.    1977
ISBN  0-919594-75-1     paper 	$7.95
SUSANNA MOODIE: Voice and Vision, by Carol Shields
The  first  in-depth   study  of  the  fiction  of this remarkable pioneer  writer.
81 pp.    1977
ISBN  0-919594-46-8     paper 	$8.95
EXILES AND PIONEERS: A Study in Identities, T. E. Farley

WOMEN IN CANADIAN LITERATURE	A critical  study  of Canada's two founding
ed. M. G. Hesse	nationalities.
An anthology  of selections. 	250 pp.    Illustr.  cover     1976

287 pp.    Illustr.  cover     1977 	ISBN  0-919594-45-X   ,paper
ISBN  0-919594-58-1     paper 	$9.95 	0-919594-73-5     cloth

JOURNAL  OF CANADIAN POETRY, Vol. 1, No.  1
 $14.95
$19.95

By  arrangement  with   the  editors,   Borealis  offers  this  first  volume  of  a  new  journal devoted  to scholarly  research  and  criticism of the poetry  of Canada-from  its origins to the present. Subscriptions $7.50 one year (2 issues), $14.00 two years ( 4 issues).
Submissions  welcome
JOURNAL OF CANADIAN POETRY
P.O.  Box 5147, Stn. F, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K2C  3H4



101

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



city's  towers  in  rising floors of light." He possesses the concreteness of the modern­ visual.  He  writes  cinema.  And   then   he has another quality. He feels his material down  to  the  last  button  on  those  expen­  sive  jackets,   down   to   the  very  fibre  of those tweed  and  linen  hats.
Callaghan's people  are  another matter, for  he  tends  to  see  them  also  from   the outside.  When  he  tries  to get  "inside" it is  usually  to  discover  bewilderment and shock.  The  external world,   with   all  its good  things,  turns  sour  once  it  is  inter­ nalized: and  the  hero -there  are  more heroes I think  than heroines-can't quite  add  things  up. Callaghan's books contain old-fashioned  ideas  of  chivalry   and  gal­  lantry; an  old-fashioned view  of women,  very often  as sex objects; and  a  series of morally  committed  but  puzzled  individ­ uals.  Somehow   the  right   thing   must  be done.  Yet   things   invariably  go  wrong.  The world goes wrong. Hallucination and phantasmagoria replace  obsession in his simple-minded characters with  a moral under-pinning. The  risk  Callaghan  has run all these years, when  he offers us such confused   men,  is  that   some  readers are likely to ask: who cares? The answer is Callaghan cares.  This  care  has  animated his work  and  kept  it from  being  all  sur­ face  and   sentimentality. We  might  add that  a certain kind of audience also cares. An   audience  of  the   mystified   and   be­ wildered: and  those  who  like action  and suspense.
His people as I say are often  platitudes: usually   the  macho  trying   to  figure   out what socked him. Or the unhappy punks James   Farrell   used   to  write   about. Or the  cool  young  women,  immaculate and beautiful, intended only for  bed.  Yet  the story moves;  it is felt; it absorbs  us. Criti­ cism has not sufficiently  measured  the ex­ tent   to  which   these  worlds  of   Heming­ way, Callaghan, Farrell, and  to some ex­ tent   Dos   Passos-the   writers    of  Cal­  laghan's formative  years-are really  the


102
 world  of  the  media.   In  the  earlier   days of the novel people came out of authentic observed  worlds,  the  low-life  of Dickens, the  intensities  and  snobberies of  Thack­ eray,  the  caste  systems,  the  struggles   of the  young  to  make   their  way-all  this derived  from  the  very  stuff  of life. In  an America   that   has  a  caste  system  based wholly  on  money  it  is  more difficult   to find  such  solid worlds:  and  many  novels come  out  of the  reflecting  and  distorting world  in  the  city  room   of  newspapers. Here  are  the children of the  headline. A reporter lives not in his own world,  but  in the world of whatever story he covers. He is always  on  the  outside. That's  the  way it was during my own  newspaper experi­  ence. We were in the courts seeing human misery, not  with  the eyes of Dickens,  but with  the  eyes of a  "story" for  some  bar­ barian   city  editor  whose  measure  of  life was  the  brutal  headline. We  are  all  over the  place,  at  police  headquarters  or  the town  hall,  ambulance chasing  or  watch­ ing fights or politicians-a  kaleidoscope world  to which  we belonged  as witnesses, onlookers,  who were supposed not to feel; assigned  to take notes -distanced by our pencil   and   scratch  pad-in    the   way young  reporters  today  are   distanced  by tape  recorders.  And  the  final  record  was in monosyllabic prose. Life uninterpreted: camera-life.
This was the world that  Hemingway poetized  with  considerable success.  It is also   Callaghan's  world,   possessing   the same toughness as Hemingway's but I suspect   a  much   deeper   humanity.  Cal­ laghan's secret  as  I  have  said  is  that  he believes in  the front-page  platitudes. His newest  novel  is  about a  war   hero  who swashbuckles  through a corporate life and then  gets  a  job  as  Toronto police  com­ missioner. He is haunted by a mystery­ a  human  triangle.  This   was  his  "fate" during   the  war;  while   commanding  a corvette  he  fished  out  of  the  sea  a  chic educated  (Smith  College)   tough  daugh-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ter of a big-time  gambler and  her  smooth Manhattan   bodyguard. The   latter  was escorting  her   to  London  to  her   father when  they were torpedoed. The  hero feels a  mysterious love for  the  girl.  She  seems to reciprocate it. They  swap  their  private histories.  But  she  is tied  by a  mysterious love-hate to  her  escort  who  once  raped her.  The police  chief   (he  is as alcoholic as most  such  characters)  has  never  been able  to  figure  out  what  happened to his feelings,  and   what   the  girl  represented. Dying    in   a   hospital  after    a   drunken smash-up he  relives  the  phantasmagoria, the convoys,  the depth charges,  the  rafts, the  life-jackets, the  smells,  the  tensions, the   resignation,  the   rescues.   The   Cal­ laghan  cinema   has  great   vividness;  he holds  you;  he is a  master  of  this  kind  of story-telling. But  we  ask:   was  it  really worth   the  telling?  Did  Ira  Groome, the bewildered macho, deserve  all  this  hard­ disciplined observation and verbal  punch­ ing?  It would  be easier  I  think  to accept  him  if  Callaghan didn't  try  at  the  same time  to give him  some sort of phony  cul­ ture.  Callaghan's  last  novel  A  Fine  and Private  Place was filled with  toughies  dis­ cussing higher criticisms as in term papers.  Callaghan's  big men  name-drop "litera­ ture"  in   their   semi-literate  world   as  if they  were  cars,  or   brands   of  whiskey:  Yeats,  Rossetti,  Eliot,  Auden, Lawrence, Hopkins,  appear  in   succession   in   this novel. At a given moment, the protagonist finds himself saying about  one of the char­ acters  "He's not  even  in  this world. He's right  out  of  some  old  western." Morley Callaghan here  touches  the  truth of  his scenario.
Having written this  I  ask  myself  whe­ ther   I  mustn't  adjust  my  critical  stan­  dards. How does one review an adventure­ suspense story beyond saying it's well told even when it's unbelievable? That's about  all  one  can  say. There is  sea adventure, figures  on a raft,  the vividness of humans caught up  in  the immensities of war  and
 the sea -"clouds racing across  the moon made  him feel better, then,  full of wonder that   the  night,   the   moon   and   the   sea could be moving along in the internal rhythmical pattern as if nothing of any consequence  was   happening;  when    in fact,  they  were  there  on  the  float." It is this   kind   of  effect,   coupled  with   Cal­ laghan's moral  integrity and   his  profes­ sional  perseverence,  that   gives  his  total work   a   certain    vigorous   substance. It represents   a  talent   created  out  of  sheer willpower  and  belief  in  struggle, in  ele­ mental things,  in  the  veneer   of  civiliza­ tion. It is the fantasy  world  of toughness  and  of "making it." And strangely enough  it  is not  the  best  part  of  Callaghan. For in  the  long  extent  of  his  oeuvre   what  stays  with  us  is  not  the  machismo,  but certain briefer works-a glimpse  of hum­ ble folk, and  humble dreams, some of his short stories  that   have  given   us  a  sense of wistful  melancholy, the  melancholy of a sparsely peopled  continent, of people thrown in on themselves with the great snowdrifts outside, dreaming their dreams; the  nostalgia  of  the   provinces, for a great  bright  world,  making the most of such  "life" as is measured out.  There are   depths   of   humanity  in   Callaghan which he has too often buried  in his melodrama.
LEON  EDEL


FOUR NEW VOICES
SHARON RIIS, The  True Story  of Ida  Johnson.
The  Women's Press.
BESs     KAPLAN,   Malke,   Malke.   Queenston
House.
HELEN  LEVI, A Small  Informal Dance. Queen­
stan  House.
PAULINE  GEDGE,  Child   of the  Morning.  Mac­
millan.

ALL FOUR OF  THESE new books are  about women,  by  women.   With   the  exception of Malke, Malke, Kaplan's second  novel, each  of  the  others   is  a  first  novel,  but


103

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



there  the  similarity ends.  In  purpose, setting,  and  choice  of  heroine, above  all in style and  technique, there  are  striking differences.
By far  the most challenging of the four is Sharon Riis' The  True Story of Ida Johnson. As a story  of a "real person," it is  simple   enough.  Ida,  your   average­ looking  small  town  girl,  tells  the story of her  life-growing  up  in  Longview, Al­ berta,  early   pregnancy   and    marriage, death  of  husband and   kids   (or   was  it murder?), odd   jobs  and  scraping along
-until we   meet   her   waitressing and
"gone   to  fat." The "story" is  dedicated "to  the careful reader" who  is warned at the  outset  that  "The truth of the  matter is:  there  is none."
The  truth of  the  matter  is  that   this "true story,"  full  of sharp detail  and col­ loquial    speech,    probes    the   nature   of reality  itself, slowly enmeshing the  reader  in a verbal  labyrinth despite a controlled surface  simplicity.    Who    is   Luke,    the young  hitch-hiker listening to Ida's story? Who is Lucy, the Indian child  Ida  played with,  now  come  back  as  Luke?   Who  is Ida  Johnson? Are they, in fact,  aspects of one   psyche?   Riis'   intriguing  novel   re­ minds  me  of  a  Maya   Deren film  fusing reality /illusion,  fact/fiction,  into   a  dis­ turbing and  haunting experience.
In  terms of narrative voice, the book recalls  Djuna Barnes'  Nightwood. The reader   is  constantly  kept  at   a  distance, like Ida  "insulating herself  against pain." Point  of  view  shifts  from  an  impersonal third   person   narrator to  Ida's  down-to­ earth speech or thoughts. At moments an­  other   cryptic   voice   intrudes  with   "ex­  planations":  "Imagery left  to  cramp in­ side  the  mind  self-destructs. It  explodes or,  more  probably, expires.  Lack  of  air. Lack  of  Lebensraum?"
Sharon Riis has written an excellent book,  ironic  and   thought-provoking. Ida Johnson comes  alive  with  remarkable clarity  while at  the same  time eluding the


104
 grasp.  This  is a  book  that   demands  re­ reading;  therefore, it  is  no  surprise   to come   to   the   end   and   find   the   tables turned:

" 'Was   all  that stuff  back  there  true?'  asks Lucy.  Ida  laughs. 'What's the  matter  sweet­ heart? You  miss  the  point or  something?'"

Bess Kaplan's  Malke, Malke, set  in Winnipeg, is a  delightful Jewish  comedy of courtship at sixty. The  heroine, Malke, wants  her  fourth husband, so she  adver­ ti es
Fmkle  answers  the  ad  and  Malke makes
a happy  fourth marriage. Harry Schenkle, however,  also  answers.  Much of  the comedy  arises  from   the  fantastic  situa­ tions  that   Malke   finds  herself  in  as  she tries  to  fend  off  the  irrepressible  Harry, arrange a  quiet   wedding with  Joe,  and  placate    an   irate    widowed   sister   who thinks  Malke  is a  disgrace. The formid­ able  sister,  Brunie,  is  finally married  off to Harry -through an advertisement, of course-and  the novel ends with  Malke, a  true  "Shodchen," composing another newspaper ad  for  a widowed  friend.
Although the situations of these people are  amusing,   and   at   times  farcical, the people   themselves   are   not.   Malke   is  a lovable  Jewish  "Balabusta" who  like  to cook  and  care  for  others.  Bess Kaplan's chief success in the novel is the dialogue which brings her characters to life and sustains  both  comedy  and   interest.  Yid­ dish  terms  are  used  liberally  with  a glos­ sary provided  at  the  end,  but  usually  the point  is quite  clear  as  when  Malke  tries to  discourage Harry:

"You're   either   a   meshugganer   or   deaf. When I say  no,  by  you  it  comes   out   yes. NO! No  means   NO! I decide who  will  be my  husband. Not  you."

As a portrait of Jewish  life and  situation comedy,  Malke,  Malke  is very  good  in­ deed.
A  Small   Informal   Dance,  by  Helen
Levi, offers a picture of a small Canadian

BOOKS IN  REVIEW


town called  Plum  Buff. The  action, com­ prised  of teas,  picnics,  and  showers, cen­ tres on Mrs.  Bartley,  a widow who strives to understand her  adolescent sons and  to cheer  poor,  pregnant Alice  Dufault. But Alice's "fault" is not  taken  very seriously, and  Mrs.  Bartley,  unlike  Malke,  remains a  loyal widow who smoothes Alice's way through small  town  gossip.
Levi's  style  is simple,  at  times  danger­ ously close to  trite,  and  the  dialogue too often  slips into  cliche.  The italicized  pas­ sages  that   serve  as  introduction  suggest that  the  story  will  be  a satire,  but  Levi's small  touches  of  irony  remain  innocuous. Plum  Buff is no  Mariposa. Plum  Buff is a Manawaka  without the  Hagars, Chris­ ties, or Grandfathers Connor, without the darker side, and  without the serious social purpose. But as Levi points out, "in a democracy each has his own choice of lifestyle."
Child  of the  Morning is an  impressive historical  novel recreating the reign of Egypt's Pharaoh-Queen, Hatshepsut. Pauline   Gedge   has  carefully   researched her subject, and  the personality of a struggling, proud, ambitious woman comes  alive.  Essentially,  this is a story of court  intrigue intensified  by the fact  that a woman  cannot wear  Egypt's  double crown.  Hatshepsut, however,  rules peace­ fully  for  twenty  years  before  being  poi­ soned  by her  nephew  and  heir.
Hatshepsut is a remarkably modern woman.  In  fact,  Gedge  uses the  story of her reign to press home a low-keyed feminism.  Egypt  was prosperous under Hatshepsut until  the ruthless  schemes of young Thothmes, supported by the priests, plunged  his people into renewed war. However,  the  males  in  this  novel are  not all vain and  power-mad or lascivious and weak. Hatsheput surrounds herself with capable ministers,  chief  among  these  the brilliant  Senmut who  becomes  her archi­ tect,  thus  commemorating her  reign,  and her lover. It is in the handling of the love


105

BOOKS IN REVIEW



interest   that   the   novel  weakens.   Gedge does  not  manage  to  lift  her   love  story beyond  the  princess  and  the  pauper level, and  the love scenes  themselves  are  banal.
Child  of the  Morning is an  ambitious
book.    Pauline    Gedge    writes    a   clear, simple   prose,   maintains  a  sure   control over   narrative  pace   and,   for   the   most part,   creates   her   characters  with  sensi­ tivity. If the novel must  be called  a quali­ fied   success,   it   offers   promise   of   still better   things  to come.

SHERRILL E. GRACE




TEXTURES
OF DISORDER

RANDAL  HARKER,    Adrift.  Macmillan,  $7·95·
MARIE  JAKOBER,   The   Mind   Gods.  Macmillan,
$7·95·
BETTY WILSON,  Andre  Tom  Macgregor. Mac-
millan, $7·95·
THE   WORST THING about  these   three "first  novels" is the way in which  they are promoted as results  of "the  search-for-a­ new-Alberta-novelist   competition." This  type  of   ultra-regionalism  is  inclined   to create  suspicion   in  the  reader who  won­ ders what  he will have  to endure for  the sake of CanLit. However, I am  happy  to report  that  each  of the  three  novels  pre­ sents  evidence of  a  lively  mind  engaged  in  its  own  mode   of  literary  expression,  adapted to a  particular myth  of survival in  a situation of intimidating  disorder.
The Mind  Gods-the weakest  in style
of  the   three-shows  how  survival   de­ pends  on  the  outcome of a "lottery  with power." The   Caronites  are  disciples  of Roger    Caron,   self-styled   Last   Avatar, who, in a futuristic version of Anaxagoras and  contemporary  psychics, posits  Mind  as  the   ultimate   power   in  the   universe. Caron  and   his   followers   believe   them-

106
 selves to be the  chosen  people  for  whom cosmosis or  total  spirituality is achieved only  by man's  harmony with  Mind. The Caronites inhabit Vilna,  the Snow  Planet and  weak, primitive colony of the Janites. Janus  (named after   the  Roman god)   is a thriving technocracy intent on  retribu­ tion  after   the  people  of  Vilna,  without provocation, annihilate a  Janite  military observation unit  and  overthrow  the colo­ nial  government. Tanya   Rastov, Janite Chief  Research  and Data Control Officer,  narrates  this  parable of   power-struggle, and  while  the  genre  is  ostensibly  in  the tradition of what  is  sweepingly   and  im­ properly   termed  "science   fiction," it  be­ comes clear  that this novel, because  of its intellectual weight and  discursive  propen­ sity, is  closer  to  the  didactic manners of Huxley,  Orwell,   and   Burgess'   A  Clock­ work  Orange   than  it  is to  the  elaborate mythology  of Tolkien, the satiric fantasy  of Swift,  or  the  inventiveness of  Peake.
There is an evident  philosophic dialec­ tic. While  the Caronites cannot endure a world without certainties and  so flee from the  responsibilities of choice,  the  Janites prefer  a  struggle  between  form  and  dis­ solution.   Tanya  Rastov   pinpoints  with brutal irony  how  the  Caronites sacrifice in  the  name  of  life  the  only  thing   that  lives-the separate,   unique,  individual self. The Janites, on the other hand, stub­  bornly  assert  their  intrinsic duality in  a form  of  negative  capability.
All  this  makes  for  engaging  reading, but  there  are  flaws.  While  Ms.  Jakober moves frequently into  poetic  description, she does not dramatize enough. Her char­ acterization is deficient: it  explains more than   it  reveals   through  action, and   its generalization  deprives   the   sketches   of sharp   individuality. The  style  has  tang but   the   philosophic  exposition   becomes too textbookish  at times. Ms. Jakober has, of  course,  given  herself  a  problem: she has  sought   to  describe  a  battle between  two  different  species  of  power,   but  she

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



does not know how to express the radical Caronite psychic force-especially in its final cataclysmic manifestation-except through exaggerated effects that seek to confirm  the  "incarnate will of some  uni­ versal  purpose."
But  The Mind   Gods  asserts  its  belief in  a  type  of  life  that   is  "some   kind  of absolute  which  admits no rules  except  its own  incessant   advance" on  every   path there  is, and  its view of life contrasts with that  in  Adrift where  existence   does  not seem  to  have  a  point.  The central  char­ acter  in  Harker's novel  is Peter  Jedison, a  drifting youth   who   returns  from   the "wilds" of his strong-willed  grandfather's farm  to "civilized  life" in the city because he  needs  money.  But  Peter's interest   in life has atrophied, and his boredom drives him   to  drugs   which,  while   giving   him psychedelic  intensity and  helping to break his usual pattern of  thinking, do not save him from  lethargy and  self-mockery after his manic  periods.  Although his drug  ex­ periences  are  often a  tribal  ritual, a ver­ sion of  Dionysian  religion,  they  underline his fundamental disorientation in a world of  flow.
Peter  knows what  he  rejects  but  is un­ certain of what  he  wants.  His  expansive  anger    is   directed     at    man's    wasteful destruction  but   his  nihilistic   view   that  life  is merely  a  waiting for  death "in  as refined  a  manner as  possible"  undercuts this  anger   and  makes  the  sanguine op­ timism   of   the   ending  with    its   quasi­  pastoral  peace  an  unconvincing and  in­ appropriate one-especially after  Peter's suicidal  experience and  his fundamental incertitude about  survival.
If judged  chiefly for  its statement, this novel  is  an  unoriginal  exercise  about   a blend  of cynicism and  romanticism. Peter is an  obvious  soul-brother of  Jack  Ker­ ouac,  Allen  Ginsberg,  and  Holden  Caul­ field,  and  he  is the  type  of  hipster who stirs violent  paranoia in organization men (the  police)  as well as in denizens  of sub-
 cultures  (youth  gangs) . He  is the  type of dispossessed whom society can neither eliminate nor ignore,  but  he is the victim of  his own  ennui  and  irony  for  his  exis­ tence  is both  boring  and  uncertain  whe­ ther  it is a  law or  an  absurdity.
What  makes  Adrift fresh  and  interest­ ing is its texture. This goes  beyond  ]edi­ son's  drug-induced  synaesthesia. It also goes  beyond   the   author's  satiric   sense which  combines  dignity  and   mockery  in comically  grotesque  displays.  The style, while used for a work  that  is narrow and  repetitive,  does  not  subvert the  content. The   texture-with   its   ironic   counter­ pointing-is  obtained  through  episodes that   seem  first-hand  experiences  which give rise not  to conceptual knowledge but to  something like  an  excitation or  lassi­ tude.  Emphasis derives  from  the  form of action    rather  than    from    a   particular repertoire of  choices.   The   protagonist's intelligence is not obliterated  by stretches of mental  fog for it is wittily  playful  even in a language of  frustration.
It  is  texture again   that   excels  in  the third  novel,  Andre Tom .Macgregor,  the winner   in  the  Alberta  competition. But here   texture  is  produced   less  by   the quality  of  language than  it  is by the  re­ lentless  realism   as  Betty   Wilson   tells  a stark  and  moving  story  about a  teenage Metis   who   has   considerable   difficulty finding  his legs in the  white man's world.  There  is  much    sordor,   plenty    of   sex, ample  crime  and  frustration. The   char­ acters,   while   lacking    depth  and   com­ plexity,   are   adequate  to   Ms.   Wilson's didactic purpose  and,  despite  their  stereo­ typing, stay  fresh  in  the  mind.
The  greatest  quality is the  strength of
incident and  pace.  While  the  spell of the bush is not conveyed  through detailed geographical  animism,  it  is  a  felt  pres­ ence, pulling Andre  from  the alien,  noisy city  world  where  he  feels  homesick  and  desperate.


107

BOOKS IN REVIEW



I wish  that  Betty  Wilson  had  tried  for greater symbolism.  Apart  from  the  bush, there  is only  one  other   effective  symbol
-that  of  the   budgie   which   represents Andre's  caged   and   vulnerable  spirit­ and   this   is  not   enough   to  elevate   her realism    to    truly    apocalyptic    heights.  Moreover, she reduces  her  final  effect  by settling  on  an  optimistic  ending.  Andre, whose  marriage  to  vapid   Dolores   Olson cuts  him  off from  his mentor, Fr.  Pepin,  and  sets  him  to  flight,  has  to  ironically adopt  his  own  infant son  and  return  to his  ancestral place.  However, instead   of being   true   to  the   preceding  tenor,   the author attempts an  artificial  balance of tensions.    Andre's  son   is   named    after Gabriel Dumont-a name  also  given  to the  ill-fated   budgie   killed  by  Dolores­ but  what  possible hope could  there  be for this  child  brought into  a  squalid   region, named   after   a   Metis   hero  eclipsed   by Riel,   and   fathered   by  a  baffled,  angry teenager who  has fled  from  city  to bush?
It  is  a   troubling  question-all    the more  problematic for the method of its generation-and it  compromises an  un­ usually  good  "first  novel"  whose  straight realism  about culture shock  a  reader is not  likely  to forget.
In  sum,  the  three  novels  under  review
yield interesting literary textures, for they express their themes without leaving an impression of incoherence and  also with­ out  pretending to be esoterically  compli­ cated. They   give  the  lie  to  popular and gratuitous  assumptions   about  the   geo­ physical   predominance  in  contemporary Canadian fiction  for  they show  very  real humanization  of   concern  for   different types  of  disorder.  And   they  reveal   this concern not  as a  regional  property but  in highly   personalized  writing  that   main­ tains  the  autonomy of  the  aesthetic and the stimulation of awareness.

KEITH GAREBIAN

roB
 ANTHOLOGY PIECES

Canadian  Short   Fiction Anthology, edited  by Cathy Ford. lntermedia  Press,  $5.95  paper. Getting Here, stories  selected by  Rudy  Wiebe.
NeWest   Press, $2.95  paper.
Toronto Short  Stories, edited by  Morris Wolfe and  Douglas Daymond. Doubleday, $6.95 paper.
Here  & Now, edited by Clark Blaise  and  John
Metcalf. Oberon, $5.95  paper.
Horizon:  Writings  of  the    Canadian   Prairie,
edited by  Ken   Mitchell. Oxford, $6.gs.

AUDREY THOMAS, in her foreword  to the Canadian Short  Fiction  Anthology, justi­ fies the  publication of  this  collection   on the ground  that  it will "educate the read­  ing  public   to  demand  short   stories."   I doubt  it. Like  the  other three  short  story anthologies here  under review,  the Cana­ dian  Short  Fiction  Anthology is destined  to reach only a small  part  of the  reading public.  Cathy  Ford's collection will  cer­ tainly interest  those who keep track of the development  of  young   writers,  particu­ larly   those   from   the   West   Coast    (the  word "Canadian" in the title of this book is rather  misleading). Many  of  the  au­  thors  of  the  thirty-five  stories   (thirty of them  previously unpublished) in this col­ lection  are  not  yet well-known, and  most of them  have still  to  realize  their  poten­  tial.  Yet,  given  the  unevenness of  their work,  the  regional  grouping of  the  writ­  ers,  and  the  vague   and   sometimes   flip­ pant  biographical  notes  at   the  back  of the  book,  this  anthology is  hardly   suit­ able for most classroom  situations at  any level, thus restricting its circulation in one of  the  usual  markets for   collections   of this kind.
Getting   Here  also  has  a  regional  fla­ vour.  The   seven  women   whose   stories Wiebe  has  selected  are  all  natives  of, or currently resident  in, the Edmonton area,  and  the book was published in Edmonton by  George  Melnyk's   NeWest   Press.  Al­ though   less   attractively  packaged  than  the  Canadian  Short   Fiction   Anthology,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the stories  (none  of them  previously pub­ lished)   included in  Getting  Here  are  of much   better   quality,  which   presumably reflects  Wiebe's  experience  as  an  editor.  He  offers  no  preface  explaining his  rea­ sons for  choosing  the  material: it  is left to stand  on its own,  and  it does. None of the  stories   is  less  than   competent, and Caterina  Edwards' "Everlasting Mercy" is very good. The craftsmanship displayed most  of   the  time  in  Getting  Here  con­ trasts favourably with  the ill-considered experiments and  downright carelessness evident in  too much  of the  material  col­ lected  by Cathy Ford.
Getting   Here  will  have   only   limited
usefulness as a textbook,  however,  despite its merits  as a short  story  anthology. To­ ronto Short Stories and  Here & Now are more   obviously   intended  for   the   class­ room,  but  neither one  is  likely  to  please a   wide   range   of   instructors. The  first offers itself as "an opportunity to observe the  city  as  reflected  by the  literary ima-
 ginations  of   twenty    short    story   riters [sic]."  This   unfortunately, is  just  what most  of  the  collection   does  not  do. To­ ronto   is  a  distinctive  presence   only   in Hugh  Hood's  well-known  "Recollections of  the   Works   Department";  the   other  selections will stand  or fall on their  merits  as short stories, not  as short  stories  about  a  particular locality.  That  Margaret  At­ wood  mentions the  CN  Tower in  "Rape Fantasies," or  that   Hugh  Garner   refers to  Queen and  Adelaide Streets   in  "The Premeditated Death of Samuel Glover," is not  enough   to make  either one  a  To­ ronto  story,  or  to  dissuade   us from  con­ cluding that  Atwood's story, although not one of her best, has sufficient substance to justify its inclusion  in an anthology, while Garner's clearly  has  not.  For  those  out­  side  the  area, and  the  influence, of  To­ ronto,  this  collection will  not  be  seen  to be an  effective  way  of  introducing any­  one to what  the editors  term  "the  distinc­ tive   flavour    of   Toronto."   Unlike  the




Fiddlehead Poetry Books

(from  the current list)

All This  Night Long, by Robert Gibbs, $4.00
When  a Girl Looks Down, by Kay Smith, $5.00
The  Assassination of Colour, by Eldon  Grier, $5.00
The  Ordinary Invisible Woman, by Gwen Hauser, $5.00
Poems and Elegies 1972, 1975, by DavidS. West, $4.50
The  Terrible Word, by William Bauer, $5.00
Wind  Sun Stone andIce, by D. H. Sullivan, $3.50
Tell-Tale Feathers, by George  Swede, $4.00

Order  from FRED  COGSWELL P.O. Box 4400
English  Department, University of New Brunswick
Fredericton, N.B.  E3B 5A3
(CATALOGUE SUPPLIED ON  REQUEST)



109

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Wiebe  and  Ford  compilations, this one is largely made up of previously  published material;  thirteen of  the   twenty   stories may  be found  in  other  books.
Although all of the  material in Here & Now  has  been  previously  published, only a   few   of   these   stories    (such   as  Alice
:Munro's  "Dance of the  Happy Shades") could  be  termed  familiar  anthology pieces. Interestingly enough, the Munro story turns up in the Daymond-Wolfe collection   as  a  "Toronto" fiction.  Blaise and  Metcalf   include it  for  rather  differ­ ent  reasons:  their  intention, they say, is to "publicize the short  story," and  their  cri­ terion   for  selection   is  "excellence," and nothing  else.  As  a   result,   the   fourteen authors  represented   here    are   all   well known,   including   Hugh  Hood,    Austin Clarke, Jane Rule,  Margaret  Laurence, and  Blaise and  Metcalf   themselves.  The  book will serve as a  useful  text,  provided the  teacher  using  it  is not  put  off by the editors' introduction, where  it  is claimed that  short story  writers in  Canada  need "foreign models" and  "foreign standards" because  there  is in this country nothing equivalent to the  "mature" domestic  tra­ dition  evident  in our  poetry. Someone not acquainted with  E. W. Thompson, Lea­  cock,  Raddall,  Callaghan, Ross,  Knister or  W.  0.  Mitchell, and   therefore in  no position  to  dispute the  editors' assertion,  will  be  content  to  view  this  book  as  a well-chosen  sampling of the work of some of the  best short  story  writers  in  contem­ porary  Canada.
Ken  Mitchell's Horizon is not a short story anthology. A companion volume  to Gary  Geddes'  Skookum Wawa, this book is, like its predecessor, a fine  compilation of  short   fiction,   poetry   and   non-fiction which   reveals  the  developing  conscious­ ness   of   a   Canadian   region.   One   can praise  this  collection,  however,  and  still disagree  with  some of  Mitchell's editorial decisions.   Dorothy   Livesay's   "Day   and Night" is, despite  her  Manitoba  origins,


I IO
 clearly   out   of  place   here,   and   George Munro  Grant's  comments on   "western bumptiousness" lose their  intended mean­ ing  when   Mitchell  detaches  them   from Ocean   to   Ocean.  More   serious   is  the omission  from  this  book of any  represen­ tative  selections  by modern western  Can­ adian  historians. Mitchell claims  that  "all strands of the Prairie experience" appear in his anthology; if this were the case, one would  have  expected   to  find  something from   W.   L.  Morton  included. Despite these  objections, Horizon, like  Skookum W awa,  will  prove  a  serviceable book - albeit   only   a  starting  point-for   any teacher, inside or outside  of Canada, who wishes  to  take  a  regional   approach  to our  literary  culture.
DAVID  JACKEL



RUSSIAN EMIGRE

SASHA SOKOLov,  A   School   for  Fools,   trans.
Carl  R. Proffer. Ardis,  Ann  Arbor.

THE  NEW  WAVE OF   RUSSIAN  emigration, the  third   since I 9I 7, has  cast  upon  our shores a thirty-three-year-old writer whose first  published   work  of  fiction,   a  novel called  A  School   for Fools, is  extraordin­ arily good. Sasha Sokolov has a Canadian passport  and  a Canadian birth  certificate. He  was  born  in  1943  in  Ottawa, where  his father, a personal friend of Stalin, had been  sent  in the forties  to take  charge of intelligence  operations at  the  Soviet  em­ bassy.  Sokolov  left   by  ship   from   Van­ couver when  he  was  four  years  old  and returned to  the  Soviet  Union, where  he lived  until   two  years  ago.   (The  photo• graph  on the back  cover of this book was taken  in  Regina, where  he  visits  a  Rus­ sian  friend-one  does  not  say  "ex-Rus­ sian"    of   these   new   Canadians-and though  he  has  a  temporary job teaching in  Michigan, he  wants  to come  back  to Canada.)

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



A School for Fools takes place in Russia and  in the  consciousness  of its main  nar­ rator,  who  lives somewhere  between  the inner  and  outer worlds, between  boyhood and  manhood. It  is a  demanding book, for  the  narrator  demands that   you  con­ centrate on him and  on  his world,  which is  also  yours.  A  retarded, often   schizo­ phrenic  schoolboy,   somewhat  cared   for and sometimes destroyed  by family, school and  country,  he  has  no  name   but   the ones he has given  himself.  He  also names the  people  close  to  him   as  they  merge with   his  consciousness,   his   memory   of them. Some names  he forgets,  like that  of the  nearby  river  Lethe. Other people  or things  can  be conveniently called so-and­ so  and   such-and-such; the  insane   have the privilege of remembering only what  is important. The  hero's emotions  form  the core of the  book;  the words  he spins  out of his emotions  form its texture.
At  the  centre  of his  past,  present  and future  life  is  pain:  the   pain   of  being called   an   idiot,   of   being   in   a   special school, of being  hated by his  prosecutor­ father, of not  always  being able  to carry on  the  type  of  conversation  that   passes for human communication, of wanting to be loved  by  a woman, of  not  being  able to acquire, through labour and  status,  the many items  that  people  can  own. Around this pain  the hero secretes an entire world of humour and  beauty.  Like the artist,  he succeeds   in   fusing   the   memory    of   a beautiful thing  with  its  existence  in  the present. So he is really  more  alive,  more perceptive, more human than  most of us. This  book  is a  lyrical  vision  of  extra­ ordinary intensity.  Sokolov  has found  the language to convey  both  the  beauty  and the  pain.  Carl  Proffer's  English  transla­ tion  is  of  the  highest   quality.  The   fact that  this  Russian  novel  fits  into  the  best of modern  literature  seems less surprising than  it  should  because  the  English  is so good.  In  Russian  Sokolov  is  an  astound­ ing  new  voice. Where  he  found   his way
 of writing,  so different from  that  of any other   contemporary Russian   author,  re­ mains  a mystery even when one has talked to him  about  it.  He  admires  Bunin, and  certainly  Bunin's   lyrical   rich   tales   of thwarted love may  be closer to this novel than  anything written  since  in  Russian. But School for Fools can be compared to the  best  in  modern  literature anywhere. No   literary   influence   explains    how Sokolov  came  to  write  so  well.  He  is a careful  writer. There is nothing extra  in the book, nothing uneven about its inten­  sity.  Often several   voices  in  it  speak  at once. Sokolov  may  have  invented a  new kind  of  dialogue, one   between   people: the schizoid  hero's  two voices and  that  of his interlocutor, whom  he may be invent­ ing  at  any  time,  since  the  fool  knows  in advance the effect  he will have on others  and  can  foretell  their  response,  much  as the writer  imagines  the speech of  his own
characters.
At  one  level   this   book  is  about  the choice of words, of attitudes which  we all must  make  when  called  out  of ourselves ("as   I  usually  do  when   no  one  hinders my thinking, I simply thought about everything I  saw") . Any  choice  carries moral  implications, and, to this reviewer, the  real  greatness  of the  book  is its morality.
Yet   Sokolov   is  not   dogmatic;  he   is modest. He lets the hero make his own connections between   memory  and   truth. In  lieu of a real  father, he  provides  him with a mentor, Savl Petrovich (Saul, who is  also  called   Paul)    Norvegov,   a  geog­ raphy  teacher in  the  special  school, who goes barefoot  and   teaches  only  what   his pupils  need  to  learn, how  to  distinguish the true  from  the false. Norvegov  is fired from   the  special  school  and   dies,  after  telling   the  students  his  parable  of  the master carpenter who cannot practice his craft  without getting materials from  peo­ ple  who  want   him  to  crucify  a  man  in exchange. When  the carpenter agrees,  he


III

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



finds  that   the  crucified   man   is  himself.
Sokolov's is a generation just beginning
to make its compromises, having been educated  by  its  elders   to  do  that. This book  should   be  the   rallying   cry  of  its refusal  to do  so, but  with  full  awareness of the consequences. When  the narrator dreams of a "normal" future, it must remain a dream, because  his way  of  see­ ing  everything makes  him  a  stranger to those  who  see only  a  part   of  the  world,  who compromise emotion  and expression.
The  hero  of  A  School   for Fools has  a genius for describing whiteness and  for filling emptiness.  He sees the white  places in the newspaper where  nothing (nothing false)    is  written;  his  father  reads   the other  parts.  He sees what  the wind  brings, has  brought, will  bring  (time  is  collapsi­ ble). He   howls  a  found   word   into   an empty   rain-barrel  and   images   his  one real  teacher saying  to him:

So shout then-most capable of the cap­ able,  shout for  yourself  and  for  me,  and  for all   of  us,  deceived, defamed,  dishonoured and   stupefied, for   us,  the  idiots  and   holy fools,  the   defectives and  schizoids, for   the  educators and   the  educatees, for   all   those to  whom   it  has  not  been  given   and   whose salivating  mouths   have   already  been   shut, or  will  soon  be shut, for  all  those  who  have  been  innocently muted, or  are  being  muted, tongues  torn   out-shout,  intoxicated  and intoxicating:  bacilli, bacilli, bacilli!

The best authors know  that  when  the emotion is right,  the  word  has  meaning.

BARBARA  HELDT  MONTER



TV DINNER

LAZAR   SARNA,   The   Man   Who  Lived  Near
Nelligan. Coach House Press.

LAZAR  SARNA's   FIRST  NOVEL  (a  twenty­ eight-year-old  Montreal   lawyer,  he  has published two books of  poetry  and  several legal  textbooks)  is  as  eminently  dispos-


II2
 able  as the  remains  of a TV dinner. It is neither   nutritive  nor  a  new  taste-sensa­ tion   as   the   jacket   blurb   implies.   The  blurb  deserves  full  quotation, for  its  en­ comia  thinly veil  the  novel's  faults:

The Man Who Lived  Near  Nelligan is a delicately shaped narrative that lets  you feel the  teeth  before  you see them. The story manoeuvres in shifting traceries of  the  real/ imagined,  dips   back    into    time    to   rescue
'fact', then curls  around to  deliver it  home, a gift,  a  present -a  rubbing from  the  alter of  that  mysterious living   temple where our dyeing  bleeds  into  history.
Sarna's characters move  gracefully in  the borderland where  flesh and  paper corningle [sic], fuse  and  finally  become  that  "indeter­ minate other' who  speaks  instinctually from
'nowhere' in  the  best  and   truest dialects of new  fiction.

Rather than  embodying the  best  aspects of  new  fiction  as  the  last  phrase   of  the blurb  claims,  the  novel  is  a  bland  con­ coction  of  modernist assumptions  about reality: that  memory  recreates the  past; that   chronology   is  not  as  important as free association; that  the texture of every­ day   life   is  more   illuminating  than    a chronicle of  externally significant events.
Our  narrator, Walter Burton, was com­ mitted   to  hospital   because  of  senility  at the age of sixty-five:  it is from  there  that  he  tells his story. The chapters  alternate between   his  past   reminiscences   and   a mental  commentary  on  his  present   life. Poems  are  interspersed, some  written by Burton,  some  by an  omniscent  observer, and some by the French-Canadian poet Emile  Nelligan.  Nelligan   was,  in  fact,  a poet-prodigy who  was  overcome by  ner­ vous depression  at  the age of  twenty, and spent  the  rest of his life in  hospital. It is there  that  he meets  the fictional  English­ Canadian  entrepreneur  Burton, in  1927.
The   novel's  worst  vexation is  its  the­ matic  haziness.  Themes are  not  knit to­ gether  at  dramatic focal  points,  but  dif­ fused in a collage of scenes whose symbol­ ism  is  muted. What  is   to  be  made   of Burton's  deluded   attempts  to  blow  up

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Nelligan  in the hospital, and  to burn  him to death when he visits Burton's home? Burton resents  Nelligan  as a reminder of his   own   tortured  existence,    patronizes him as a French-Canadian, and  envies his artistic success;  moreover, he  seeks some sort  of answer from  Nelligan. What  does he want?
The atmosphere of hopelessness, a com­
mon  gambit in modern novels, may stem from    the   half-enunciated   themes    that any self-knowledge, any  real  meeting of minds,  and  any  ascertainment of general truths about life, are futile. Or,  this vague sadness  may   rest  in  the  modernist  per­ spective     that     although    commonplace events  are  numinous, they  are  ultimately ineffable. Yet  one  should  not  be  driven  to  such   extrapolations:   Sarna  has  neg­ lected  his duty  to explain his world-view. We  are  forced  to  a  literal  interpretation of  the  blurb's  suggestion   that   the  novel speaks from "nowhere."
Furthermore, the  novel  goes  nowhere. Burton, like  Lear, "hath ever  but  slen­ derly   known   himself,"  but   there  is  no tragedy  here,  for  there  is no struggle and no fall.  Burton has  had  three  wives who have died of illneses exacerbated by mari­  tal tensions, but  he does not explore  these tensions.  He  admits  that   fear  of  impo­  tence  and  death  plagued   him  when  he should  have been  happiest, but  does  not ask  why.  Sarna introduces no  events  to either   justify  or  challenge  Burton's  lack of commitment, nor  any  characters who are  "engage" to  act  as  foils. The  novel has  no goal.
The blurbist's notion  that  Sarna's  nar­
rative  has  teeth  should  be dispelled: it is a fangless monster. Nor is it illusively con­ voluted: it  is not  convoluted at  all. The  distinction between  reality  and the  narra­ tor's  fantasies is easily  discernible, as  in the  childhood incident  in  which   Burton accidentally shoots  his  hated father:  the deliciously  vivid  details  of  that  shocking
 moment   immediately identify  it  as  fan­
tasy.
Similarly,  the relevance of the poems  is clear,  and   the  time-shifts are  easily  fol­ lowed, especially since they are delineated by changes  in type-face. In  fact, the  nar­ rative  is more  edited  than  molded, and more    crudely    hewn    than     "delicately shaped."  Nowhere   does   it   flow   freely from  the  inner  to outer worlds  of  major  and  minor  characters, in  the  manner of Virginia  Woolf.
Burton    is   a   credible  narrator,   for
Sarna's prose conveys his businessman's lapidary  precision   of  speech,   his   occa­ sional  Victorian floridity, and  his  ama­ teur  poet's  eye for  imagery.  Yet  Sarna's prose,  like  his  narrative  and   informing ideas,  is unexceptional.  The net  result  is nicely-packaged  mediocrity.

JOHN W. ROBINSON


UKRAINIAN POETRY

YAR      SLAVUTYCH,    The   Conquerors of    the
Prairies.  Slavuta, Edmonton, $4.00.

EvERY  YEAR IN CANADA a sizeable  body of literature is produced that  never  comes to the attention of the vast majority of  read­ ers  in  this  country This  is  the  "ethnic literature"-poetry and  prose written by immigrants  for  whom   the   natural  lan­  guage   of  expression   is  one   other  than  either  English or French. Generally, these works  are   not   translated,  yet   they  still form  a  part  of  Canadian literature. The rare appearance of any  of these  works in translation  should   be  welcomed  by  the anglophone public  as  an  opportunity  to gain  some  insight   into   this  other,  rela­ tively unknown, stream  of our  literature.
One such piece of "ethnic literature," now available  in  English  translation, is a collection   of   poems   by   the   Edmonton based  Ukrainian poet,  Yar  Slavutych. In
1968 The Conquerors of the  Prairies was


113

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



published in  Ukrainian only. Recently it has come  out  in a bilingual edition, with English  translations by an  Australian, R. H. Morrison.
Yar   Slavutych,  a   professor   of  Slavic languages and  literature at the University of  Alberta, has  been  writing poetry  for over  thirty  years,  in  Ukraine, Germany, the  United States, and   most  recently  in Canada. He  has  published  eight  collec­ tions  of  poetry   apart from   this  one,  as well  as  a  translation into  Ukrainian of selected  poems  by John  Keats. The Con­ querors   of   the   Prairies   is  particularly suited  for  translation into  English.  Much Ukrainian  Canadian  poetry  concerns   it­ self with  issues that  are  not  of  great  in­ terest  to the Canadian public- the "old country" and  the  authors' feelings  about  it. But  The Conquerors of the  Prairies is firmly  set in  the  new  country. Its  princi­ pal  themes  are  western  Canadian history and  the  Canadian landscape, things  that form  a  part  of  everybody's common  ex­ perience.   At  the  same   time,  the  author gives an immigrant's view of this country, a view which  the  English  public does not often  encounter.
The   conquerors  of  the   prairies   after whom  this collection is named  are the Ukrainian pioneers  who  came  to Canada at the turn  of the century, and  turned the wilderness  of the  prairies into  productive farmland. The   twenty-two poems  in  the first section  of Slavutych's collection are devoted   to  the  subject of  these  pioneers. In the opening poem  he tells us who they were:

conquerors of the  prairies,  in  their  way, Came  Pylypiwsky, Yelyniak,  Leskiw

where they went: "Mundare remembers you, and  Vegreville," and  what  they did: "Grubbed up  the  burnt-out poplars  from their  bed."
Slavutych presents   the  Ukrainian  pio­ neers   as   "conquerors  with    a   peaceful aspect,"  who  won  the  land  not  by  the

I 14
 sword,  but  by "the   humble   plough  with home-made steel  for  share." They   were simple  people,  who  can  be  described   m terms of

Thick  sheepskin  coat  and  shoes of  hide untanned,
Slices of bread,  and  onion  odor  ...

yet their achievement was as great  as that of any conquering hero.
In a poem he calls "Sorrow," Slavutych delves into  the feelings of the immigrants at  finding   themselves  in  a  foreign   land. He recreates their  loneliness, their longing for things known and  familiar. This  poem was composed  at the grave  of the pioneer Ivan  Pylypiw, and  the poet  attributes the words to Pylypiw himself:

No cuckoo's  heard,  no nightingale is found, Like  those  that  filled  my  youth  with  their
sweet sound.
As an  immigrant himself,  Slavutych well understands the  feelings  of  the  pioneers. The  feeling  of spiritual rejuvenation in a new land  that  he attributes to Pylypiw  at the end  of this poem -

And  out  there,   where  red  cranberries' bushes stand,
My life finds new strength in a foreign  land

-is   similar   to  his  own   experience  in
Alberta, which  he expresses later:

And  all  my former   joy, and  strength made
.uew,
I have  discovered  on  Alberta's fields.

Perhaps the most striking  poem in this section  is "The Old  Men." Here  Slavu­ tych   paints   a   portrait  of  old   pioneers  whose  time  of  action   is  past,  and   who spend  their  days  sitting  in  the  sun  remi­  niscing about  past  joys and sorrows:

Their time  is  past.  They  lean  with  knotty hands
Placed  heavily on bony knees, at  rest ...

They sit there lost in thought, omniscient­ Like  old stone  idols set on  Scythian  graves.

An  interesting aspect  of this section  of

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



The  Conquerors of the  Prairies is  Slavu­ tych's  attempt to step  back  even  further into  history  to  recreate scenes  of  Indian life. This  is something rarely  seen in liter­ ature by recent  immigrants.  Traditional Indian life is too far  removed  from  their personal   experience  to  be  a  subject   for their  writings.  But  there   are  several  In­  dian   poems  in  The  Conquerors of  the Prairies:  "The  Stallion," a  tale  of death  and  revenge  set  in  a  Cree  encampment, "The  Inheritance," a story  of an  old  In­  dian whose only son  has  been  killed, and a   ballad   entitled  "Blackfoot,"  the  only poem in this collection  that has not been translated into  English.
Slavutych's landscape is definitely west­ ern  Canadian, and  references to  specific places  abound.  Inevitably, as  an  immi­ grant, the  poet  sometimes  fondly  recalls his native  country ("At  least in sleep  I'll see Kherson")  but  his feet  remain firmly planted in  Canada:   "This land   of  Ed­ monton that's my land  too."  The variety of winter  scenes that  appear in the second and  third  sections  of The  Conquerors of the Prairies ("Polar Sonnets" and "North­ ern  Lights")  are  sometimes   simply  de­ scriptive, as  is  this  spare   image   of   the northern landscape:

Hungry coyotes'  whining, Caw  of glutted crows. Sterile tundra pining Where no  tree-top  shows.

Others are more subjective, giving  us not only  a  picture  of  winter,  but   also  the author's reaction  to it. For  the most  part, the winter landscapes are  very  bleak  and mournful.  For   Slavutych,  the   land   of winter is a  land  of  death. But  in  a  few poems he takes a more positive view of winter. He extols the  beauty  of the north­ ern  lights, and,  in the penultimate poem, presents  a  rather  fanciful dream   picture of the coming  of spring  to the arctic.
The Conquerors   of the  Prairies is not the  place  to  look  for  anything startling
 or  novel  in  the  realm   of  poetic  expres­ sion.  The   style  is  traditional,  even  old­ fashioned. All  the  poems  maintain strict rhyme and  rhythm; their tone is lofty and heroic.  The  author  seems  to  be  overly fond  of  such  out   of   fashion   devices  as apostrophe and   heroic  adjectives.  Still, apart from  such  excesses  as  "The keen scythe hunts, athirst for prey," and "Stalk, do not weep  and  do  not  grieve," he may be  forgiven  for  assuming a  heroic   tone. He  is,  after   all,  dealing with   a  heroic  subject.
The  English version of The Conquerors of the  Prairies  is  true  to  the  original in almost  every  way. The translator has re­ tained  precisely not only the meaning, but also the tone and  the form  of the original poems. As might  be expected, his attempt to  fit  the  English   poems  to  the  rhymes and  rhythms   of  the  Ukrainian  ones  has led  to  some  difficulties -forced,  stilted language in some places,  unnatural word order  in  others,  but  on  the  whole  Mor­ rison  has  handled well  the  very  difficult job  of   translating  poetry.   Obviously,  a reading of one  collection of poetry  won't  give a  full  indication of the  breadth and variety of Ukrainian literature now being produced in  Canada. But  to  the  English reader  interested in the subject, The Con­ querors of the  Prairies will give some  in­ sight into  at  least one of its strains.

ZONIA KEYWAN



SEARCH FOR HOME

MYRNA KOSTASH,  All  of Baba's Children. Mc-
Clelland &  Stewart.

AFTER THE BATTLE  OF POLTAVA  in  the eighteenth century, Russia  began  the rusi­ fication  of Ukrainian culture. In 1918 the Ukraine  enjoyed   a   brief   independence under  a provisional  government that  fell when   the  Russian-Bolshevik  army   cap-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tured   Kiev  for  a  second   time  and  con­ tinued   rusification. For   those  who  had come  to see Kiev  as  the  New  Jerusalem the  dream was  gone.  My  father, having  taken   up  a  Saskatchewan  homestead  a few years before  1918, wrote in a spidery cyrillic  script   to  his  brothers -a  priest and    professor  - in    the   Carpathians: "Brothers, the  Ukraine? She  has  perish!  All you have now are  the songs you sing." These words have always  haunted me.
In  Canada, Sir  Clifford  Sifton,  Minis­ ter  of the  Interior under Prime  Minister Laurier, was pleased  with  the  Ukrainian immigrants: "I  think  a  stalwart peasant  in   a  sheepskin   coat,  born   on   the   soil, whose  forefathers  have  been  farmers for ten  generations,  with  a  stout  wife  and  a half-dozen   children  is  good   quality.... These men  are  workers.  They  have  been bred  for  generations to  work  from  day­ light  to dark.  They  have  never  done  any­ thing  else  and   they  never  expect   to  do anything else."  Sir  Sif  might   have  pros­ pered  with a brief history lesson to inform  his  blatant racism.  The stalwart  gentle­  men and  their  families  came from a place once  ruled  by Tartars-an  area  altered  by  Asian  culture  (an   area  where  some women   dressed   in   silk,   long   before   a peasant there  put  on  a  sheepskin coat). The place  later  became known  as "Rus," the old term  for  the politico-cultural cen­ tre around Kiev  by  the Dnieper River.  It later   became   the  Kievian centre  where Byzantine culture  and   Orthodox  Chris­  tianity  of  the  ninth and   tenth  centuries impinged on  the  chronicles of Slavic  im­ agination. For  a while  the  Vikings  ruled the area  in  the twelfth  century, but  those inhabiting   Rus   displaced   them.    These  were only a few of the cultural influences  that  laid  the  basis for  my father's dream
-my father who once had  difficulty  with
12 languages and  wore  a sheepskin  coat, and  later  heard  of Sir Sifton,  and  learned to live in  this country under the  yoke of that    familiar   Anglo-Saxon  label,    "bo-

II6
 hunk." And, yes, my father was a realist; he knew,  after  the  fall  of Kiev,  Ukryina "the  Motherland" was   only   a   mythic place  existing  only  in  the  vague  bound­ aries  of  the  imagination  where  memory  was  sometimes   illuminated  by   a  single dream. A  dream  held   in   the   transient meaning of home, held  in the shifting co­ ordinates of all  possible  places  where  the world   begins-then,    and  now.   Then, back in Galicia,  his boyhood  imagination was coloured  by a  world  that  began  with Selo, "the  village." He could  see Selo and its onion-shaped  belltower from  the farm.  In time his brothers went that  way-and soon moved on  to other  intellectual pur­  suits  in  Kiev  where  their  Dido,  "grand­ father,"   knew   his   world   really   began (since his Dido's  Dido  and  Baba, "grand­ mother,"  knew   the   first   definition   of Ukryina: "that place surrounded by other  cultures-languages and other things you had  to learn in order to survive coexisting  with   everyone").   My   father  knew   his meaning of  home  and   country  loomed somewhere   between   the   Kievan  centre  one  looked  out  from  and  all  those  fron­  tierlands beyond,  where  Taras Bulba  and Cossacks  rode   to  defend   "the  Mother­ land." The  poetry  of  Taras Shevchenko chronicled   in   lyrics   those   places   and stories. My father and  his brothers knew well  the  meaning of "eclecticism," being eclectic  survivors  themselves.
And what does all this have to do with Myrna   Kostash   and   her   book,   All   of Baba's Children? Well after  being Ameri­
canized,  urbanized, and  McLuhanized in the  great  imperial  centre  of Toronto she goes  home   to  Edmonton,  Alberta. She buys a  farm  and   house  near  Two  Hills, and  names  it  Tulova-after "the  Gali­ cian   village   the   Kostashchuks   left  be­ hind."  In   Two   Hills   she   spends   four months  of interviewing the  townspeople, then  sets  about   writing   a  social  history delineating  her   relationship - political and  spiritual-to  a  Ukrainian heritage.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



She   becomes    involved    in   the   process of new  journalism, the writer's ego and imagination   mediating  between    docu­ mented  fact,   objective   reality,  and   the audience.  Her   energy   sources   become: the  new  left  ideology, and  social  human­ ism,  counter culture,  regionalism, ethnic consciousness,  and  nationalism. The book slowly   grows   from   a   profound  energy emanating  from  the  social  injustices suf­ fered  by  the  Ukrainian immigrants' chil­ dren-her  "parents' generation" and "their   experiences between     I 920    and
I950· 0   0   ."
In  a recent  interview (Student, Febru­
ary I 978)   she  tells  of  her  "excruciating position"  where   she   sees  herself   being assimilated into  what  is "really  inhuman in a lot of ways from  [her] point  of view as a  woman, an  ethnic, and  Prairie  per­ son."  Of  the  last chapter, "Mythologies," in All of Baba's Children she further says to  the   Ukrainian   Student  interviewer: "And yet the  model  which  I  was offered by   which    to   resist   that    process-the Ukrainian  Canadianness coming   out   of the  mainstream of  that   community was also  untenable. It  didn't relate  at  all  to my  realities,  my experiences over  the  last ten  years."
Being of Ms. Kostash's generation (and
yet  not,  because  my  parents were  immi­ grants)  I begin  to understand  her search for the meaning of country and a place to call  home-and her ambivalent ending:

A  tourist I  came, a  tourist I  leave. Like thousands   and    thousands   of    Ukrainian­ Canadians of  my  generation  and beyond, I only   travel  these   ethnic  sideroads  when   I need  to  find  a  breathing  space  while,  away from  the  fumes  of  the  cosmopolitan metrop­ olis   and   all   its   works.   But,   metropolis  is what I return to  when  it's time  to  go home.  It is   after all   where   Baba   meant to  have me   iive    wheshe   mortgaged  her   life  so mine  w uld
CPR  quarter  as   from    the    kolkhoz, near
Tulova,  in   Galicia. When  I  look   at  the remnants of the cultural reality left from her history  and  finger    them    like   curios  in   a
 Tijuana souvenir shop, it's  not  that I'm ungrateful  or   even   unmoved. I  can   store them  in  a  trunk, along with  my  high  school yearbooks and   my  mother's  wedding  dress. But  if  I tried to  use  them, they  would   fall apart in  my  hands. I have  other skills  now and  assignments to fulfill  that Baba  never dreamed   of.   Not    that  she    wouldn't    be pleased.
If there's any  way  at all  that I carry on from  where she  left  off,  it  won't be with  her language, because I never knew  it, nor  with her  habits, because  they  make  no  sense,  nor with   her  faith, because I  have   lost  it,  nor with  her  satisfaction, because my needs  have changed. (italics mine)

Ambivalent  because    she   named   her farm  Tulova, and  said  at  the  end  of her book's  introduction: "I feel  at  home  in Two  Hills." Yes, Selo has changed after Henry  Ford,   Marconi, NASA,  and  Mc­ Luhan  (and   his  theory   of  the  "Global Village").  Baba   was  perfectly   right   in urging  us to move on. And faith? If noth­ ing  else,  I  think  deep  in  the  recesses  of her   Byzantine-icon  illuminated  memory  Baba  meant  to  assure  us of  the  possible refuge  in  the  Kievian   imagination moni­  tored  by an intertribal consciousness  (that propensity  to  look  from   within   beyond into  the extended margins of void threat­ ened   by  the   phantom  horsemen).  The need  to dream still  remains. The Viking  and Tartar horsemen  still ford  the  rivers of  our  Slavic  blood -even  though  here home is a lantern-carrying phantom walk­ ing  the  asphalt highway   to  the  city.  All else is myth: the Ukraine, the Ukrainian­ Canadian, the Anglo-Saxon -all a myth.  And  the  only  reality  is a  mythic  Ukrain­ ian-Canadian, a tourist, fainting at  Taras Shevchenko's grave  on  a  hill  near  Kaniv down   from   Kiev,  on   the   Dnieper, and  then  rising  to  bag  a  handful of earth to take  home.
ANDREW SUKNASKI

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



POPBOILERS

IAN    SLATER, Firespill.  McClelland &  Stewart­ Bantam,  $1.95·
T.   A.     KEENLEYSIDE,   The    Common  Touch.
Doubleday.
CLARKE  WALLACE,   Wanted: Donald  Morrison
-The True  Story  of the  Megantic Outlaw.
Doubleday.
CHARLES TEMPLETON, Act  of God. McClelland
&  Stewart,  $xo.gs.

PoPULAR  FICTION  has  long  been  a  pub­ lishing  category  sui  generis,  largely  un­ co!lcerned  with critical aesthetics and cur­  rently   fashionable   standards  of   proper  literary decorum. At its best it displays an imaginative vigour that  puts  the majority of    self-consciously   artistic  creations  to shame.  But  more  usually  it  reads  as if it was   written  in   a   trance-that   amor­ phous "cultural trance" of cliche thinking and   stereotyped   characterization   which embodies  the half-conscious collective  es­ sence of any given  milieu.
Take Ian  Slater's Firespill, a book  pre­
sumably  conceived  by its author as a cau­ tionary  warning in the form of a very con­ temporary  ecological   nightmare. Some­ time  in  the  near  future, off  the  Alaska coast,   two  giant  "supratankers" collide, spilling 6oo million gallons  of oil-which is  then  accidentally ignited  by  a  sailor's carelessly  discarded cigarette. Trapped amidst   the  resulting inferno  is  the  U.S. Vice-President, a "captivatingly plump" young   woman   who   coincidentally  hap­ pens  to  be  the  passionately  beloved  ex­ mistress  of the  President. The only  hope for  her  rescue is a vintage Canadian sub­ marine,  complete with   mutinous  crew, leaking   fuel-tanks, and  a  failing  oxygen supply.  And  meanwhile, as the  spreading "firespill" threatens  to  ignite   the  entire  Pacific  coast,  from  Alaska  south  to Cali­  fornia, the  authorities move  to  institute drastic emergency measures: nothing less than  "the mass  evacuation of  the  entire population of the  Pacific  Northwest."

JJ8
 Throughout, Slater's prose  style  is  as flat-footed  as his plotting, as woodenly lifeless as his sub-stereotypical  character­ ization.   Yet  here   and   there  amidst   the prevailing  murk    glint   brief    flashes   of something archetypally deep and dreamily compelling. "Leaping  in  a  kind  of  mad unison," he writes  at one point,  "miles  of orange   red  flame  could  be  seen  licking hundreds of  feet  into  the  dense  smoke, reminding  the   President  of   childhood horror   tales  in   which   primordial  crea­ tures  bent  on  destruction would  rise out of  a  volcanic  sea  to  devour   the  earth." This,  then,  is  the  true  theme  of Firespill, looming  from  behind  the  smokescreen  of formula  melodramatics:  an  apocalyptic vision of  the world in flames, to which  the only  inadequate  response  is  one  of  be­ numbed   impotence in  the  face  of  over­ powering catastrophe.
The sole  emotion  that   rings   true   in these  pages  is a  darkly  despairing  help­ lessness.  And  finally,  in  defiance  of  all conventionalized expectations to the con­  trary,  it proves  wholly  justified. The sub­ marine's heroic  mission  fails; Vice-Presi­ dent  and  rescuers  alike  go  up in  smoke;  the firestorm  is  unstoppable, and  the  be­ wildered  inhabitants of  the  Pacific  coast are  left  to  reap  the  whirlwind. In  night­ mares like  this,  there  are  no grounds  for last-minute reassurances. The sole saving grace  for  the  world  at  large,  as  it  turns out, is the author's absolutely  stultifying ineptitude, which effectively anaesthetizes his readers  against  the  real  import of his pessimistic  driving vision.
Viewed  as  a  timely  warning,  Firespill is a misfire -instead, it functions in  the mass psyche in much  the same fashion as those  mildly  troublesome dreams which, as Freud explained, have  the secret func­ tion  of  blunting  the   urgency   of   poten­ tially   worrisome    external   stimuli   that  might    otherwise  awaken   the   dreamer from his slumber. This paradoxically self­ negating quality is in  fact  characteristic

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



of  that   increasingly  popular  sub-genre, the semi-documentary novel which presses itself on the public as a thinly fictionalized but   correspondingly  eye-opening  expose of  the  real  truth about some  scandalous real-life  situation.
Take,   for    instance,  The   Common Touch, by T. A. Keenleyside. The  author here   is  a   political   scientist   who   spent several  years  in  the  diplomatic  service; his book is explicitly  intended as a scath­ ing indictment of our foreign policies and the conduct of our official  representatives abroad-a Canadian counterpart of The  Ugly  American of  some years ago. Set in a  fictitious  Southeast Asian  country, this tale  of  the  tribulations  of  an  idealistic  young   diplomat  is  knowledgeably  con­ ceived  and  indubitably  well-intentioned. But   despite    a   plethora   of   authentic­ sounding  details,   neither  the   situations nor  the  characters come  even   remotely alive. Few readers are likely to be shocked out  of  their  complacency by  the  stereo­ typed  revelations of  this  plodding exer­ cise in cliche-cloaked intrigue and  formu­ laic disillusionment.
A different set  of formulae  predomin­ ate  in Clarke Wallace's Wanted: Donald Morrison -the  saddle-sore  conventions of  the  old-fashioned  pulp   western. But this  clumsily  fictionalized re-creation  of the   hunting  down   of  a   "modern  Rob Roy" in  the  Quebec of 188g  at  least  has the  virtue  of an  interesting story  to  tell. And  the  connoisseur of  bad  writing  will find   it   genuinely    rewarding,   for   the author has  a  positive  genius  for  the  in­ spired  malapropism. (Two samples: "He  had  a stubborn streak  as long  as a  tape­  worm"  and   "high  above,   the   Canada geese seemed  to stride  across the sky with the   steady   pace   of   long-distance  run­  ners.")
Such  spurious striving after   vividness, the   hackneyed   stock-in-trade  of   corres­ pondence-school writing-courses,  at  least makes   a  welcome   change   from   mind-
 numbing dullness.  But in  the  final  analy­ sis it  is no  less a  screen  against  the  tra­ vails  of  reality.  In  a  foreword,  Wallace earnestly    proclaims   his    intention   "of bringing  alive   the   hardships,  joys,  and  tragedies    which    faced    unwary    immi­ grants...."   But   instead   he   belabours them    to   death,   immolating   historical actuality   on   the    Procrustean   bed    of formula   characterization  and   generally sub-formula writing.
Alongside   these   three   variously   mis­ conceived   botches,   Charles  Templeton's best-selling  Act  of God  shines  out  like  a reasonably   good   deed   in   a   decidedly dreary   world.  In   his  early   pages,  to  be sure,  Templeton  is every  bit  as  guilty  as Clarke   Wallace   of  self-consciously   over­  wrought  prosifying,  and   over   and   over he  lapses  into  currently-fashionable  cli­ ches of  motive  and  presentation. Yet  the overall impression  here is one of amateur­ ishness  rather than   outright ineptitude: the writing  gets steadily  better as the book progresses, as if Templeton is learning as he goes; the plotting, apart from  one awkwardly-integrated  subplot,   is   com­ mendably tight;  and   above   all   the  au­  thor   plainly   has   the   born   story-teller's gift   of  seeing   his  characters  and   their  interactions come  alive  in  the  theatre of his mind,  however much  difficulty  he may have  in  setting   this  inner  vision  down on  paper.
As every media-blitzed Canadian  must know,   Act   of  God   deals   with   the  dis­ covery of what  appear to  be the  authen­ ticated   bones  of  the  unresurrected Jesus Christ  in  Israel,  and  the  impact of their  finding  on a somewhat worldly  American archbishop. Plainly,  to do  this theme  full justice   would   require  the   powers   of  a Dostoevsky-or,  at  the  very  least,  a Graham Greene. And,  needless  to say, Templeton falls short.
Yet he acquits himself surprisingly well, all  things  considered. His  story  is  care­ fully thought out and  patently sincere; its

II9

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



chief characters, though somewhat stiff at times,  are  no  mere  lifeless stereotypes - though only  one  of  them,   the  Toronto­ born  detective Copeland  Jackson, comes anywhere  close  to  being  fully   realized.  The book's  faults  for  the  most  part  stem directly from Templeton's inexperience as a novelist.  In   the  end,  for instance, he falls into  the characteristically amateurish error   of  spelling   out  all  the  underlying significations of his story in a tacked-on epilogue,  rather than  letting them  emerge dramatically  in   the   main   body   of  the text.  But  the  fact  remains that  this awk­
ward  conclusion really is the theologically
and  dramaturgically right  one, for all the
clumsy  obliquity of its  presentation. The conception is admirable; the  fault  lies in the execution.
The  responsibility for  such  failings  as these must  rest as much  with  McClelland
& Stewart as with  Charles Templeton­ for almost  all  the  more egregious failings of  Act   of  God   could  easily  have   been remedied  by  another   run   through  the typewriter,  under    the   guidance  of  an astutely   sympathetic  editor.  (This, inci­  dentally,  is   another   mark    of   modern popular  fiction:  for  the  most  part   it  is severely   under-edited, if  it  is  edited   at all.)   As it stands,  Templeton's ambitious attempt at a novel  vividly  manifests both the strengths and the besetting weaknesses of    the    contemporary   popular   novel: genuine imaginative vigour,  undercut  by the stereotyped banalities of crudely con­ ventionalized presentation.
JULIAN REID



JINOTHER WORLD

TOM   MARSHALL,    The    White  City.  Oberon,
$7·95;  pa. $3.95.
DAVID    HELWIG,   Atlantic Crossings.  Oberon.
IN A  FOREWORD to The  White City Tom
Marshall  speculates on  the   unconscious


120
 impulse  behind  what  he calls his book  of air (the  last of a tetralogy which  has focussed,  in turn,  upon  fire,  water,  earth and  air)  : "One can  be chosen  by a place before  one  is conscious  of its psychic  his­ tory.  Perhaps   we  newcomers  of   recent  centuries have, in spite  of our sins, begun at  last  to  soak  up  some  of  the  psychic energies  of this space." The poems them­ selves,  however,   are  simpler   and   more accessible  than   the  slightly   intimidating preface    would    promise.    Further,   the volume is not so tightly  unified  as the airy theme   suggests.  This   is,  in  fact,   not  so much  an integrated sequence of poems on a  common theme, as it is a collection of poems,  many  of  them  occasional, which are  often  related  to  AIR  only  through a determined editorial ingenuity.
Most  of  Marshall's poetry  is based  on a short  line of one  to four  syllables;  most of his images, like "orange lichen  on grey rock",    are   sharply    particularized;    his direct  presentation of immediate  percep­ tions   shows  the   pervasive   influence   of William   Carlos   Williams.  There  is,  in other   words,  little   in   the  form   of  this poetry  to distinguish it from  the  work  of a hundred other contemporary poets. But Marshall has a good sense of the  textures and  resonances  of  words.  In  one  of  my particular   favourites,  for   instance,  he catches   the  magic   and   mystery   of  the
"Blue   Mosque: Istanbul" in a  few  de­
tails:

These  windows  are  the  broken colours  of desire,
cool promises of paradise.

And  pale  as heaven the  blue  curvature, a geometrical abstract of roses.

Marshall creates  a  spacious   beauty  here not  only  by the images  but  also  by  mov­ ing  from  specific images  to such  abstrac­ tions as "desire" and "promises." The im­ plicit  suggestion  of   the  mind's reaching out  prepares for  some intellectual specu-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



lation  which  would  otherwise seem  quite unpoetic:
I remember this  not as  dream but
a  clear sky  matter-of-factness

Or perhaps as
dream's mystical   precision when unrealized as dream.
This  sense  of  a  dream  unrecognized  by the   dreamer  becomes   a   description  of
"the   serenity   a   work I  of  architecture
carries." But then,  as a good poet should,
Marshall extends   and   reframes  the  en­
tire  poem  with  another  discovery:
What awakening then these  ludicrous
bobbling chanticleers. What absurd
incongruity-a  prayer.

Suddenly we  are  moved  outside   the mosque, beyond its serene dream, to the discordant  yet   vitally    energetic   world which  surrounds it. In  one  sense the rooster's crowing  may be felt  here as a prayer; in  another sense  the  very  exis­ tence   of   the   chanticleer,  and   of    the mosque,  whose total  experience is prayer,  makes conventional prayer unnecessary.
In  a short  review it may be a distortion to spend  so much  time on one  poem.  Yet it is no more distortion than  capsule sum­ maries  of a dozen poems. "Blue  Mosque: Istanbul" reveals the rich pleasures  which lie  in  Marshall's  best  poems; it  suggests his typical  forms;  it  shows  us,  by taking  us inside the poet's mind  and  evoking  the spirit of a particular place, what  Marshall means   by   "psychic   energies." If  Mar­ shall's  strength as  a  poet  is  the  sudden juxtaposition, or the surprising metaphor, which  carries  the  reader   into  an  undis­ covered  mental  landscape, his weakness is his attempt at  reporting  sensory  impres­  sions without interpretation and  synthesis. Marshall's  poems,  or  parts  of  poems,  in this mode  -there are  too many  of them
 -don't  go  beyond  the  tediousness   of  a shopping list :

(light laid  on  fence-posts, grass blue-tinged cabbages

cows  and  one  horse  grazing swallows  gliding

roosters crow intermittently

sprinklers jerk)
("Imaginary Mountains")

White City contains two slightly  longer poems (or sequences) in which Marshall considers,  particularly through Indian myth and legend, the psychic history of Canada. The  most  intriguing of  these  is "A   Message   from   the   Garden  of   the Gods"  in  which  the  poet,  proposing that there  are  two  kinds  of  Canadians   ("fa­ natics ... [and]  the   secular   shaman") , imagines  Canada backwards. This  vision moves  us  from   west  to  east,  and   back through history,  giving  us a  renewed  and altered  understanding of our past, ending with a realization that  our mythic  origins are  in  this  land  and   in  this  time : "the
white  city, I I the  garden of  the  gods  is
here."
David  Helwig  is also  reaching back  to distant  history to find the psychic energies of this place. His book, Atlantic Crossings, much more explicitly unified and focussed than  White City, consists  of  four  poems retelling  the stories of four  early  crossings of the Atlantic: by the Irish  monk, St. Brendan; by  a  slave-trader; by  Colum­ bus;  and  by the  Norsemen.  When  I  first read   Helwig's   "Voyage   with   Brendan" I   was  bewildered.   Since   I   only   knew Brendan as a name, I found  it difficult  to connect  the  bizarre  images  and  events  in the  poem.  But once  I  read  an  outline of the  Navigatio  Brandani upon  which  the poem  is  based,  the  details   began   to  co­ here.  Brendan voyages  west  in  search  of the  Earthly Paradise. The  tempting asso­ ciation   of  Brendan's  Land  of   Promise


121

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



with  North America, though it  has  only a tenuous historical basis, gives Helwig's poem a most obvious connection with Marshall's discovery  that  "the garden of the gods is here." Brendan's voyage is told in the first person by one of the three late­ comers  who  have   been  taken   on  at the last  moment, almost  as  an  afterthought. There is a marvellous, sometimes a night­ marish, quality about Brendan's legendary wanderings.   Helwig's   terse   poetry    ex­ presses the sense of the  fantastic, through the  puzzled,  awestruck voice  of  the  nar­ rator:

near  west an  island  green  with  grass trees and  flowers like multiple  suns an  island  stream  poured  light
and we pulled the boat to harbour where  by a fountain stood  a  wide tree  leaved  white  with  birds.

But  delicious  as  Helwig's images  are, and  quotable as the poem  is, Atlantic Crossings is  a  series  of  four   narratives, and  fascinating new  perspectives on  fa­
 It sank  and  suddenly  that  place
was a fluid crimson  jewel in  the  blue and  shining  ocean.

"Columbus in Jamaica" describes Colum­ bus, through his own words, as Christ,  dis­ illusioned,  despairing, realizing his dream of a  "new  world,  Jerusalem" cannot   be. Helwig  retells  "The Vinland Saga" from  the  woman's  point-of-view, in  the  voice of Gudrid,  wife of Thorstein. Her  story, too,  mingles  a  love  of  the  great   beauty  of  Vinland with  the  growing   despair  of ever making  permanent settlement there: "This is a good land,  but  we will never/ live in safety."  The  poem,  and  the  book, ends with the Norse leaving  the new land, acknowledging their  defeat.
Helwig's  is a haunting and  enchanting series  of  poems.  Like  the  best  poems  of The  White  City is shows us, in the words of an epigraph which  Marshall takes from Paul Eluard, that  "there is another world, but it is in this one."
LAURIE RICOU

miliar  stories are  what  keep  bringing me	 	
back  to the book. Each  of the four  poems

tells,  in  a way,  a  story  of  the  search  for an  earthly paradise; each   reveals,  along the   way,  the   savagery   and   evil   which stand   in  the   way  of  such   achievement. "The Middle Passage" is described by the captain of  a  ship  crammed  with   black slaves destined  for the North American market. The  story  here  is grotesque, yet the  horror is intensified   by  moments of great   beauty.   The  ship,   becalmed,   be­ comes  an  emblem  of  the  inhuman  logic of  the  slave  trade. Here,  for  example, is part  of Helwig's description of dead  slaves being  thrown overboard:

The  next  a child.
The  clothes of the man  that  carried him had  been fouled  by the floor of the  hold where  he  had  slipped  and  fallen.
He  held  the  body by arm  and  leg and  turning sharply  from  the  waist
he threw  it into  the  air  where  it floated
slowly down like a dark  bird
and  hit  the  water  with  a flat smack.


122
 ***   JEAN  BRUCE. The  Last Best West. Fitz­
henry  &  Whiteside.   One   hears   often   of  the
Multiculturalism Programme that  is carried  on
under  the  auspices  of  the  Secretary of State's
office, and  here  is at  least  one concrete  mani­ festation  of its existence,  in  the  form  of  Jean  Bruce's  excellent  documentary  anthology  com­ piled  around  the  population  of  the  Canadian West  by  immigrants from   Europe,   from  the United  States  and  from  Asia, during  the  cru­ cial years from  1896  to  1914  when  the  prairie  provinces  emerged  out  of  the  old  Northwest Territory. Apart  from  a  perceptive  introduc­ tion,  written   with  exemplary   conciseness,  the book consists entirely  of photographs from  the time and  extracts  from  official documents and publicity material, and,  on the other  side, from the  accounts  of  settlers   themselves,  in  letters and  diaries.  The  effect  is a  rich  mosaic of ex­ perience,  touching  on  every  aspect  of  the  set­ tler.>' life in Canada and  bringing out-which is  presumably   the  aim   of  the  volume-the extent  to which their  responses were shaped  by differing  backgrounds. As  memento  of a stage in Canada's growth  that  is  now receding  from memory into  history, it is one of the  best of its kind. 	G.W




THE RAILROAD IN CANADIAN LITERATURE

ALL OVER  THE WORLD  railroads  revolu­ tionized  life.  The impact of  the  railroad on  Canada,  however,  was  unique. The  Canadian  nation   was   literally   built   on rails; and  for nearly seven decades, Cana­ dian  politics  were the  politics  of railroads and  railroad  building.1  For  Canada, the railroad is not only a symbol of industrial progress; it  is undoubtedly the  symbol of modern Canada, embodying within  it the many  elusive  dimensions of  the  modern Canadian identity. Images of the railroad in Canadian literature,2   particularly in poetry and  novels, reflect  this modern national identity:  especially,  they  reflect the  ambivalence with  which  Confedera­ tion and conquering the Canadian wilder­ ness are  accepted. On  the  one  hand, the railroad is treated as a romantic symbol of adventure and  progress, and  on the other  as  a  symbol  of  corruption,  dehumaniza­ tion,  and  intrusion.
Hugh MacLennan  humorously  sum­
marizes  the  dimensions of th se
flicting  attitudes towards the  railroad, in
his essay "Journey Into The  Present." He says, "It is a miracle of comfort and effi­ ciency this  train. It is-dare  I say it?­ the  symbol of this  bright new  Canada of ours." It is a  "metal snake,"  the  sum  of "burgeoning bureaucracies," the means of connecting the great expanses of land, and it  is  the   result   of   what   the   "pioneers hewed out yard by yard." It connects  men all over Canada, but  it also "plays  blame­  less,  soul-destroying  tunes   to  the  happy captives" riding  inside.3


124
 As  MacLennan  suggests,  the  impetus for  building the  Transcontinental  Rail­ road   was   a  great,   romantic   vision   of nationhood; but such a railroad was costly to build  and  was often sponsored by men who  cared   less  about   Canada's  future than  about their  own crass economic and  political  gains. The  romance of  building this railroad was  being  a part  of the  wil­ derness that  was Canada before it became  an  urban  country; but  the  railroad itself is a part of  the  urbanization. The Trans­ continental is a symbol of human achieve­ ment,  of victory, over  the almost impreg­ nable  Canadian  wilderness; but  the  train  is an  evil,  "mechanical" snake  intruding into God's idyllic, natural world. Building  the   railroad brought men  together in communal effort; but  the  train  is a  ma­ chine,  a  part  of  the  industrialism  which destroyed  the quiet  rural  way of  life and its values.
E. J. Pratt's epic  poem,  Towards The
Last Spike, serves well as a reference  point
for an examination of these different con­ flicting  attitudes. In  the  poem,  Pratt de­ velops the brightest  of these images of the train,  presenting it  as  the  symbol  of  na­  tionhood  and   romantic   adventure.  He focuses  a great  deal  of  attention on  Sir John   A.  Macdonald,  who  twice  bet  his political   career   on  the  Transcontinental and   Confederation.   For   nearly   twenty years,  including  two  terms   in  office  as Prime  Minister, over British Columbia's threats of secession, and  through the Riel Rebellion, Macdonald juggled politicians, the  military, money,  and  governments to accomplish his dream of building a  rail­ road  "from sea  to  sea."  Pratt  begins  by describing Macdonald's  sleepless  nights; with  a  touch  of  mock-heroic humour he says,
Insomnia had  ripped the  bed  sheets  from him
Night  after night....
For  goblins  had  a way of pinching him,
Slapping a  nightmare onto dwingling snoozes....

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



Upon his  wall -the  roads   all  Jed  to market-
The north-south route.

Macdonald  knew  that   because   railroad lines already  existed between  Canada and American cities, Chicago and other Amer­ ican  Great Lakes  cities  would  have  un­ doubtedly  become  the  centres  of  Cana­ dian   commerce  unless   an   independent Canadian railway  were  built  connecting the  provinces  to  each  other. He  wanted  an  all-Canadian line,  which  meant cross­ ing  the  Rockies-and more  nightmares. Pratt writes:

He  returned
To  bed  and  savoured soporific terms:
Superior, the  Red   River, Selkirk ...
He  spat  out  Rocky grit  before  he swallowed.

After describing Macdonald's problems, Pratt continues with the adventures of the other  heroes,  the  promoters, pathfinders, and engineers.  One  of the most important of these heroes is Van  Horne, whom  Pratt elevates to the status of a Canadian Paul Bunyan, capable of super-human feats:

Stephens  had   had   his   raw   hands on   Van
Horne,
Pulled   him  across  the  border, sent   him  up
To  get  the  feel of northern temperatures....

His  Name  was  now  a  legend....

Fast  as a bobcat,
He'd  climb   and   run   across   the   shakiest
trestle.
Or, with  a  locomotive short   of coal,
He  could  supply  the  head  of steam himself. He  breakfasted on  bridges, lunched on  ties; Drinking from   gallon   pails,   he  dined  on
moose....

Although Pratt's description lacks the hy­ perbole   typical   of  some   American   folk legends,  Van  Horne is, nevertheless,  cast as a  prototype of the  square-jawed  hero, able  to  pit  his  great  strength  against all odds  and  win  in  the  true  manner of the romantic folktale.
In fact,  Pratt's poem can  be considered
(among other   things)   as  an  exercise  in
 attempting to  create, or  locate,  a  Cana­ dian legendary hero. To satisfy their struc­  tural   needs  the  epic  poem  and  folktale­ legend both require a superman, an Odys­ seus, Paul  Bunyan, or  Van  Horne, fight­ ing against  the forces of evil. An unfortu­ nate  tension is created in this poem  when Pratt tries  to  fulfill  the  requirements of the epic form  he has set for himself, while at the same time trying  to give an histori­  cally accurate account of what  happened. To do  the latter, Pratt must  describe  not only  the  acts  of  heroes  like  Macdonald, Van  Horne, and  Stephens, but  he  must also  describe   those  of  the  workers   who laid  the  tracks.  Hordes of  men  slipped around  knee-deep   in  mud   and   sweated under   the  hot   sun   to  build   a  railroad across the Canadian wilderness,  which  at times  seemed  capable of swallowing and obliterating every   tie  and   trestle   thrust into it. It was a task equal  to the strength of ten dozen  Paul  Bunyans.
So while  Macdonald is off in a corner
having nightmares and gagging on "Rocky  grit" and  while  Van  Horne is off romping through the mountains, jumping over  trestles  with  a  single  bound, Pratt concerns  himself  with  the  problem  of  de­ scribing  the heroic  work of the labourers. And  this  is a complex  problem.  His  epic form  wants  a single  hero.  Yet  central to the  experience of  building the  Canadian railroad and  to  the  very  Canadian cul­ tural  identity  Pratt wants  to  frame into legend  is a group  and  community experi­ ence so  diverse4   that  it only obscures  the achievements  of   individual  heroes   and also is itself practically impossible  to char­ acterize.   So,  how   to  describe   it?   Pratt turns  the group  into  a single  being;  man and  beast  become  one,  melting together into a surrealistic mass, dividing, undulat­ ing, and  reuniting:

Thousands of men  and  mules  and  horses slipped
Into their  togs  and   harness night and day....


I25

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



As individuals
The men  lost  their  identity; as  groups,
As gangs, they  massed, divided, sub  divided, Like  numerals....
In  his poem,  "Can. Lit.", Earle  Birney indirectly, but aptly, summarizes the prob­ lem  Pratt is attempting to resolve in To­ wards  The Last  Spike. Birney says, "Too busy  bridging loneliness  to  be  alone/ we hacked    in   ties   what    Emily   etched    in bone." Building  the Transcontinental was so great  a task that it did not have a single focal point; it was so huge a job that  there was  little  energy  left  for  Canada to  pro­ duce an Emily Dickinson or a Walt  Whit­ man  to sing about it. Birney  laments the lack of any one focal  point  in this experi­  ence  suitable  for   myth-making;  specifi­ cally, he laments the  lack of a clear  reso­ lution  to  the  problems  of  Confederation that  a  national railroad  was supposed  to have  resolved  but  did not, Birney says:
We  French, we  English never   lost  our civil  war,
Endure it  still,  a  bloodless civil  bore; No  wounded  lying  about, no  Whitman
wanted.
It's only  by our  lack  of ghosts we're haunted.
Indeed, Pratt's  problem   is  that   while  it used  up  enormous amounts of  time, money,  and  energy,  building the  Trans­ continental did  not  produce ghosts which could  be resurrected as legendary heroes.
Yet   the   Canadian  railroad  did,  cer­
tainly,   create   the   stuff   adventures are made  of. A much  earlier poet  than either Birney  or  Pratt, who  did  not  try to write epics  and  who  was  not  in  the  least  con­ cerned   about   the  problems   of  Canadian epic  heroes  and  ghosts, was Cy  Warman. Born  in  Illinois,  Warman spent  much  of his life working  for  railroads and  writing about them.  He  settled  in  London, On­ tario  in  r 904 and  was quickly  adopted as a Canadian writer  and poet.5 Like Pratt's, Warman heroes  are  strong,  rugged  indi­  vidualists. They  live  in  a  world   where men,  machine  and nature exist  in  har-
 mony.  For  example, in  "From  Cornfield To The  Cab," Warman expresses the tranquility and  domance which  the  lone engineer  feels sitting  at the throttle, guid­ ing his mighty iron horse as it races across the  majestic  landscape. Warman  empha­ sizes  the   engineer's   independence  and sense of communion with  nature:
To  reach   the  summit of  some  high mountain at
sunrise; to  look  down   the  winding trail which
he  must  travel, and  see  the  blue-jay cloud lying
across  the  track; to  dash  through the  cloud and
out  into   the  glad   sunlight again ..• is  apt to  impress  one  with   the  awful   grandeur  of
God's  will.

Man,  nature, and  machine are  all part  of one master plan. And man's magnificent creation, his beautiful iron  horse, is over­ shadowed  only  by a  force  mightier  than  man:
I hear   the  whistle  sounding, The  moving  air  I feel;
The train goes  by  me,  bounding
O'er throbbing threads of steel.

My  mind  it  doth  bewilder
These wondrous things  to  scan; Awed,  not  by man,  the  builder,
But  God,  who  made the  man.

This  identification of man,  machine and nature as one in God's  great  plan  is  pos­ sible partly  because Warman conceives of the  train  as an  organic,  living  being.  In fact,  it is an exciting mistress,  a wonder­ ful combination of  woman and  horse:
"Be  swift", I cried, "oh   matchless steed
The world  is watching...."
With   quick  and   ever  quickening speed, The hot  fire  burning in  her  breast
With  flowing  mane and   proud neck  bent
She  laughed across  the  continent.

Another thing  certainly which  helps sup­ port   Warman's  romantic  vision   of   the railroad is its nostalgic identification with the lost idyllic setting of  unspoiled nature. In  Warman's  poetry,  the  engineer  is  a

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



travelling man,  a  Dionysian character without roots. And most often  he is look­ ing  backward in time,  back  into  the sun­ set,  back  to a lost freedom in a  world  of joy and  beauty.  In  "The Freight Train," Warman says:

The man  who  rides  these  mountains,  whose fiery  steed  of steel
Drinks of  Nature's flowing   fountains,  must
... feel
A  divine and   peerless  painter spread the scenes....

Ah,  how  I miss the  music  of the  whistle and the  bell  ...
And   the   mighty, massive   Mogul  seems   to
try  to
call  me  back.  ...

Ah yes, the romantic hero. He does well to die young.  Nothing is quite  so unnerv­ ing  to  the  romantic sensibility  as an  age­ ing,   pot-bellied  Don   Juan,  surrounded by  bratty grandchildren and  a  nagging,  toothless    wife.   Conversely,   nothing  so touches  the  romantic heart as  the  bitter­ sweet  scene  of  fair  maiden  crying   with confused   emotion  over  the  grave  of  her gallant knight  (the engineer) fallen  from his  great   steed   (the   iron  horse). While she laments her loss, she is proud  that  he died    with   throttle  in   hand.   Warman muses:

T'would be sweet  to  know  ...

That a  woman would  come  to  their graves once  a  year,
Bringing wreaths of  flowers; that a
woman's tear
Would  dampen  the   dust   on   the   graves   of
those
Who  have  lived  and  died  in  their
over-clothes.

But as the twentieth century progressed, the  attitude Warman expressed,  that  the engineer was a gallant knight  able  to con­ trol  his wild  steed,  was  quickly  replaced  by  the  feeling   that   the  railroad   was  a mechanical monster  that controlled men's lives.  Particularly in  the  early  novels  of social  realism,  the  railroad  was often  de-
 picted  as being  a menace. The train  may still have been a symbol of escape from domestic  responsibilities, but  now  the escape became  desperate. For  example, Robert J. C. Stead, in a number of rural realist    novels   about  the    problems   of prairie  farmers in the West, uses the train as a symbol of evil. In The  Smoking  Flax, the second  of three  novels about the same family/  Cal   Beach   goes  West   with   his young nephew, Reed,  the  illegitimate  son of Cal's  deceased  sister. Cal  finds work at the Stake's farm,  falls in love with  Minnie Stake, and then discovers that Jackson, Minnie's brother, is Reed's father. Jack­ son,  who  cannot bear   the  shame  of  his discovery  and  his own  failure,  leaves  the farm  and  hitches  a ride on a freight train.  No  longer   the  beautiful  steed   of  War­  man's  verse, the train is now a serpentine monster. Stead  says, "With a strange fas­ cination Cal   watched  his  dark,  many­  jointed centipede roaring by.... "
Now the romance of the  train  becomes dark  as the  train  becomes  a means  of  es­ cape  from paternal and  family obligations and  personal  responsibility.  No  longer  is the  train  part of God's  natural universe.  Instead of sitting  proudly at  the  throttle and  seeing  the  sunshine and  blue  sky as Warman's  engineers did,  Jackson desper­ ately  hangs  on between  the  moving  cars;  and  as  "the cars  swing  more  and   more boisterously,  the  vacuum of their  motion sucked dust and  cinders from  the roadbed to fill his throat and  eyes." The image  of dust,  like  that  of  the  "centipede" is one of  death. Jackson   philosophizes bitterly about   life,  saying  that   men   live  in  the hopes  that  tomorrow will  be  better than today,   only  to  find   out   that   tomorrow mocks their  hopes. At last, in his despair, he lets go his grip  and  is killed  under the wheels  of  the  moving  train. His  epitaph is  written   in  the  morning paper;  he  is called a bum, an unidentified tramp, acci­ dentally  killed  while  stealing a  ride. For certain, none of Warman's maidens is go-


127

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



ing  to  come  once  a  year  to  cry  over  his grave.
By the time of the Depression, this dark image  of the railroad becomes  even  more hostile  as  mens'  lives  become   more  un­ bearable.  In  Irene  Baird's  novel,  Waste Heritage, written  in  I939,  the  train be­ comes a malevolent symbol of  the struggle  between  labour  and  management as well as  a  symbol   of   death  and   mechanical determinism.  The   story   centres  on  the life  of  Matt,  an  unemployed, angry  and  alienated   youth,   and   works   up   to  the climax  at  the  time  of the  sit-down strikes in  Vancouver and  Victoria in  I938. Vio­ lence  is central to  the  plot; Matt arrives in   Ashelon   (Vancouver)  by  train   and beats  a  policeman to  death. Also  he  in­ directly   causes  the   death  of  his  friend,  Eddie, who,  like Jackson, is killed  under  the  wheels  of a train.
Likewise  in Earle  Birney's  novel, Down The Long  Table, which   also  deals  with the  I938 strike,  the  train  is again  a sym­ bol  of  the  conflict  between  unemployed workers  and   the  government.  And  here too,  it  becomes  a  symbol  of  hopelessness and   death. The  hero   George   Saunders, alias  Paul  Green, leaves the  University of Toronto for  the  West  Coast   to  help  or­ ganize a Communist Cell  there.  To  get to Vancouver, Saunders hops  freight  trains, where   he  meets   men   and   women   who have    travelled   back   and    forth    across Canada many  times  looking  for work. Al­ though they do not  have  money  and can­  not  find  work,  the  railroad  company will not   allow   them   to  ride   on   the   freight  trains  even though it would cost the com­ pany  nothing to do so. Consequently, the riders   must   hop  off   the   trains   as  they approach the towns and  run  to the woods to avoid detection and arrest. While  jump­  ing from a moving  train, one lad leaps too soon;  both  his hands are  crushed by the train.
This image  of the  train  as a symbol  of destruction carries  with  it  a further con-
 notation of isolation  and  intrusion. Ironi­ cally,   the   Canadian  railroad,   built   to bridge  the  vastness  of the  Canadian wil­ derness,   to   "bridge   loneliness,"  and   to create  a viable Confederation, becomes  a symbol of the very isolation  and  loneliness it was built to diminish. For one thing,  the train  means separation from  home,  loved ones, and  things  familiar. Patrick  Ander­ son  captures the  mood  of  the  traveller's sense of nostalgia  in his poem,  "Railroad Station." Here  the  train  becomes  the ob­ jective correlative for the grief and sorrow of departing:

the  train has  moved
out  under the  twisted iron ... tearing the  paper streamers
of  lover's  eyes, gentle  and  terrible with  no  tearing noise

before  it  has  moved  ... the  memories on  love and the  body  grieves

to  feel,  as  a  winter tree, careses   die  like  the  leaves -

It is important to note in this poem that the departure of the  train  and  the lover's leaving  are  associated  with  winter.  Win­ ter is central to the Canadian experience, and  many  poets are  fond  of  equating the feeling of loneliness and isolation  with the cold,   hard    winters.   Louis    Dudek,  in "Night Train," purposely sets the time of his poem  in  winter  to contrast two kinds of isolation,  natural and  social:

Outside, smoke  crossing the  country
Fretted with  oil  tanks  and  forgotten freight
cars,
then   the  river

Frozen under the  bridge

This  naturally isolated  scene  with  frozen freight  cars and  silent  frozen  river is satirically contrasted to the less natural, human isolation  inside of the heated  train car:

-the motion
Of  the  railroad's belly pounding under us-

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



While  within  the  lighted  car,  in  the loudness,
Girls sit,  their  heads  bowed  over  books,
Ferreting the  pages  of  love,  unsatisfied.

Outside is frozen quiet; inside, frozen ten­ sion. With  a few quick  strokes, as it were, Dudek  paints  a picture depicting a  basic theme  in Canadian literature.
It is a  theme  of  ambivalence  towards communication. In  a country where win­ ter and  isolation  are  so close to the  heart  of the cultural experience, efforts  to break the silence can  take  on  the  characteristic feature of a taboo. That is, the wilderness outside  is brought into  the human society, into  the  train,  and  is internalized deep  in the   human   psyche.   Dudek's  frustrated passengers would rather sit reading books than  risk  penetrating into  that  wilderness by communicating, for to break the silence might   mean   uncovering  the   dark,  pas­ sionate  forces  of  the   uncivilized  wilder­  ness.
Or  it might  even mean discovering the secret  of life and  death, itself,  as it  does for  the  passengers  in  Birney's  "Arrivals." For  them,   the  effort   of  communicating results  in  a  nightmare. In the  Eden-like setting  of his poem,  which  is as "cosy as any  Christmas Card,"  the  train  passen­ gers  are  unexpectedly  united   in  an  un­ welcomed  "kinship of being alive." Their train  has  just crashed into an automobile and  killed  the driver. Suddenly, the  pas­ sengers are united  by death and  by a com­ monly  shared  feeling  of  guilt.  The   train  becomes   an   extension  of   them;  their efforts to reach out across the frozen land­  scape  to  communicate  have   resulted in sin. While  the train  cuts  across the  physi­ cal wilderness, it figuratively cuts through the  psychological  wilderness  of each  pas­ senger,  laying  bare  the  hidden fears  and shame each would  rather keep covered beneath an inscrutable blankness,  like the blanket  of snow which  covers the ground. As  the  now  stalled  engine   cools, it  ticks like  an  insidious  heart, "live   under  the
 snow"; and   with  each   cooling   tick,  the passengers   start   with   fear   and    "circle about/ as if for some  where  to put  down the guilt."
Thus,   the  train   that   symbolized  pro­ gress and  adventure in the poems of  Pratt and  Warman becomes  in  Birney's  poem an evil, intruding serpent and  a symbol of man's  sinful  attempts to become god-like  by trying to change a land of ice and  snow into  something other  than   God  made  it. In  a  curious  way,  though, the  symbol  of the  train   is still  a  romantic one  in  this poem,  shifting  now  from   light   to  dark,  from  a mighty  "iron horse" and  exciting  mistress to a demonic machine of destruc­ tion.
But alas, as the importance of the  train
-at least   for   passenger   service-be­ comes less and  less in an age  of  jet plane  and  even  rocket  travel, the  potency  of its symbolism   weakens.  And   the   train  be­ comes   more   the   subject  of   anecdotal stories  than   of   great   epics.  In   a  recent  article,  Martin   O'Malley  talks   of   the


Nor'east  for  Louisburg
by  WILLIAM DOUGLAS FRASER
Nor'east For  Louisburg is an adventure tale of sweeping grandeur; the  personal history  of  a youth who    volunteered  for    war   as  a  loyal  subject of George    Ill when  New   England  rose   against   the French  fortress   of    Louisburg  commandjng   the Gulf    of   St.   Lawrence  and    the    approaches to Quebec  and menacing the  Boston fishery.
Approximately 240 pages, plus cover. Many  historical
photographs. Foreword by
Phyllis R. Blakeley, LLD. Assistant Archivist for
Nova Scotia.
Deluxe perfect bound edition. Catalogues
Available to
libraries.
Size 6" x 9" $5.95 retail     ISBN 0-920474-01-2
New  from  Amethyst
12 Crascent  Town  Road,  Unit 310
Toronto.Ontario  M4C 5L3


129

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



train's nostalgic  appeal to a passing age. There are,  he says, only a handful left of that  quickly vanishing breed  of railroad enthusiasts who are
turned  on by whistles and  puffs of steam and the rhythmic clickety-clack of steel on steel. They  will fight  to the  last  drop  of diesel oil for their  right  to a lower berth.... But soon they  will  be  gone,  like  enthusiasts  of  the past.8

NOTES
1 See G. R. Stevens,  Towards the  Inevitable
1896-1922  vol.  II  of  Canadian  National
Railways  (Toronto: Clarke  Irwin,  1962).
2    Critical   literature dealing   with  the  subject of  railways,  specifically  Canadian  railways, is sparse and  often  difficult  to locate. Eliza­ beth  Waterston has written  two chapters  on travel   literature,  both   of   which   include  bibliographical notes  on  railroad literature, in   the   Literary   History   of  Canada    (To­  ronto: Univ.  of  Toronto  Press,  1965). pp.
347-65,  598-6o8.  But  except  for  some  his­ torical  writings,  some travel  literature  (see, for example,  Douglas  Gladen, On  The Cars and  Off, London, 1895), a few  geographi­  cal  studies  and   the  infrequent  writings  of railroad  enthusiasts, seldom  has the  railroad been  treated  as  a  major  subject  of literary  criticism.  For  instance, I  know  of only one recently   published   anthology  of   railroad poetry  written   in  English   (Kenneth  Hop­ kins'   The   Poetry    of   Railways,   London,
1966)  which includes  British  and  American as well as Canadian poetry.  In fiction, especially  novels,  the   railroad   usually  ap­ pears  as a  part  of the  scenery  or  a  part of a   larger    theme,    such    as    industrialism. Novels like Sinclair's The  Octopus are few; and   the  attention   writers  such   as  D.  H. Lawrence, Thomas Wolfe, and  Willa Cather give to the  railroad  is usually  in  relation  to other  themes.
a  Scotchman's Return and Other  Essays  (To­
ronto: Macmillan, 1960), p. 38.
4    Often  entire  communities were  involved  in the  effort  to  build  the  railroad. Thus   the societal  features   of  the  Canadian  railroad have  had  a  very  important  (if  latent  and, until  recently,  little  considered)  impact  on the Canadian culture and  on the  Canadian literary   imagination. For  discussions  about this communal  effort  and  about  societal  as­ pects  of  the  Canadian  railroads and  rail­ road  building  see  R.  A. J. Phillips,  Cana-
 dian  Railways   (Toronto, 1968)   and  G.  P. T.  Glazebrook,  Life  In  Ontario   (Toronto,
1968).
6   Warman   is  now  a  forgotten   figure  in  the history  of Canadian literature, but  he does deserve  a certain  recognition  as the Robert Service  of Canadian Railways.  See  "Cana­ dian  Celebrities:  No.  XXXII-Cy  War­ man  And  His  Work," Canadian  Magazine,
18  (March 1902), pp. 410-12.
11   Tales  of an Engineer  With Rhymes  of the
Rail  (New  York:   Charles  Scribner's  Sons,
1913), p. 206.
7   Neighbors (1922),  The  Smoking   Flax
(1924), and Grain  (1926).
8  "All   Aboard,"  Globe   Magazine   (January
24, 1970), p. 10.

WAYNE H. COLE



ON THE VERGE
*****   CHARLES  RITCHIE.     An   Appetite    for
Life: The  Education  of a Young  Diarist, 1924-
1927.  Macmillan.	"I am  writing  be­
cause I do not want  my life to slip through  my
fingers  like sand,"  says Charles  Ritchie  in  the
early  pages of An  Appetite  for Life.  He  had, still  in  his  late  teens,  already   abandoned the ambition  to write fiction,  but  the  urge to write in  some way  remained   and  made  him,  as  he says "a  compulsive  diarist." But  urge and  am­ bition  are  different; Ritchie  was so little  con­ cerned  at  the  time  to  publish  his  diaries  that they   remained   stored   away   until   his  retire­  ment   from   the  diplomatic  service,  when   he published  first his  journal  of  the  war  years in London    (The   Siren   Years),  and   now-as Appetite  for  Life-the  journal  of his college years, the mid-twenties  in Halifax  and  Oxford.  Ritchie   projects   a  personality   and   a  period with  charm   and  authenticity, and   his  diaries have  aroused   much   critical   enthusiasm,   per­ haps  because  Canadians do  not  often  succeed as  autobiographers  of  any  kind.  Indeed,   the Ritchie  diaries  make  good  social  history,  ele­ gantly   written,   but   Ritchie   is  no   Pepys   or Rousseau,   and   if  we  are   thinking   of  auto­  biography   as  an   art   rather    than   as  found literature, John  Glassco in  Memoirs  of Mont­ parnasse is a great  deal  better.  Yet  there's  no denying  that   An  Appetite  for Life  is good  of its kind and compared  with other  recent Cana­  dian    autobiographical   works    (Diefenbaker, Hutchison, etc.)  it shines. 	G.w.

ON THE VERGE


****   RAMSAY    cooK.    Canada:   A   Modern Study. Clarke  Irwin.                   This  is Ramsay Cook's   revision  of  a  book  first   published   in
1964.  It is  a  history  of  Canada from  1760, now  brought  up  to  the  dramatic point  at  the end  of  1976  when   the   PQ   gains   provincial power in  Quebec.  A non-academic study, it is refreshingly  free  of specialist   pretensions,  and sensitive  to  the   regional  issues  that   are  now taking on such importance in Canadian affairs, and  not  merely  in  the  matter of Quebec  and the  rest  of  Canada. It  recognizes  the  impor­ tance  of  personalities as  well  as  geographical imperatives,   and   altogether  it  is  one  of  the best popular  histories  of Canada  in  print: the kind  of  book  from  which  a  visitor  or  an  im­ migrant  could  gain  an  excellent  first  view of the reasons why Canada is, as Laurier once put it,  so "anomalous" a  nation,  and  of  the  ways in  which  the  many  local  cultures and  ethnic groups  have  so far  managed   to  live  together.

L.T.C.

**** 	KATHLEEN COBURN. In    Pursuit    of Coleridge.  Clarke   Irwin,   in  association   with Bodley Head. . 	In  Pursuit  of Coleridge is  so dedicated  to  its  ostensible  subject   that, although   a  portrait  of  Coleridge  appears   on the  back of the  dust  cover,  and  a  photograph of some of his manuscript notebooks  forms the frontispiece,   there   is  no   photograph  of  the author,  Kathleen  Coburn.  Yet,   despite   this rather  touching  diffidence,  In  Pursuit  of Cole­ ridge is in fact  a .kind of autobiography, since it  deals  with  the  central   theme  of its author's life, the search  for  the  widely scattered  manu­ script  material  that  Coleridge left  behind  him. That  search  made Kathleen Coburn one of the world's   great    Coleridge   scholars.    She   dis­ covered  and  edited   his  Notebooks;  she  found much  other  valuable  material about  him, and she was deservedly chosen  as the General  Edi­ tor  of  his  Collected   Works.  Research   of  the kind  that  Kathleen  Coburn   began  when  she first  ventured   to  England   from  Victoria   Col­ lege,  Toronto, can  read  as  excitingly  as  any detective  story,  as  those  who  remember  A. J. A. Symons'  Quest   for  Corvo  will  know,  and since  in  this  case  the   research   was  entirely interwoven   with  Dr.  Coburn's  life  from  her early graduate days, In  Pursuit  of Coleridge  is also  an  intellectual  self-portrait. The   author emerges from  it  as a  woman  of great  scholar­ ship,  rare  persistence,  and  a charm  which  un­ doubtedly  helped  open  many  doors  in  modem  Coleridge  households  that  had  been  closed  to earlier  scholars.
o.w.
 ****   SAROS cowASJEE. So Many  Freedoms: A  Study   of the  Major   Fiction   of Mulk   Raj Anand. Oxford  University  Press, Delhi.  Rs.6o. Mulk  Raj   Anand  is in  many  ways an  Indian Frederick    Philip   Grove,   a   writer    of   great power   and   intensity,    but    lacking   the   self­ critical   instinct,   so  that   his  works  are  often vigorous and  always vivid in their  rendering of the   feel  and   small   of  Indian   life,   but   fre­ quently   poorly  constructed  and  patched  over with  passages  of  careless  writing   which   does not  seem  consistent   with  Anand   at   his  best. Thus,   though    Anand   seems  often   a   larger writer   in  his  aims  and   sympathies  than   his main  rivals, R. K. Narayan and  Nirad  Chaud­ huri,  both  of   them  are  more  consistent   and more finished writers, and  we accept  them with fewer  misgivings.  Perhaps   it  is  this  curiously unsatisfying  quality  in  Anand,  the feeling  that so  much   potentiality  has   not   been   realized, that   has  made  criticism   of  him   up   to  now either  blindly  adulatory or conscientiously  ten­ tative.  Saros  Cowasjee's  book, So  Many  Free­ doms, is welcome and  useful  precisely  because it approaches Anand's  work with  a  recognition  of  the  way in  which  so much  power and  sin­ cerity  are  mingled  with  so  much  imperfection. He  deals  with  all  Anand's  novels,  judiciously mingling   biography    and   criticism,    and    his judgments   of  individual   works  are  generally  sound.  This  is certainly  the  best  introduction yet  written   to  an  always  appealing yet  often disappointing writer. 	o.w.


*** 	JAY BOCHNER. Blaise   Cendrars:   Dis­ covery and  Re-creation. University of  Toronto Press. 		Blaise Cendrars was one of the most   important   of   modernist   writers,    the friend   and   equal   of  Guillaume  Apollinaire; Dada   and  Surrealism  both  owe  him  a  great but rarely acknowledged  debt,  but  his work, in magnitude and  variety,  goes far  beyond  these movements.   A   restless   wanderer,   he   never fitted   into    the   closely-knit    French    literary establishment, so that  recognition came  late  to him,   and   outside   France    he   has   received scandalously   little   attention,  despite   Henry Miller's  efforts  to  arouse  the  interest   of  Eng­ lish  readers.  This  makes  Jay  Bochner's  book, the  first  full  study  of  Cendrars,  welcome  in spite  of  its  limitations. The   first  half  is  bio­ graphical, revealing   how  vague  even   now  is our  knowledge  of large  areas  of  Cendrars' life and  how much  of what  we seem  to know  was distorted   by his mythomania. Here there  is a curious  gap,  for  Bochner  seems  unaware that the  anarchism of  Cendrars  had  its roots in  his childhood;  La    Chaux-de-Fonds,   his   home

ON  THE VERGE



town,  was  a  great  centre  of  early  anarchism, and  the  name  of  Bakunin,  who  died  only  11 years   before   Cendrars  was   born,   was   very green   in   the   memories   of  the   local   watch­ makers,  who  were  devoted   to  both  him  and Kropotkin. The   later,   critical  portion  of  the book  is rather aridly  written,  and  unlikely  to provoke  interest  in  those  not  yet familiar  with Cendrars, though  it  will be  useful  to students. We still  need  a fluently  written  book on Cen­ drars   that  approaches  him  with  his  own  zest and  imagination.
o.w.


*** 	J. E. cHAMBERLIN. Ripe  was the  Drowsy Hour:  The  Age of Oscar Wilde. McGraw-Hill Ryerson,  $11.50.  The   earnest   importance  of Oscar  is  the  theme  of  Ripe   was  the   Drowsy Hour.  Every  decade  a  bright   young  man  dis­ covers  that   Wilde's   jests  have  a  serious  side, and  Chamberlin is  this  decade's  young  man. Much  that  he says about  Wilde  has  been said before-a  great  deal  of  it  by Oscar  himself, who never doubted  his importance as a central and  symbolic  figure  in  his  age,  which  indeed he  was. Many  writers  have  noted  how  Wilde · seemed   to  focus  all   the  artistic  fads  of  the Nineties,  have  traced  his relations  with  fin de­ siecle  anarchist politics;  Chamberlin  performs
a  service  by showing  that  Wilde -a man  of
wide and miscellaneous  erudition, also focussed the  perplexities  of earlier  Victorians about  the nature   of  truth   and  falsehood  and  helped  to resolve them  in his teachings  on the  autonomy of  art   ("Art never  expresses  anything but  it­ self")   in  which  opposites  can  co-exist  without  the  conflicts  that   life  inevitably  incurs. Only in  art  can  we afford  to make  the  Nietzschean  journey  beyond  good  and  evil.
o.w.


***   FREDERICK  W.   ROWE.  Extinction: The Beothuks     of	Newfoundland.    McGraw-Hill Ryerson, $10.95· Tragedies such  as the  extinc­ tion  of human  peoples  lend  themselves  to sen­ sational   treatment, and   the  story  of   the  Beo­ thuks in Newfoundland has been  no exception.  Their   numbers  have  been  vastly  exaggerated, hence  increasing  the  enormity  of  their  extinc­ tion;   some   writers   have   seriously   talked   of
5o,ooo    Beothuks    inhabiting   Newfoundland
when the white men came, where  it is doubtful if  their   terrain  could   have   supported   more than  2,ooo  in a  hunting and  fishing  life. The real brutalities committed  by fishermen and furriers   against   individuals  and  small  groups have  also  been  turned   into  massacres  of hun-
 dreds  of people for  which  there  is no firm  his­ torical  evidence.  All  this,  in  its  way  detracts from  the  special  misery of what  actually   hap­  pened; that  the arrival  of the  white  men  was fatal  for  the  Beothuks  not  only  because  of the actual   killings,  but   even   more   because   new diseases steadily  reduced  the Beothuk  remnant, and  the  occupation of  traditional fishing  and hunting grounds  created  starvation conditions  in  the  territory  remaining   to  the  Indians. In Extinction  Frederick   W. Rowe  endeavours to assess the  facts  on  the  basis  of  real  evidence, and  his book should  be read  as a corrective  to the  mass  of sensational  and  unscholarly   writ­ ing  that   has  been  devoted   to  the  Beothuks. The  reality was dismal enough; it did  not need embellishing.
L.T.C.


**  PETER    OLIVER.    G.   Howard    Ferguson: Ontario  Tory. University  of Toronto Press for the  Ontario Historical   Studies  Series,  $14.95. The  Ontario Historical  Studies  Series is a  pro­ ject    supported    by   the    Ontario   provincial  government. It  aims eventually  to embrace  all aspects of the  history  of Upper  Canada, Can­ ada  West and  Ontario from  1791  onward. It will  include  a  general  history,  and  studies  in the  economic, social, political  and  cultural de­ velopment  of the  province.  It will  also, as  at present  planned, include  some  ten  volumes on the  more significant  premiers  of Ontario. The  first   volume   in   the   whole   series   is   Peter Oliver's biography of G. Howard  Ferguson, premier from 1923 to 1930, an active Tory politician   for  years  before  his  elevation,   and later   Canadian  High   Commissioner   in  Lon­ don.  It is not  the  best of send-offs  for  a  new series. Surely  it  would  have  been  more  auspi­  cious to have started   the  series  with  a  Life  of a  man  complex  in character, like John  Sand­ field Macdonald, or of an  influential  advocate  of provincial  rights  like Oliver  Mowat. Fergu­  son was an adept  machine man, with a narrow  political   vision,   whose   best   achievement   is probably  the  cleverness  with  which  he  edged his  province  out  of   prohibition. The   rest  is pedestrian  politics. Ferguson  deserves  three  or four   thousand   words   in   the   Dictionary    of Canadian  Biography  and  will  probably  get  it when his turn  comes. There is just not enough in  his  achievements,  which  were  mediocre,  or his personality, which  was humdrum, to justify the  four  hundred   pages  Peter   Oliver  has  de­ voted  to them.
o.w.
