$2.50  per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·71
Winter, 1976


REMEMBERING RODERICK HJIIG-BROWN


Articles
BY  W. J. KEITH, ELLEN D. WARWICK, LOUISE E.  NELSON-VANHEE, GARY  ROSS, LEONA M.  GOM, PETER BALTENSPERGER, RENE LABONTE, SHERILL D. GRACE

Poems
BY RALPH GUSTAFSON, TOM MARSHALL, ANNE CORKETT, MIRIAM WADDINGTON, TOM WAYMAN

Review Articles and  Reviews
BY  KATHY MEZEI, G. V. DOWNES, RALPH GUSTAFSON, E.  E. GREENGLASS, MARGARET STOBIE, SANDRA D JWA,  CHRISTOPHER RINGROSE, FRANCIS MANSBRIDGE, ANTHONY APPENZELL, S. E. READ, BARRY  CAMERON

Notes
BY  MARY F. MARTIN


A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW









PRIDE OF
PLACE AND PAST





MARGARET  LAURENCE's latest book, Heart  of a Stranger  ( Mc­ Clelland & Stewart,  $8.95)  is not entirely her newest, for it consists of  essays and memoirs written  over a fair  period, some of them published in magazines, others
-like a  fascinating  essay on  Mahammad 'Abdilla  Hasan,  the  so-called "Mad
Mullah" of Somaliland-written and  put aside for many years. Together,  with their  echoes of experiences  that  stretch  from Margaret  Laurence's  prairie child­ hood,  through   her  periods  in  Somaliland   and  Ghana,   down  to  her  Ontario present, they form  not merely an evocative background  to her fiction, but also a minimal  autobiography of a remarkable  author  and a remarkable person.
What  emerges most strongly from Heart  of a Stranger  is that fact about  recent Canadian writing  which  an  excess of thematic  criticism has tended  to obscure: the extremely concrete feeling that  emerges out of a heightened sense of place and past in so many  of our  novels, short stories and  poems. Canadian writers-the best of them at least-have become highly visual in their way of expression, and real  as  their  thematic   motivations  may  sometimes  be,  it  is  more  often  their preternaturally intense projection of the Canadian land and Canadian life that  is likely to stay in our  minds.  I believe that  recent Canadian critics were attracted to  the  thematic   element  in  our  writing  largely  because of  the  simplistic  and deceptive  obviousness  of  the  themes  which  the  last  generation   of  Canadian writers -the  MacLennans and  Mitchells-tended to  develop.  Our  literature in  the  past  had  strong  didactic  inclinations,  and  what  the thematic  critics have found is largely the product  of that lingering desire to teach. And this, I think, has led  them  to  pay  less than  sufficient attention   to  the  way  in  which  Canadian geography  and  history are being used by our writers symbolically yet at the same time  almost  super-realistically   to  create  a  mythology very  different  from  that developed by verse-writers in the 194o's, a mythology characterized by an almost

EDITORIAL

chthonian  attachment  to  the  solid  earth   and  flesh  of  here  and   then,   memory incarnated into  myth.
This  is something Margaret Laurence seems to have  recognized  clearly  enough through reflecting  on  her  works  as well as her  world,  for her  novels, while  in no direct  way autobiographies, have  been rooted  always in experience intensely  lived and   understood. Manawaka may,  as she says, exist in  the  mind  and  not  on  any maps,  but  it  would  hardly be  there  but  for  the  existence  of  the  map   town  of Neepawa for Margaret Laurence to have grown  up in. All of us, as writers,  know that   our  works  come  into  fullness  only  when  their  umbilical  cords  are  severed, but  also  that   there  is no  spontaneous generation in  art  any  more  than  in  life; somewhere there  is  always  the  parental organism   that  the  creative imagination has abandoned. Or  perhaps never  truly abandoned, which  may be why Canadian novelists  and  poets these  days are so concerned  to evoke and  at  the same  time  to exorcise  the   realities  of  place  and   past.  Of  this,  in  "A   Place   to  Stand On", Laurence speaks  wisely:

My writing,  then,  has been my own attempt  to come to terms with  the past. I see this process as the gradual  one of freeing oneself from the stultifying  aspect of the  past,  while at  the same  time  beginning  to see its true  value-which, in the case  of  my  own  people   (by  which  I  mean  the  total  community,   not  just  my particular family),  was a determination to survive against whatever  odds.

(These words were written and  published,  incidentally, before Margaret Atwood's Survival, which  in turn  was written without  prior reading  of Laurence's piece, an illustration  of  the   way  ideas,   when   they  become  timely,  often   appear  simul­ taneously  in a number of minds.)
In  a later  essay, "Where the  World  Began", Laurence develops  this dual  aspect
of  the  past  in  the  writer's consciousness,  and  relates  her  personal  experience to the  more  general  shifts of consciousness  that  make us seek through history  for the myths that  distinguish a culture moving towards maturity.

When  I  was eighteen,  I  couldn't  wait  to get out of that  town, away from  the prairies.  I  did  not  know  then  that  I would carry  the land  and  town  all my life within  my skull, that  they would form the mainspring and source of the writing  I was to do, wherever and however far away I might live.
This was my territory  in the time of my youth, and in a sense my life since then has been an attempt  to look at it, to come to terms with it. Stultifying  to the mind it  certainly  could  be,  and  sometimes was, not  to  the  imagination. It  was many things, but it was never dull.
The  same, I  now see, could  be said for Canada  in general.  Why on earth  did
generations  of Canadians pretend  to believe this country dull?  We knew perfectly well it wasn't.  Yet for so long we did not proclaim what we knew. If our upsurge of so-called nationalism  seems odd or irrelevant  to outsiders, and  even to some of our own people (what's  all the  fuss about?), they might try to understand that for many  years we valued  ourselves  insufficiently, living as  we did  under  the  huge

3

EDITORIAL


shadows of those two dominating figures, Uncle Sam and Britannia.  We have only just begun to recognize our legends and to give shape to our myths.

* 	* 	*
One  direction in which  the inclination to undervalue ourselves has been remark­ ably  reversed  in  recent  years  is, of course,  in  history.  I do  not  mean  merely  the kind   of  imaginativeness that  has  characterized  the  writings of   historians like Donald Creighton, who  are  themselves  notable  myth-makers in  the  best sense of the  term,  but  also the  care  and  interest  and  mere cash that  are being  put into  the rediscovery  of  the  past's   very  texture through the  resurrection  of  material long buried  in archives  and family treasuries.
This  has  been  a  nation-wide process,  and  its  result  has  been  a  fleshing  out,
not   merely  of  national  history,   but   also  of  long  neglected   regional   historical traditions. Everywhere in  Canada old memoirs  and  cycles of correspondence are becoming available for  the  first  time,  and  one  notable   project   has  reached  the stage  of first publication in Vancouver, where  the University of British  Columbia Press  has  started to issue scholarly  editions  of items  preserved  in the  rich  collec­ tions of the  Provincial Archives  in Victoria  and  the City Archives  in Vancouver.
One  of the first two volumes  to appear in the series is a work that  has long been
known  and  used  by local  historians, though  it had  to wait  until  I975  for  publi­ cation:   The   Reminiscences  of  Doctor   ]ohn   Sebastian   H elmcken    ($I 8.95). Helmcken, London-born of German parents, came  to Fort  Victoria in  I85o; he died  in  Ig2o,  having   played  a central  role in  the  colonial  politics  of  Vancouver Island  and,  later,  British  Columbia, and  having  been deeply involved in the events that   led  up  to  British  Columbia's entry  into  the  Canadian  confederation. His experience and  his memories were rich, and  early in the  I 8go's,  having  written  a series  of  reminiscent articles  on  Victoria in  the  I 8so's for  the  Victoria Colonist, he sat  down  to his autobiography, beginning with  his London childhood and  his medical  apprenticeship at  Guy's  Hospital in pre-Lister  days,  and  describing  very vividly  the  Victoria he  first  knew,  dominated  as  it  was  by  the  Hudson's Bay Company's fur  interests; the  great  changes  that  came about through the  gold rushes  from  I858 onwards; and  the  political history  of the  Pacific  coast  colonies until  British  Columbia's separate existence  vanished  into  Confederation; at  this point,  with  dramatic  appropriateness, Helmcken put  down  his pen.  His later  life was  that  of an  ageing  general  practitioner in a small  provincial capital, and  we have  to see it  from  outside  in  fugitive  references  made  by other  writers,  notably  Emily  Carr, who in her  Book  of Small  presents an engaging  vignette  of Helmcken in  his old  but  active  age  as  one  young  patient  knew  him.  The  Colonist  articles, somewhat more  sharply  impressionist  than  the  Reminiscences, are  printed as an Appendix, and,  with  a  useful  introduction by Dorothy  Blakey Smith, the  whole volume  combines not  only  to give  a  unique  view of early  European life on  the

4

EDITORIAL

Pacific   coast,   but  also  to  project   a  sympathetic  personality  whose  qualities of humour, of  endurance, of  good  sense  tempered sometimes  by  excessive  loyalty, emerge  very clearly through a serviceable and often eloquent prose.
There was more  of the self-conscious writer  about  Susan  Allison,  whose Recol­
lections  are  published as  the  second  volume  in  the  UBC  Press  series,  under the major title  of  A Pioneer Gentlewoman  in British Columbia  ($I 8.95). As Susan Moir,  the  author of  these  recollections  arrived  at  Fort  Hope  on  the  Fraser  River with   her   mother  and   her   spendthrift  stepfather,  Thomas  Glennie,  who   was attracted  by  the  thought of  becoming  a  country squire  in  the  rich  land  of  the goldfields.  Fortune did  not  flow as easily as Glennie  had  expected, and  in I 864 he vanished, leaving  his wife and  children  to make do as best they could  with  the help  of genteel  acquaintances in  Victoria  and  the  Fraser  Valley.  In  I 868  Susan Moir  married John Fall  Allison,  after  whom  the  Allison  Pass is named. Allison was one of the  pioneer  farmers in the Similkameen Valley and  in  the  Okanagan, and  one  of  the  founders of  Princeton, and  Susan  shared   the  life of  a  rancher­ trader that   he  pursued. She  was  deeply  interested in  the  Indian  peoples  of  the region,  and  deeply  concerned as she watched  their  decline  during her  decades in these  valleys  whose  late  nineteenth century   remoteness  is hard   to envisage  now that  they are  traversed  by main  highways.
The fact  that  she was often  involved in life at its most elemental-- for fire and flood  several  times  left  her  homeless  in  a  virtual   wilderness-did not  diminish Susan  Allison's  interest  in the  artistic  accomplishments she had  learnt  in her girl­ hood,  and  after  Allison  died  in  I 897  she began  to turn  to writing,  publishing a long  poem  on  the  Similkameen Indians  and  also  a  paper  on  them  which  was published   by  the  British  Association  for  the  Advancement of  Science.  But  most of her  work  went into  the Recollections which are here printed. They  are the only major   account by  a  woman   of  pioneering   life in  British  Columbia during the mid-nineteenth  century;  it  would   not  be  inappropriate  to  describe   A  Pioneer Gentlewoman in  British Columbia  as the  far  western  equivalent of Roughing  It in the Bush, though  Susan  Allison had  greater qualities of philosophic endurance than  Susanna Moodie  and  also a greater empathy not only with the wild land  but also with the strange and sometimes alarming people she encountered.
Mrs.  Allison's  actual text  is in  fact  quite  short; together  with  a couple  of  her versions of Indian stories as an  appendix, it runs to little more than  So pages. The remainder of the  200 odd  pages of A Pioneer Gentlewoman  of British Columbia is taken   up  with  Margaret Ormsby's long  introduction and  her  elaborate notes identifying and  telling  the  basic  history  of every  individual and  place  named in the  text. Some  such  apparatus was needed, since Susan  Allison writes as if on the assumption that   her  readers  would  know  everyone  she  mentions; Dr.  Ormsby's work  has  been  done  so  well  that   what  we  have  is not  merely  the  story  of  one woman,   but   a  kind  of  shadow  history  of  the  extraordinarily  beautiful  region

5

EDITORIAL


through  which   one   travels   from   Hope   across  the  ranges   to  the  Similkameen
Valley and on to the western shores of Okanagan Lake.
Finally,  a note  of regret.  Roderick  Haig-Brown, a contributor to the first issue of Canadian Literature, a constant friend  of the  journal, a personal  friend  of the editor,  has died  with  sudden grace  in his garden, near  to the unsleeping river  he loved.  We  know  all  of our  readers  who  have  read  his works  will  join  us in our sadness  over  the  departure of this splendid prose-writer  who carried  the  tradition of  the  great   naturalists and   was  the  true  heir  of  Isaak  Walton and  of  W.  H.
Hudson.
GEORGE WOODCOCK





BLUE CITY

Ralph Gustafson


The  air is quiet and  the window holds a truce with  the sun
red
where it went down. The sill is dust.
This is
a dirty city.
Blacks sing in the dusk slowtirne.
They  have invaded the neighborhood
with harmony,
greatchords like sorrow,
a broken armchair, TV,  bedsprings
Junk
on the street,
and  the universe constructed  of stars.
The  Lord God was hung on the lonesome tree

they sing in the dusk.

6

RODERICK HAIG-BROWN




W.].Keith





LANARTICLE  appearing in 1958, Roderick Haig-Brown  w"' described as standing  firmly "in  that front rank of Canadian writers whose works are  published in New York and  London, as well as in Toronto, and  whose repu­
tations  are  international, rather  than  national  or  provincial.m  I consider  this a valid assessment, yet it must be admitted  that his name is not one likely to spring to  mind  whenever  contemporary Canadian  writers are  being discussed. He  is a presence, certainly, but he remains as a writer shadowy, almost aloof-definitely outside  the  current  "establishment". Most anthologies ignore  him, and  we look for his name in vain in such literary surveys as Butterfly on Rock or Survival  (his absence from the last-named  is all the more surprising, since survival is a recurrent theme  probed deeply and  variously throughout  his work) ; even Pacey's compre­ hensive Creative Writing  in Canada  includes only two perfunctory  references.
The  main  explanation  for this neglect lies in the fact that  Haig-Brown  works
best in a slighted genre. Though he has produced a number  of works of fiction, aimed at both  juvenile and  adult  readers, his most significant writing has been in discursive,  non-fiction  prose,  and   those who  devote  themselves  to  this  literary genre are almost invariably  the last to be recognized as writers of enduring  merit. In  Haig-Brown's case, however, there are a number of other  contributory factors. His favourite subject-matter, wild life in general and fish in particular, places him in a special category likely to earn him the devotion of enthusiasts but the neglect of others. At the same  time, his interests transcend  the usual classifications; thus in most libraries his work will be split between fiction, literature, history, natural history, sociology, juvenile books, etc., and  this inevitably discourages any unified response  to his  achievement.   Finally,  his  international  publishing  history  not­ withstanding,  he  is a  decidedly  local writer,  focusing  his attention  on  western North  America  (particularly, of course, British Columbia), and  it is well-known that,  despite the  provenance  of  this magazine,  Canadian literary  activity in its publishing,  advertising,  fashion-setting  aspects is concentrated  upon  the  eastern part  of  the  country,  with  all  the  unconscious preferences  and  prejudices  that always accompany such a situation. The  aim of this article  (by one who, though

7

RODERICK HAIG-BROWN

a  student  of the  literature   of wild life, is no fisherman  and  lives and  works in Toronto) is to try to right  the imbalance; I hope to offer an introductory survey of Haig-Brown's  work (in the logging terminology of which he is fond, a "cruise"), to establish its basic pattern  and assess his overall contribution.
Haig-Brown's  first book,  Silver:  The  Story  of  an  Atlantic  Salmon,  was  pub­ lished in  I93I; his most recent, The  Salmon, appeared  in  I974· Across a span of over  forty  years, these two  provide  an appropriate frame  for his literary  career. The  common  subject-matter indicates  a lifelong interest  in  fishing and  ichthy­ ology, and  it  is noteworthy  that,  although  the former  was written  for  children and  the latter for adults, although  the first is narrative  and the second expository, both  are  didactic,   informative.   Haig-Brown  has  always  been  an  instructor,  a teacher  or nothing. The  connections  between the two books suggest  that his work does  ind ed
between them:  Silver was published in England  and has an English setting, while The  Salmon,  though  international in scope, was commissioned by the Canadian government  and  is primarily  concerned with the North American  situation.
An approach  to Haig-Brown's  writing is best made, in fact, through an account of  his "transplanting" from  southern  England,  where  he was born  in  I 908,  to Vancouver  Island,  which has been his permanent  home since  I933· His roots go deep  into  the English countryside.  His maternal  grandfather, Alfred  Pope,  who had  gone to school with  Thomas  Hardy,  was mayor of Dorchester  in  I886,  the year Hardy  published  his Dorchester  novel, so could legitimately think of himself as the mayor of Casterbridge.  Haig-Brown spent many holidays in Dorset during his  boyhood,  and  on  one  occasion  accompanied   his  grandfather   to  tea  with Hardy  at Max  Gate.2  And it was in the environs of  Dorchester  that  the founda­ tions of his knowledge  of outdoor  life were well  and  truly laid.  "In  my earliest fishing years,"  he  writes, "I fished  between  the  chalk  hills of Dorset  until  any change  in  the river  Frome  or  the fish that swam  in it or the duns  that  hatched from its weed beds marked itself instantly upon my mind."3
But  alongside  a  loving  familiarity  with  the  natural   world  he  also inherited
literary  interest  and  activity  from  both sides of his family. His grandfather  was the author  of The  Old  Stone  Crosses of  Dorset and his father,  who was killed in the  First  World  War,  had  published Sporting Sonnets and Other  Verse in  I903 and My  Game-Book  in I 9I 3, the latter dedicated to the five-year-old Haig-Brown who has since called it "as beautifully written a piece of tradition  as any that ever sought  to mold a boy"  (RNS, 2I6). With this background,  it is scarcely surpris­ ing  to  find  him  well  versed  in  the  English  rural  writers,  and  we  encounter references  to  them  throughout  his work -naturally  enough,  to  lzaak  Walton and  Charles  Cotton  (Haig-Brown's interest in fly-fishing leads him to prefer the latter   to  the  former),  but   also  to  Gilbert   White,  Cobbett,  Surtees,  Barnes, Jefferies, Hudson,  and  Henry  Williamson  (whose Salar the Salmon  [I935l was

8

RODERICK HAIG-BROWN

anticipated to some extent  by Haig-Brown's  own Silver). Although  I would not wish to imply that  Haig-Brown  is anything  but Canadian in his mature  writings, it  is  important  to  lay  some  emphasis  on  his connections  with  the  essentially English rural  tradition.
Haig-Brown  first came out  to Canada  in  I925,  travelling to British Columbia and   the  American  Northwest,  working  in  logging-camps  and  on  surveys, and thereby  gaining  his initiation  into what was to become "years of living with  pros­ pectors  and  trappers   and  stump  ranchers"   (RNS, I4). Before  long,  he  had registered a trap-line  in the northern  part  of Vancouver  Island  and  entered  into a hand-logging  partnership. He returned  to England  between  I 929 and  I 93 I, at which  time Silver was published,  but he came back to Vancouver  Island  in the latter  year, and  after  working for some time as professional  hunter, trapper and guide,  he married  and  settled down  by the Campbell  River,  home of "the  most famous  run of big salmon in the world."4   In the books written since then-The Salmon  is his twenty-third-he can be said to have made the mountains, forests and waters of British Columbia  his own.
The  relation between an immigrant  and  his adopted  country is a complex one, especially for  a  writer  who  has established  his literary  niche  as a detailed  and wide-ranging   commentator  on  his  new  land.  One  gets  the  impression   when reading  through  Haig-Brown's  work that  he has been particularly  conscious of a responsibility to justify his change  of allegiance by a thorough  mastery of all the historical, zoological and sociological aspects of the province in which he lives. I have  taken  my  title  for  this  essay from  a  passage in  Starbuck  Valley  Winter (I 943)   in which Don Morgan,  following in his creator's footsteps  (he is also an immigrant, but in his case from  the United  States),  is about  to establish a trap­ line in the wilds:

He had  names of his own for most of the creeks and swamps he could see, and even for  some of  the  logging roads. Standing  there, looking over it,  he felt  a sudden  pride in  the country, a sense of ownership through knowledge, through having set his feet upon so much of it in the three years he had lived there.5

Similar sentiments recur in Haig-Brown's  writing. Here, for example, is the continuation of the account  of his Dorset upbringing  in A  River  Never  Sleeps: "In   the  years since  then  I  have  fished one or  two Vancouver  rivers  [i.e., the Nimpkish and  the Campbell]   until I know them as well as I know the Frome;  I feel at home in them, and everything  I see in them or about them has its meaning for me, as the life of the  Frome  meadows had"  ( RNS, 83). Ultimately,  he can observe:  "I fish the Campbell  with a sense of ownership fully as strong as that of any  legitimate  owner  of fishing rights in  the world.... The  sense of ownership grows simply from knowing the river" (RNS, 350).
The  image of exploration  and  discovery may be seen as a unifying thread  that


9

RODERICK HAIG-BROWN

links his numerous  writings.  In  his historical books for schoolchildren-Captain of the Discovery ( I 956), The  Farthest Shores ( I 960)  and Fur and Gold  ( I 962)
-he has brought  to life the exploits of the men who first explored both the coast
and  the interior  (Bering,  the Spaniards,  Vancouver,  Mackenzie,  Fraser, Thomp­ son,  etc.)   and  in  the  last-named the  administrators   and   politicians  (notably James  Douglas)   who  consolidated  the  achievements  of the  explorers  and  initi­ ated  the subsequent  development  of British Columbia.  In  Silver and  Return  to the  River   (I 94 I ) , at  first sight  books of  a very different  kind,  a  comparable  interest is to be found,  though  this time the discovery is scientific; Haig-Brown is fascinated   not  only  with  the  life-cycle of  the  salmon  but  with  the  efforts of dedicated  human  beings  (the  unnamed  "Good  Fisherman" in the first, Senator Evans and Don Gunner  in the second)  to discover and reveal the complex secrets of  natural  processes.  In   his  juvenile  adventure  stories-especially  Starbuck Valley  Winter   and  The  Whale   People  ( I962) -the boy-heroes embark  upon personal voyages of discovery, venturing  into new  places and  proving themselves in new accomplishments.  Haig-Brown's  own  role as fact-finder  and  sympathetic  interpreter is less dramatic but  no less real;  he communicates  to  his readers  a sense  of  intellectual   discovery  through  painstaking  research  and  a  lifetime  of practical  experience.




HIS FAVOURITE SUBJECT  is, of course, fishing, and  he has written  on virtually  every aspect of it, from practical handbooks like A Primer of Fly-Fishing  (I 964)   to  authoritative surveys like The  Western   Angler  ( I939), though  he is at  his best in  the  more  personal mode, in such  books as the four accounts  of the  fisherman's  year divided according  to the seasons, and  books of essays on  fishing  subjects  like  A  River  Never  Sleeps. But  he is by  no  means confined  to the  literature of angling.  His ownership through  knowledge extends over many  other  areas. One  of his novels, Timber   ( I942;  published in England as The  Tall Trees  Fall [I943] )is based upon his intimate  acquaintance with the logging industry,  and  he made  a special study of cougars in order  to write Ki-Yu
( I934;  later republished  as Panther)  and another of the traditions of the Indians
of the Pacific Coast for The  Whale  People. But the seal on his intellectual owner­
ship of his adopted  province  was set by his writing of The  Living  Land  ( I96I)
-a  veritable  anatomy  of British Columbia,  which surveys its natural resources and  future  prospects on the basis of the studies produced by a series of Resources Conferences.
This  whole image of ownership  can, however, be carried  too far. Haig-Brown
is acutely  aware  of the fact  that  "any  given generation  of men can have only a lease, not ownership,  of the earth; and one essential term of the lease is that  the


10

RODERICK HAIG-BROWN

earth  be handed  on to the next generation  with  unimpaired  potentialities."6 He also  knows  that  ownership  of  any  kind,  though  accompanied   with  privileges, carries  with  it  duties  and  responsibilities. It  was not  enough  for him  merely to discover and enjoy the wild life and natural  beauty of British Columbia; these constitute  a  priceless  heritage  that  must  be  both  shared  and  conserved.  The sharing  of both his knowledge and his enthusiasm for the natural world has been accomplished  by means  of his writings. The  need for conservation  has similarly been  urged  through   the  written   word,  but  it  has  in  addition   been  furthered through his action and example.
Although  his preoccupation  with wild life had  been fostered  by his early  up­ bringing  and  the  practice  of his father,  he is by no means  a  blind  follower of traditional  ways. While his father's  book reflected, in the son's words, "a vigorous man's  love of shooting and fishing" (RNS,  2 I7), his own development  has been towards  protection.  During  the  half-century  in which he  has known  Vancouver  Island,   the  situation   of  its  wild  life has  changed  out  of  all  recognition,  and Haig-Brown  has recognized and adapted  to this change. As he writes in Measure of the Year  ( rgso):

I hunt  as often  as I can  get out,  with greater enthusiasm and  interest than  ever; I shoot  less and  less, and  with  an  ever-increasing reluctance, because  a wholly  new factor   has  come  in  to  destroy  all  the  calculations that  once  seemed  to  make  my measure of  killing  reasonable and  sane: I am  no longer  a single  hunter among a few others  of my kind; I am a part  of a vast and  always increasing army  of hunters that  suddenly seems  to  threaten the  future of  every  wild  creature I love.  (MY,
199)

More recently he has made comparable statements concerning the population explosion among fishermen, and has proposed more stringent legislation and advocated  rules of self-discipline to meet the new dangers  involved. Although  to some outsiders  the  combination  of the  roles of hunter,  angler  and  protector  of wild life seems contradictory, Haig-Brown is one of our leading  conservationists, and  he carries special conviction because of his previous, and  continuing, experi­ ence as a sportsman.
He defines conservation as "a religious concept-the most universal and fundamental  of  all  such  concepts,  the  worship  of  fertility  to  which  man  has dedicated  himself in every civilization since his race began."7  But his arguments have hardly  anything  in common  with those of urban  arm-chair conservationists who all too often  have little or no familiarity with the wilderness they profess to defend,  and   whose  opinions  are  abstract  and  theoretical.  Like  Thoreau  and Jefferies before him,  he is prepared  to defend sport  because "carrying  a gun  has taught  me a thousand  things about  animals and  country  and  wind and  weather that  I should  not otherwise have  bothered to learn"  (MY, 203). He knows the differences between  hunters  and  butchers  (MY, 205),  and  insists that  genuine


ll

RODERICK HAIG-BROWN


sportsmen "are the keenest  and  most effective of all conservationists" (MY, 201), that   they  can  play  a  powerful   and,  indeed,  essential  part  in  any  rational  pro­ gramme of protection.
In  recent  years,  Haig-Brown has devoted  a great  deal of time  and  effort  to his civic duties  as  magistrate and   judge.  This  side of  his life has found  little imme­ diate  reflection  in  his writings   (two  amusing essays in Measure of the  Year, the boys'  adventure story,  Mounted  Police  Patrol  [ 1954], some  uncollected articles  in  popular  magazines),  and   it  seems,  indeed,   to  have  interfered  substantially with  his  writing-The Salmon is his first  book  for  a  decade, and  even  this  is little  more  than   an  up-to-date recapitulation of  earlier  material. We  may  well regret  this,  but  it  is  not  difficult  to  see the  relation  of this  work  to  the  overall  context  of his life. Haig-Brown is very much  a humanist, and  he knows  that  the framing of wise laws and  the  firm  but  humane enforcement of them are  essential to our  own survival  and  also to that  of  the other  species with  which  we share  the earth. His  emphasis on  ethics  and  restraint extends  from  conduct when  hunting and  fishing  to  behaviour in  day-to-day living.  Whether as magistrate, sportsman or  writer,  he  actively  upholds the  need  for  human und rstanding,
and  discipline.


A DETAILED  LITERARY EXAMINATION of Haig-Brown's writ­
ings  soon  reveals  the  existence  of  two  marked-and, at  first sight,  opposed-­
attitudes  recurring  regularly in  his  work.  The   first,  one  of  the  features that probably derives  from  the  English  rural  tradition, is an  ever-riding concern  for truth and  accuracy. Thus, in  his dedication to Silver  he writes: "I have  tried  to make  it an  interesting story and  at the same time I have tried  to keep to the truth about salmon  and  their  ways."8   Similarly,  the  preface  to  Ki-Yu begins:   "Every detail  of panthers and  their  ways set down  in this book is strictly  accurate-yet accurate knowledge of  panthers is not  easily gained."9   And  in  the  discussion  of his own  work  that appeared in  the  first issue of this magazine, he told  how  his early  logging-companions begged  him  "to  tell the  truth, the  whole  truth, not  as poets  and  writers  and  film  directors see it,  but  as  they themselves  saw  it -the daily truth  of hard work and  danger.mo
Yet  against   this  earnest   preoccupation  with   unadorned  fact  is  a  balancing acknowledgement of  the  sense  of elevating  wonder  to be d rived
edge of wild things.  This  is best described  at the opening  of Measure of the Year:

The  great  clear  signs of the changing  seasons, the migration  of geese and salmon, of caribou  and  buffalo,  the swell of leaf buds in spring, the first fall snow on the high mountains,  have meaning  beyond themselves and a power of association that must go far  back  into  the earliest  development  of man. They  have passed, many

12

RODERICK HAIG-BROWN

of  them,  through   wonder   into  superstltwn   and  religion,  and  are  now  become wonder again and living pleasure. (MY, 3)

Ultimately, however,  these  two  attitudes are  by  no  means  incompatible.  Haig­ Brown  is impressed  by the realization  that  truth  is itself wonderful. This is, indeed, one  of  the  paradoxical  (and   pleasing)   results  of  recent  scientific  discoveries  in ichthylology. "In  my  own  lifetime," he  writes,  "many  questions  about salmon  have  been  answered, many  mysteries have been revealed.  But every answer,  every revelation  serves only  to  make  these graceful  forms  lying over  the gravels  at  the headwaters of a  mountain stream  a more  affecting  miracle." 11  Haig-Brown finds the  same  principle  at  work  in  all  branches  of  natural  knowledge; it  is not  too much  to say  that  the  prime  impulse  in  his work  is to reveal  this  miracle  of  the living  fact.
Fact  and   the  interpretation of  fact:   these  not  only  make  up  the  content of
Haig-Brown's writings   but   also  define  their  form.  In  Return   to  the  River,  for example, the subject  is the life-cycle of a chinook salmon, but Haig-Brown's introduction  of  Senator  Evans   and   Don  Gunner the  scientist   is  more  than   a technical device  to  guarantee authentic observation. The two  follow  the  move­ ments  of the  fish because  it is in the interests  of man  that  their  habits  are known and  their  runs  preserved. The  chinook-run on  the  Columbia River  is  appropri­ ately  scrutinized  by  conserving politician  and  research  scientist  because  it  is on co-operation between  these  two  that  the salmon  depend in  the modern world  for their  survival.  Moreover, truth lies in the combined  wisdom  of  the  two observers.  Don  Gunner is  prepared  to  admit that  "you  old  anglers  come  much  closer  to understanding a  place  like  this  [the  breeding-pool]  than  scientists  do."  Evans,  who  is sage  as well as senator, replies that  scientists  have  taught him  about "the rhythms of life," and  proceeds  to articulate the  pattern that gives the  whole  book its subject-matter, its form  and  its underlying  philosophy: "From algae  to plank­  ton  to insects to fish, from  diatom to daphne to stonefly  to fish again. From  there to  the  birds  and  animals, finally  man.  And  it  all starts  from  decay,  chemicals,  bacteria. I  like  it.m 2    Return   to  the  River  is  a  narrative of  natural history,   a demonstration of  ichthyological research,  a  conservationist tract  and  a  celebra­ tion of the natural process all in one.
In  an  earlier  book,  Pool and Rapid  (1932), Haig-Brown employs imaginative
means  to convey  a comprehensive truth  beyond  the  scope of statistics  or  prosaic description. Based  on  his  experiences  on  the  Nimpkish  River  in  northern  Van­ couver  Island   (called   the  Tashish   here), the  book  chronicles the  history  of  the river  and   its  human  inter-relations from  the  earliest  times.  Thus it  begins  in pre-history  with  the  world  of the  Indian gods and  continues through  the  period of early white settlement to the  threat  to the river  (conveniently defeated in what seems  now  an  over-optimistic climax)   from  industrial  development. Alec Lucas,

13

RODERICK HAIG-BROWN

who  properly  stresses the  function  of the  river as a structural, unifying  device within  the narrative,  classifies the  book as "a  novel,ma but it is hardly  fiction in the  accepted  sense. It  is best described, I think, as imaginative  history-history which   recognizes  myth   as  a  legitimate   part   of  the  psychological,   tradition­ sanctioned  truth  of its subject,  and  admits created but representative figures (the  young Indian  chief, Skookum the first white settler, his son Redhead)  as elements within  a  contrived   but  essentially  accurate  account  of  an  extended  historical process. Haig-Brown  reveals the  breadth  of his own viewpoint  by criticizing that of  the  technological  experts  brought  in  by the  Tashish  River  Power  and  Pulp Company: "They  talked  of her  [the  river]  as  a  thing;  they could not see that romance  and  mystery were hidden  in every crevice of her rocks, in every twist of her current,  in every smooth curve of her gracefullength." 14 Had  Pool and Rapid been  written  a little  later,  I suspect  that  Haig-Brown  would  have  found  words with  less vague  associations than  "romance" and  "mystery"  to convey his sense of  wonder  at  the  span  of   historical  continuity,  but  as a  whole  the  book well illustrates  his attempt  to reconcile the needlessly opposed perspectives of scientific fact and literary creation.
Haig-Brown seems to have been drawn towards fiction (though, under the circumstances, imaginative  narrative  might be a more suitable term)  by the opportunity it provides for genuinely creative presentation. It is not altogether surprising,  however,  that  his novels are  most memorable  for  their  informative, non-fiction  qualities.  This  is as true,  I  believe, of  his juvenile fiction  as of his adult  novels. Thus  Starbuck  Valley  Winter  derives its interest  from  the account of trapping  in a remote valley, the dangers of such a life under  tough conditions, the sheer struggle for survival; these are far more compelling than the rather perfunctory   plot-mystery  centred   upon  the  sinister  figure  of  a  rival  trapper. Similarly,  in Timber, the recreation  of life in the logging-camps, the techniques and  even  the  terminology  of  logging  (which  Haig-Brown  reproduces  exactly, together  with a useful glossary),  hold the attention  more readily than  the incon­ clusive love-triangle  or  the  excessively didactic  (and  now outmoded)  discussion of trade-unionism. The  background  proves more absorbing than the events played out against it.
His  most  important  novel  is  unquestionably  On  the  Highest  Hill  ( 1949). Though it shares some of the  weaknesses of Timber-a  rather  rambling narra­ tive, an  uneasy compound  of elements that  do not belong integrally  together­ its interest  lies in its hero, Colin Elmslie, whose compulsion towards a wilderness not yet discovered and spoiled by mankind  provides the central focus of the book. It  is a  novel  half-way  towards  allegory. The  first confrontation  between  Colin and  the mountain takes place in the school-room when he is required  to write an essay:

RODERICK HAlG-BROWN

No writing had ever poured from him so fast as those stored-up thoughts of the high mountain. He had stopped only when his imagination climbed beyond easy reach of words, and he scarcely knew that he had stopped; he had simply followed his thoughts into the mountains beyond reach or touch or need of pen and paper. Thought  had climbed in him and with him, away from the room, from the valley, from  the  reality of the road horne and  suppertime and  his father's  return  from work.15

Colin's life-pattern is implicit within this moment of revelation.
On   the  Highest  Hill  records  the  withdrawal   of  a  solitary;   Colin's  love  of wilderness develops into acute misanthropy. His mountain  must be unsmirched, inviolate:  "He  thought: this is of me and I am of it. Nothing here is evil, nothing is touched,  nothing  dirty  or destroyed"  ( OHH, 83). Away from  mankind,  "he was free  to  think  clearly  for  the  first time  in  his life"  ( OH H,  2I 5). Though warned  by an older  hermit-woodsman  that  he may die in them if he persists in retiring  into the mountains,  Colin must follow his destiny. His tragedy  (possibly too  strong  a  word)   is that  complete  solitude,  whether  desirable  or  not,  is no longer feasible: "Seems like there's no place left where a man can keep to himself and  act  like  a  man"   ( OHH, 294).   Ultimately,  in  a  climax  which  offers an inadequate resolution  of  the  tensions that  have  been  building  up  in  the  plot, Colin  turns  to  violence  to  defend  his supposed  right  to  isolation  and  dies a fugitive on the mountain  to which he has retreated.
According  to Alec Lucas, Colin Elmslie "becomes the author's final comment on civilization's ever increasing encroachment on the natural world and its suppression of man's freedom  of spirit.m6  My own response is rather  different;  I find Colin limited as a character  because he represents what is virtually a distor­ tion of his creator's general attitude. For all his dislike of developers and polluters, Haig-Brown  is not  a  solitary;  indeed  much  of his strength,  as  I  have  tried  to demonstrate, lies in his active, positive role as defender of an authentic wilderness (his vigorous and eloquent protest over the governmental spoliation of Strathcona Park  in the 195o's is a case in poine 7 ). In his neurotic escapism, Colin stands in marked  contrast  to  Haig-Brown's  own  clear-sighted,  balanced   response  to  the often depressing tensions inherent  in modem  living. Part of the unease I detect in the  novel  stems  from   a  difficulty  in  reconciling  his  apparently  sympathetic  presentation  of his hero with  the superiority of his own views as manifest  in his writings as a whole.
In   a   recent  interview,   Haig-Brown   was  questioned   about   his  preferences among the literary genres and replied:  "I think novels really give you the greatest satisfaction  in a way, because you live most intimately  with them,  but  I like the essay form.  It's straightforward and  practical, and  has a lot more useful purpose today  than  a  novel does.ms Like so many  writers on the natural world,  he has effectively explored  the indeterminate area  between fiction and  non-fiction.  But

RODERICK HAIG-BROWN


his best work,  I  have  no doubt, is to be found  in his essays and  discursive  prose. Here   he  is most  at  his  ease.  An  adequate structure is  provided   by  the  natural divisions of the  seasons  or, often  enough,  can  be imposed  by the terms of his own interests  and  personality. (One of the most satisfying  of his books, A River  Never Sleeps,  combines  unity  of  subject-fish-lore-with month-by-month  seasonal presentation,  and   buttresses   the   artistic   structure  by  juxtaposing biographical experiences in  England with  those in North  America. )  An open  form  allows him to  combine practical  advice   with  anecdotes,   reminiscences,   didactic argument, evocative  d scription.
inclines,  and  although in  Measure of  the  Year, properly  considered among  his
best  collections,  he  demonstrates his versatility  by studiously  avoiding any  direct discussion of angling, for the  most part  we are rarely far from  the river-bank.
Roderick  Haig-Brown has strong  claims  to be considered the  North  American "Compleat Angler." This  continent has, doubtless,  produced more  expert fisher­ men,  but  none  who can  rival  him in his comprehensive grasp of all that makes up the  experience of angling or  can  convey  a quintessential impression  of  its mani­ fold  attractions. Fishing,  we  might  say, is where  he starts  from.  For  him,  as for Izaak   Walton, it  is a  multi-faceted activity,  and  the satisfactions to  be  derived from  it include appreciation of the  beauty  of his surroundings, recognition of the numerous species of wild life around him, sheer  joy in a challenge that  combines  skill and  judgment with  strength and  physical exertion,  the warm  companionship of friends,  and   (recalling Walton's definition,  "the  contemplative man's  recrea­ tion")  "the flowing  ease of thought that  comes upon  me as I fish"  ( FS, I 3). He classifies  angling   as  "an art,  ephemeral,  graceful, complicated, full  of tradition yet never  static,  ... as much  a  part  of  civilization  as most of the  minor  arts  and sciences"  (FS,  I I).  Although a  devotee, he is never  pompous  about  it; he states frankly that  he  fishes  because  he  likes it  ("I go fishing  to  please  myself, not  to catch  my breakfast or prove anything" [FS,  I 2] ) , and  the words that  tend to recur in his angling  books are "pleasure," "beauty" and  (especially) "observation."
Success in angling depends upon  intimate "local  knowledge" ( FS, 70), and  in acquiring this the  fisherman must  develop  his powers of observation and  sharpen his responses. The key-phrase here  is "observation as participation" (MY, 4)  - the  necessary  preliminary to  ownership through  knowledge.   In  order   to  attain expertise,  the  fisherman is impelled  to "see"  the countryside in the  most positive sense:  "A  stream  is just  that  to a casual  observer-a  pretty  flow of water  with life on its surface  and  growth on its banks. To a fisherman it is pools and  runs and riffles, hidden   rocks,  sunken   weed  beds, gravel  bars,  log  jams  and  cut  banks."19
The   fisherman's  concerns, indeed,  extend   to  include   the  whole  of  the  natural world: "Nothing that   moves  or lives within  range  of his vision and  understand­ ing  is unimportant to  a  fisherman. Birds,  trees,  mammals,  insects  and  weeds,

RODERICK HAIG-BROWN

weather  skills, meadows  and  rock and sky, are all part  of a fisherman's world  and of his pleasure" (FS, 120).
Once  again,  comparison between  his English  and  North  American experience proves   central.  In   Fisherman's  Summer   he  makes   an   important   distinction between  "a  parent   stream" ("the river of growth, the  scene  of boyhood  endea­ vors, successes and  failures")  and  "a  home  river," to which  the  adult  fisherman comes and  brings  experience and  skill to be applied  and  tested.20 The former, for Haig-Brown, was  the  Dorset  Frome,  but  his "home river"  is the  Campbell, and  he shares  with  the  reader  a loving  exploration of every  inch  of  it. The  child,  in Wordsworthian phrase,  is father of the man  in a very real sense. The whole struc­ ture  of  A  River  Never  Sleeps  depends  upon  this  relation,  and  an  extended pas­ sage from  Fisherman's Spring  needs to be quoted  not  only  for  the subtle  distinc­ tions it makes but for the admirable prose in which it is written:

No man  loves the felt-soled boot and  breast-high  wader  more than  I do, no man throws a fly at leaping current  waves with greater  pleasure or keener expectation. Yet  I  remember  well the  easy, unhampered   walking  through  the  meadows,  the calm of resting under  a shade  tree to watch a long, quiet  reach of gliding water, the  rhythmic,  tearing  sound  of cropped  grass as some rich  dairy  herd  fed  along the  river's  banks.  And  even  more  than  these, the chance  meetings  with  country people  about  their  country  affairs-hedgers and  ditchers,  herdsmen  and  shep­ herds, keepers and  millers and farmers, the exchanges of tobacco and  information,  acceptance  and  acknowledgement  of each other's  business in the  meadows.
Here,  these things have their dimly recognizable counterpart; the trapper  in his cabin  on  lonely lake  or stream  fork, the  occasional game  warden  or  prospector. We accept the deer coming down to drink, the bear seeking berries, the beaver swimming, in place of the slow-stepping Devons, the gleaming Jerseys or the block­ bodied Shorthorns.  They  make  a  wilder scene, more exciting  and  unpredictable, essentially different.  One  may prefer  it, as I do, but  the other  remains  a part  of
angling, a part of fly-fishing. (FS, 214-4)

This  seems to me a key passage  for establishing  Haig-Brown's unique  merits  as a writer; its  argument  depends upon  subtle  discriminations of  response  that   can only  be  conveyed   through  a  carefully  modulated control   of  language. This  is highly effective  prose, yet it is difficult to isolate its qualities. There is a deceiving simplicity  about  it; it  flows so easily that  its excellence  is apt  to pass unnoticed. The   concentrated  multi-sensual precision   (in  "the   rhythmic, tearing sound   of cropped  grass,"  for instance) is masterly,  but we find no dominating use of  meta­ phor,  no  conscious  high  points,  no  ostentatious   patches  of "fine  writing".  None the  less, the  prose can  express,  clearly  and  economically, all  the  distinctions and nuances  he wishes to make.  Without striving  for any  dazzling effects, it is richly evocative,  yet keenly exact.  We can  visualize each scene as it is brought before  us
-not in  the  minutest detail,  perhaps, but  in all its essentials.  "Neither sport  nor art," he  tells us, "should be  unnecessarily  cluttered and  complicated" (FS, 45).

RODERICK HAIG-BROWN

One  might say that  his prose shares its qualities with the rivers he loves -lucid, briskly and smoothly flowing, containing abundant life.




E	who grew up in the English countryside becomes a Canadian adult,  but  one  who  nevertheless remains  essentially rural  in  his  atti­ tudes. He  is maturely  aware  of the importance  and  dignity of the  regional  and the  provincial,  and  is not  the kind of writer to be overwhelmed by an imagined sense of isolation-"whatever measure of isolation I have known," he comments when  pressed, "I do  not  regret."21   He  defends  rural  values  with  fervour  and determination, insisting in The  Living Land that  "a sound and  prosperous farm population  is just as important for its human  yield of valuable citizens as it is for its  more  commonly  recognized  yield of milk or  potatoes  or  grain"   ( LL,  8g). Unimpressed  by the  complacent  attitudes  of cosmopolitans,  he  refuses to equate reality with  the  latest urban  fashion, and,  though  countryfied, he is a master of the  urbane: "City  people talk  of 'escape'  when  they talk of country  living. To me a cow is a reality. Escape is homogenized,  pasteurized milk, delivered to the back-door  in  a disposable carton" (MY, 263). The  tone is light-hearted, gently ironical, but Haig-Brown  is wholly serious in his convictions. A few pages earlier, with  earnest  sincerity,  he has noted  how  he hopes to protect  his children  "from the  abysmal  ignorance  of  the  city, from  the  naivete of extreme  sophistication"  (MY, 260). We recognize the committed tone of the unabashed  countryman.
As a writer whose main subject-matter is the natural  world, Haig-Brown  does not fit readily into literary categories that  are determined  by either chronological periods or national  boundaries.  In  many  respects, he has more in common with the  early  nineteenth-century explorers of British Columbia  than  with the Cana­ dian  writers of the last  thirty  years that  count  technically as his contemporaries. He  is read,  in  the  United  States,  Great  Britain  and  elsewhere,  by a readership that,  if modest in size, is loyal and  appreciative,  but he is read, of course, as an outdoors-writer,  not for any particular  Canadian quality in his work. Yet, in his undemonstrative way, he is firmly nationalistic,  though  without  any trace of the flamboyant  or the self-conscious. He shows little interest in  ponderous discussions of "the  Canadian identity," and is unlikely to grant  that any insuperable  or even unique  problems confront  Canadian authors. Asked some years ago to comment on the future  of Canadian writing, he observed:  "A writer should aspire to write for  the  world,  or  as large  a section of the  world  as he can  reach,  and  for this reason conscious nationalism  as opposed to its incidental  expression has little real significance."22   He  is concerned  himself with  more  basic matters.  Preoccupied with the conservation  of the Canadian environment,  he knows only too well that the threats  do not necessarily come from the other sides of borders; his opponents,

18

RODERICK HAIG-BROWN

more   often   than   not,   are  Canadian  developers  and  logging-companies-and even Canadian governments.
As a  significant   contributor  to  Canadian  culture, he  has  found   his  English
origins  a stimulation rather than  an inhibition. He  has always  been aware of the fact   that   "Americans  and   Canadians share   some  traditions  that   British   and Canadians do  not:   traditions of  mass immigration and  western  development, of the  opening  up  of  land   and   the  development of  a  country without hereditary rulers" (MY, 16). On  the other  hand,  he is not ashamed to admit that  he put aside many  possible  advantages when  he left  England; with  the  figure  of  Hardy  still bright  in his remembrance, he acknowledges that  "for  the writer  ... there  is more to know,  more  to understand, more  to use in the thousand square miles of Dorset than    in   the   three   hundred  and   fifty  thousand  square  miles  of   [his]   own province.'m But he has never  regretted his choice;  the gains outbalance the losses. He  has  resolutely  gone  his own  way, and  finds nothing to lament in  his position (as  the  urban  cosmopolites  would  describe  it)  "outside the main  stream."
Above  all, it is the  invigorating, pioneering  challenge  of the  Canadian  experi­ ence  that  he  has found  so stimulating. He  has succeeded  in grafting  his  English sense of tradition and  history on  to that  purposeful  energy  that  is so characteristi­ cally  North   American. "I  love  American and  Canadian  literature," he  writes, "because they speak directly  to me with a fierce urgency and a closeness that  is not in  things  European" (MY,  178). There can  be  no  better  summing-up of  his attitudes-and of his inspiration-than the following sentences from  Measure
of the Year:

It  is good to be writing  at  the start  of a country's history instead of at the end, to be looking on  new unwritten  places and  new unwritten  people,  trying  to  under­ stand,  trying to find shape  and  pattern  and  meaning where  none has  been found before. There  is no limiting tradition  at such a time, no need for precious form or pretty  experiment.  There   is  only  the  subject,  too  vast  to  be  seen  clearly,  too amorphous  to be pressed into  completely recognizable shape,  an  infinity in which to search and  reach  and  feel for finite things. It is a freedom  beyond all conceiv­ able  freedoms,  bounded  only  by  the  imagination's   reach  and  the  imagination's skill in finding words for it. If there can be no full success, if  neither  we who write nor  the times we write in are ripe for profound  understanding, at least we are in and of the country's flood, her spring, her increase. (MY, 25)

To  this "increase," Roderick  Haig-Brown-still the explorer  and  the  discoverer
-has made a notable,  enduring contribution.

NOTES

1 Stanley  E.  Read,  "Roderick  L.  Haig-Brown,"  B.C.  Library  Quarterly, 22 (July
1958),  15.
2    For  his account  of this visit, see "Hardy's Dorset," Tamarack Review, 2   (Winter
1957)' 46-54·

RODERICK HAIG-BROWN


3  A  River  Never  Sleeps   (New  York: Morrow, I946), p. 83. Hereafter cited  in text as RNS.
4    Fisherman's Spring   (Toronto: Collins,  I95I), p. I85. Hereafter cited in text as FS.
5    Starbuck Valley Winter [I 943]  (New York: Morrow, I 954), p. 34·
6   Measure  of the  Year   (Toronto: Collins,  I95o), p. 226. Hereafter cited  in text  as
MY.
7       The Living   Land   (Toronto: Macmillan, I96I),  p. 21. Hereafter cited  in text  as
LL.
8  Silver:  The Life  Story  of an Atlantic Salmon  [I 93I] (London: Black,  I 947), p. 7·
9   Ki-Yu: A Story  of Panthers  (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, I934), p. 1.
10   "The Writer in Isolation," Canadian Literature, I  (Summer I959), 8.
11  Fisherman's Fall  (Toronto: Collins,  I964), p. 85.
12   Return to  the  River: A  Story  of the  Chinook   Run   (New  York: Morrow, I94I),
p. 48.
13  Alec Lucas,  "Nature Writers and  the Animal Story," in Carl  Klinck,  ed., A Literary
History  of Canada (Toronto:  University  of Toronto Press,  I965), p. 378.
14  Pool and Rapid   (London: Black,  I932), p. I42.
15  On  the  Highest   Hill   (Toronto: Collins,  I949), p.  II. Hereafter cited  in  text  as OHH. It may  be  noted   that  this  novel  takes  on  a special  interest  for students of Canadian fiction,  since  its  theme  bears  significant   relation  to  the  later  explora­ tions of man  and  his artistic conquest  of nature in Ernest  Buckler's  The  Mountain and   the   Valley  (I952)  and   Gabrielle  Roy's   The  Hidden   Mountain   (1961). Characteristically, however,   Colin's   compulsion   is  to  retreat  into  the  mountain, not-despite  the  passage  quoted-to  express  it  in  words  like  Buckler's  David  Canaan or in paint like Roy's Gedeon.
16  Lucas,  p. 388.
17  See  The Case   for  the   Preservation  of Strathcona Park   (Victoria, B.C.:   Daily
Colonist, I955).
18   "Roderick Haig-Brown Talks   with  Joan   Heiberg," B.C.  Library   Quarterly, 35 (April   I972), 5·
19  A Primer  of Fly-Fishing (Toronto:  Collins,  I964), p. I26.
2 ° Fisherman's Summer (Toronto: Collins,  I959), p. 49·
21   "The Wrier  in  Isolation," I I.  It is worth  noting  that  Haig-Brown's subtitle  for this article  was "A surprised exploration of a given subject."
22    "Two Authors Look  at  the  Future of Canadian  Writing," Canadian Author and
Bookman, 46  (Spring I97I),  4·
23     "Hardy's Dorset," 52.










20

TO SEEK
A SINGLE SYMMETRY




Ellen D. Warwick







GWENDOLYN MACEWEN h"' &ated  that  in he< writing she hopes  to construct a myth.  At its simplest,  myth  can  be defined  as an  attempt to make  concrete and  particular a  cosmic view.  Mythopoeic writers  are  those  who "suffering the  lack  of an  acceptable or  widely  believed  body of mythic  material to  give  order   to  their   imaginative  restatements of  experience, set  about  con­ sciously to  make  a mythic  frame for their  works.m  In  her four  major  collections  of poetry,  The  Rising  Fire, A Breakfast  for Barbarians, The Shadow-Maker and  Armies  of the  lvf oon,  MacEwen works  toward creating such  a frame. Its  basic shape  is indicated in  the  poem  "Tiamut" (The  Rising  Fire) : in  a  divided   but holy universe all things strain  toward reunion.

A woman called Chaos, she
was the earth inebriate, sans form, a thing of ripped  green flesh
and forests in crooked wooden dance, and water a wine drunk of itself
and boulders bumping head-on the fool clouds.

Tiamut, her breasts in mountainous  collision, womb a cave of primeval beasts, thighs torn greatly in the black Babylonian pre-eden -

Woman, she winced at the coming of Marduk;
his hands laid her out flat and angry on a bed of void,
Marduk  stretched  her out, and Tiamut  lay, coughing up black phlegm.

and Marduk  flattened her belly under one hand and sliced Tiamut down the length of her body - the argument  of parts, the division of disorder­ and made the sky of her left side
and fashioned the earth from her right ...

21

TO SEEK A SINGLE SYMMETRY

We, caught on a split organ of chaos, on the right half of a bisected goddess
wonder why moon pulls sea on a silver string,
why earth will not leave the gold bondage of the sun,
why all parts marry, all things couple in confusion why atoms are wrenched apart in this
adolescent time.

In  an era of lean, spare  lines, The  Rising Fire ( 1963)  impresses a reader with its verbal  richness. Words  pour out with abandon  as if they have magical  power and a right to exist without reference to an objective reality:

under the knuckles of the warlord sun how long do we have how long do we have, you ask, in the vast magenta wastes
of the morning world when the bone knuckles under for war when the bone intersects as the tangents in the district of the sun
centipedes and infidels, snakes and the absence of doves?

("The Breakfast")

Nor  does  MacEwen   use structure   to  control  the  outpourings.   As  the  above example  illustrates,  her  verse form  can  be as arbitrary  as her  meaning.  Neither rhyme  nor  punctuation helps contain  the  flow, though  the  latter  appears  more often  than   the   former.  Instead,   each  poem  gives the  impression  of  an   un­ disciplined creation that gushes out in emotive language.
Though  its surfeit  of words,  its looseness of thought  and  its arbitrary  forms display  little  feeling  for  integration, The   Rising  Fire's thematic  material  tends toward  synthesis. At  times  it  surfaces as  a  desire  to  recapture  a simple,  more perfect  state.  In  "Evidence   of  Monday,'' a  young boy,  new  to  the  world  of experience,  remembers  the  innocence of a "brief  green world."  Exiled to work­ a-day  reality, he longs to return  to "eden  under  the tugging  years,/  eden at the end of d'ays." Though "The Breakfast" is less well-realized, it echoes the urge to capture   the   world,   create   a  self-contained   space.   " ... eat   only  apples/  to improvise an eden.... by eating  the world you may enclose it./ seek simplicities; the  fingerprints  of the  sun  only j and  the moon duplicating  you in  your body,/  the  cosmos fits your  measures;  has  no ending."  The  poem cannot  sustain  close analysis,  yet it  is in  part  an  attempt  to integrate  experience into a  meaningful whole that "fits" man and that man can fit into.
One  recurring  image  that  exemplifies MacEwen's  tendency  toward  synthesis amid  disintegration   is  her  use of  the  circle, a  figure that  encloses. The  shape appears  in such  diverse guises as a ferris wheel, a conical hat, the sun, the moon, the  earth,  an  orbiting   path,  an  egg, a  man's  eye and  even  the  movement  of neutrons and protons around an atom. In a three-poem sequence about space exploration  she parallels the "sweet fanatic  pace" of the smallest bit of molecular


22

TO SEEK A SINGLE SYMMETRY

matter  with  the  movement  of  planets;  compares  the  circling  of an  astronaut's spaceship with the "sweet/  concentric circles" of the mind's logic:

but look to limits for a minute
as the introverted eye looks inward
we find the inward Eye looking out and finally, the astronaut swims through yellow yolks of total suns toward the ultimate inquiry

("Nikolayev and Popovich")

The  outward   journey  that  orbits  the globe  becomes a  pattern  for  the  journey inward  to enclose, integrate,  find meaning.
The  inquiry, the search for meaning,  rarely meets with success. The astronaut, reaching  the  limits of the  universe, discovers not  walls, "but  mirrors/ reflecting the  question  mark/ of  his  own  face  back.... " Similarly,  a  ride  on  the  ferris wheel  means  to move at  "the/ point  of absolute inquiry/ and  stop  nowhere  on the   mind's   circumference."  Though   integration   may  never   be  attained,  the attempt  counts. "I ask you to revise your codes of holiness ... 1/ ask you to join me on/  the ferris wheel." ("The Ferris Wheel".)
In  addition  to the figure of the enclosing circle, MacEwen  utilizes dance  as a symbol of synthesis. Frequently  the poet seems to gasp at the diversity of a world where  "all/ must  be taken  into  account/ sooner or later." Dance  can  become a primitive,  ritualistic  ceremony  that  keeps the  unknown,  feared  complexities  at bay. " ... dance  before it is possible to walk,/ dance  crookedly into  the difficult night."   ("Poem  for G.W.")  More  often, however, dance  takes on  the symbolic function  Yeats  assigned it,  the  role of an  image so pure  that  thought  and  the form  used  to  express it  fuse into  one. "The  Athletes"  in  the  park  perform  a classical ballet  with  their  "syntax  of  perfect  limbs".  So  welded  are  spirit  and matter  in  their  play  that  "the   big forums/  of the skull collapse  and/ the  soul blows through  its horn  of bone."  In  "The  Two  Themes  of The  Dance",  Adam must  dance  inward  to find  the  identity  he longs to express. God,  on  the  other hand,  can  dance  outward,  express pure image, since his perfect state  allows an integrity of intention  and action man lacks. In "The  Absolute Dance", MacEwen says explicitly  that  "something  sustains usj between  the  crib  and  crypt ... the dance  which  is the synthesis."  Each  man  struggles to discover this synthesis on his own.  Old  dancers  are  knocked aside for "they  have no answers."  By being willing to  try  each  of  us can  "move  towards  the  total  power  of the  dance/ to seek a single symmetry, an hour of totality." ("The Absolute Dance".)
Both  the encircling  astronaut  and  the energetic dancer  highlight  the sense of desperate   movement   this  poetry  conveys, its  "sweet  fanatic   pace".   Fleeting moments of stillness, then,  might imply the attainment  of the integration sought.

TO  SEEK A SINGLE SYMMETRY

In  "Black  and  White", a  poem strongly reminiscent of "Leda  and  the Swan", such a still point of perfection  occurs. The  winged muse plummets down toward a supine  body, onto "knees  which crashed the sheets" and  "ohj dark  outrageous anchoring  and  the  beauty  of it." The  single, ultimate  meaning  is momentarily caught  in  the still point  Art  effects when it unites the ideal and  the real, mates eternity with time.
Despite  a lack of cohesion in individual  poems, Rising Fire shows MacEwen working toward  the cosmic view she wishes to create. In  a divided  world strain­ ing  toward   reunion,   her  circle  and  dance  imagery  point  up  a  drive  toward synthesis. Though   the  movement  is usually thwarted,  the  poet at  least  suggests that in the realm of art an instant of such perfection is possible.




IN THE  PROSE INTRODUCTION to her Ig66 volume, A Breakfast for Barbarians, the  normally  reticent  author  offers some comments  on  her  atti­ tudes  vis-a-vis the  world and  writing.  "My  prime concern has always been  with the raw material  from  which literature  is derived," she says, "not  with literature  as an  end  in itself." As her  title implies, she writes with a sense of  hunger  and appetite   "even  though  it be  satisfied  with  such  diverse  first  courses  as  kings, dancers, sperm whales, astronauts, escape artists or fruits from algebraic gardens." The  horrors  of modern  civilization  have cut  man  off from  himself, leaving him exiled, alienated.  To  this state  of affairs MacEwen  says:  "No-rather  enclose, absorb,   have  done.  The   intake.... I  believe there  is  more  room  inside  than outside. And  all the diversities which get absorbed  can  later  work their way out into  fantastic  things.... It  is the intake, the refusal to starve./ And  we must not forget  the grace."  This  brief statement  echoes "Tiamut." The  world is holy but not  whole, in need of being rescued from its fragmented,  chaotic state. The  poet acts  as saviour  by constructing   a  frame,  a  world-view  that  absorbs  diversities, giving them significance within an over-all pattern.
One  of  the  greatest  differences  between  Breakfast for Barbarians and  Mac­
Ewen's  earlier  poetry is the  new discipline imposed on the language.  As Davey remarks,  "Gone   is  the  inflated   poetic  language  of the  first  two  books which presented   MacEwen   as  a  variation   on  the  ecstatic  dryad,   and   in  its  place impressively  realistic  speech  which  presents her  as a  most  attractive   flesh and blood woman."2   Part  of the change springs from a realization  that  words should point  to  the  real;   the  poet  walks in  fear  of  abstractions.  "For   you  I  would subtract  my images/  for the nude  truth  beneath  them."  ("Poem".) Thus, in "It Rains,  You See," the boys shy away from the pathos of mathematics,  preferring to  work  with  concrete  objects  such  as chewed  pencils and  fingers. There  also

24

TO SEEK A SINGLE SYMMETRY

appears  a  delightful  coupling   of  the   formal   phrase   with   the   colloquial that imparts to the  work,  however  exotic the subject  might  be, a sense of immediacy:

now there  are no bonds except  the  flesh; listen- there was this boy, Manzini, stubborn with
gut stood with black tights and a turquoise leaf across his sex

( "Manzini: Escape Artist")

As  in  earlier   works,  verse  form  in  Breakfast  for Barbarians seems  to  spring from   a  spontaneous  creation;  poetry   is  discovery   as  well  as  communication. Perhaps  because   thought  patterns are  more  clear,  line  divisions   become   more organic, make  more  sense. Occasionally, MacEwen lapses into  pure  prose ("Ultimately, Said  The  Saint,  We  Are  All Of  Us Devouring Each  Other")  or, conversely,  sets  herself  the   task  of  working   within   a  confined,   artificial form ( "Modrakhina" and  "The Cyclist  In  Aphelion"). She  is at  her  best  when  line length, rhythm and  punctuation are unobtrusive, conversational:

they knew what it meant,
those egyptian scribes who drew eyes right into their hieroglyphs, you read them dispassionate until the eye stumbles upon itself blinking back from the papyrus

("Poems in Braille")

"There is a  great  unspeakable wheel  which  keeps/  Us slender  as  myths,  and green   with   sleep."    ("Green  With   Sleep".)  In   Breakfast   for  Barbarians  the enclosing   circle,  be  it orbit,   arc  or  microcosm,   continues to  grope   toward the synthesis  it symbolizes.  In  "The  Kindled Children'' the  lens,  the  sun  and   the children's eyes all suggest  this figure.  More  important, the  one  kindling the  fire creates  at  the same  time,  through the integrity  of his thought and  action, his own miniature universe:

When you hook a whole afternoon into a small lens and change it into fire for the kindled children, when you move about, having little need
of wider fires, whole burning worlds, or anything beyond the intact moments of your deeds.

The  orbiting astronaut traces  this same sort  of enclosure: "his  body  has  become a  zodiac  of  bone/ its  own  myth,  a  personal   cosmology." ("The  Astronauts".) And  the  moment  of poetic  inspiration, which  MacEwen portrayed as mating of ideal  and  real  in  "Black  and  White", here  becomes  a circular action  compared to the path  of a planet  whirling  around a sun.

TO SEEK A SINGLE SYMMETRY


More   often,   as  the   introduction  indicates, the  theme   of  eating   becomes  an analogue for the need to contain the universe.

let us make an anthology of recipes, let us edit for breakfast
our most unspeakable appetites - let us pool spoons, knives
and all cutlery in a cosmic cuisine, let us answer hunger
with  boiled chimera
and  apocalyptic  tea,
an arcane salad of spiced bibles, tossed dictionaries-
( 0 my barbarians
we will consume our mysteries)

("A Breakfast for Barbarians")

By consuming we  will  regain  and  make  one  with  ourselves  that  which  has been divided, split,  and   hence  lost.  In  a  society  damned as  materialistic and  overly consumer-oriented, the  poet  literally  turns  the  tables.  She  suggests  that  consum­ ing  is sacred,  a sign  of a holy  hunger that  longs to digest everything, thus  bring­  ing  together  all  into  an  integrated whole. Even  man  himself, she says only half­  playfully,  may  be  the  object  of a divine  appetite that  wants  to subsume him into
a larger  existence:

Finally, the gigantic universal spoon like some­ thing from the cover of an SF magazine, dips down with the shining symmetry of a rocket's nosecone towards the earth,  towards us here on our geographic  tablemats at a sure, alarmingly sure angle ...
It seems that we the consumers are also consumed.

("Ultimately, said the Saint, We Are All of Us Devouring Each Other")

In  Breakfast  for Barbarians to  devour  signifies not  a cannibalistic but  rather a
Eucharistic act  wherein all creation unites  in a feast of holy communion.
The impulse  to  consume may  be sacred; still, it is doomed  to leave  the  con­ sumer  always  dissatisfied.  No matter how much  is taken in, more remains waiting for  the  intake. Simple, uncomplicated, "bright ancestral food"  has  disappeared from  our  complex  cities.  Now,  "we  eat  and  we eat  and  we know and we know/ that   machines work  faster  than   the  machines of our  mouths.  ("Strange Break­ fast".)  Modem  technology makes  possible  for  man  such  a  plethora of  experi­  ences to be integrated that  one staggers  back,  daunted by the  task.  In  this sense,

TO SEEK A SINGLE SYMMETRY

"we  have  too  many  myths."  Having  too  many  means  we are  left  with  none, since  no  single  pattern   emerges  to  give  coherence  to  the  confusing  array  of choices. So crowded  is the altar  with dishes that  one cannot  perceive the sacred food. As MacEwen  puts it in "The Last Breakfast,"

sometimes  the food refuses to be sanctified
and  you stand  over the table beating your chest and  screaming impotent graces

What  is the solution when "the  food has become an anathema'' and "the whole thing  is  decidedly  insane"?   One  consumes  anyway  because  in  so  doing  can conjure  up the image  of "dark  men running  through  the earth/ on their  naked, splendid feet." The  bared  foot touching earth  brings back into contact  two parts of a Tiamut-sundered universe.
In The  Rising  Fire both the astronaut  and the dancer  moved toward  a "single symmetry"  but  did  not  attain  it. So also in  Breakfast   for Barbarians  the intake proves insufficient. After incorporation  comes transformation. "And  all the diversities which get absorbed can later work their way out into fantastic  things." ("Introduction".)  MacEwen   pictures  transformation   not  as  change   imposed from outside, but  an  intrinsic  movement coming from the inside out. A sculptor is surprised  to find  a shape  emerging  of its own accord: "I was working  with clay and  a  face/  inherited   my fingers;  nor  did  I  ask it/ to  rise from  the  grey amorphous  mass." ("The Face".) The poet becomes a queer "incredible  animal" in her garden  "working  from the inside out".  ("The Garden  of Square  Roots".) The  escape artist finds "there  are no bonds except the flesh" when he slides free "as  a snake from/  his own  sweet agonized skin".  ("Manzini: Escape  Artist".) The  very universe is expanding  outward,  transforming  itself in a cosmic sigh into nothingness.  ( "Thesis".)
A  reader  is  not  sure  where  MacEwen's   transformations lead:   to  the  void
mentioned  above  or  to  some  bright  new order?  In  "Safed:  Israel,"  the  poet mourns that  "In  all things/  we lack the final syntax, the total  form./ The  eye is not full on Safed."  Art fails to achieve the total form, for Chagall  paints the eye turned sideways and  hence communicates only a limited half-vision. But
Once
the Eye turned full of Safed and wrestled  for the light with that  total  and sarcastic  dark, and  won the  jacob-angel fight.

("Safed: Israel")

The  capitalized  "Eye" suggests that  mystical union  with some Godhead, a com­ ing together of the ideal and  the real, captures a moment  of integration that Art cannot.  In  "Subliminal," on  the other  hand,  the instant  of perfection  occurs in

TO SEEK A SINGLE SYMMETRY

sexual  union  when  two beings are transformed  into one and  time stops:  "where there  is  not  time/  no  differentiation   of identities/  ... Christ  oh  Christ  no one lives long/  along  that  layer."   ("Subliminal".)  And  finally, art  does capture  a second  of supreme  integration when  it transforms  both  perceiver and  perceived into  one entity. Thus,  the  poet communicates  the thing-in-itself:  "with  legs and arms  I  make  alphabets/ like in  those children's  books/ where  people  bend  into letters and signs." ("Poems in Braille".)
In   the  final  poem  of  the   volume,  "The Aristocracies",  MacEwen   brings together   all  these  avenues  to  perfection -sex, mysticism, art-and  presents them in the figure of the dance. Cannot,  she wonders, the body of her lover-muse and  the  body of God "dance through  the same diagonal instant/ of my vision." If so, "I will altogether  cease to speak/  as you do a brilliant  arabesque  within the bas-relief/  your body bent like the first letter of an unknown,  flawless alpha­ bet." The  reader gives thanks that  such happens only in the realm of  MacEwen's desire.  If coherence,  order  and   perfection  were  achieved,  the  poet  would  no longer need to function as saviour. Silence would be the result.
Breakfast for  Barbarians communicates  above all the wish to bring  pattern  to
the overwhelming  diversity of contemporary  society. Images of the circle, eating, transformation   and   the   dance   suggest  that   experience  must   be  contained, ingested,  changed   and  figured  forth  in  a  new  perfected  mode.  Modem   man struggles  under  an  ever-growing  body of past history and  faces the possibility of new worlds and  new time systems being discovered. All those realms have to be comprehended, then  integrated, lest man find himself irrevocably alienated  from the  universe.  In  the  Arcanum   poems and  those dealing with  the  Middle  East, MacEwen  tries to go backward  in time and space; in those dealing with modem technology she reaches forward  into the future.  Both movements seem to spring from  the same impulse, a need to gather  up every jot and tittle so as to fit it into her  mythic  "brief  green  world".  Only  by taking  the necessary step first, that  of encircling and absorbing all, can the poet hope to transform  reality into some significant  whole.




BECAUSE IT   URGES an emphatic  "no" to nay-saying, Break­ fast  for  Barbarians is  an   affirmative   book.  MacEwen's    rg6g  volume,  The Shadow-Maker,  delves into  the  negative  aspects of man's  experience.  Though individual   poems do  not  show  the  drive  toward  enclosure  and  synthesis to the degree that  earlier works do, the collection itself is a self-conscious effort to mark off one  particular area  of life. Evil, the dark  regions of existence, must also be incorporated into  myth  if  the  poet's  vision is  to  be a  whole  one. The  author  subdivides these regions into "Holy  Terrors", "The  Unspeakable", "The Sleeper"

TO  SEEK A SINGLE SYMMETRY

and  "The  Shadow-Maker". Unfortunately, the  divisions remain  artificially imposed, yielding little insight into either  the poetry or the rationale  behind such a partition.  Indeed,  the entire book comes perilously close to being poetry written to prescription.  NEEDED: a volume on the tragic sense of life. "I have come to possess your darkness, only this," says the title poem. The statement  sums up the purpose of Shadow-Maker.
MacEwen's usual involvement  with language  is blunted  in  this  book. Rather
than  fearing  abstractions,  she  revels in  them  and  hence slips all  too often  into banality.  "Love,  move  me,  cast  me furious  through  space;/ Love,  bend  me to your  time -/ Test  and  revise me,  I  fear  your face !"  ("Two Voices")   comes dangerously close to the verse of ladies' magazines. Though  she wishes to contain the  darkness,  the  author   complicates  her  task  by  refusing  to  make  evil  real, concrete,  and  hence  believable.  In  "Westminster  Abbey",  by  contrast,   Irving Layton   uses  a  cluster  of  tangible  objects-chapels, monuments,   tombs-to stand   for  a  corrupt   tradition   that  he  despises. MacEwen,   however,  explores twilight  regions by direct  statement  about  emptiness, loss, the  absence  of good, but  without  linking such concepts to experiences that  might arouse the appropri­ ate emotions:

And once fearful I no more wanted Sunflowers, conquests, kingdoms, stars, But that priceless loss of things-
The unbearable dark and sweet lack of wanting
The death in the mouth, the utterly empty eye,
The easy wealth of nothing for it needs
No tending and no holding

("The Pillars")

Because  the  language   remains   subjective,  abstract,   the  shadowy   realms  are ultimately   unreal.  The  "priceless  loss of  things"  does  not  leap  out  from  the writer's imagination to take on a full-bodied meaning in the reader's mind. The blandness of MacEwen's  evil is typified in "The  Taming  of the Dragon," where the  beast  becomes  both  unbelievable  and  foolish with  harmless  claws,  golden teeth and a wreath of flowers around his neck.
Perhaps  the  poet's  experiment  with  more conventional  verse forms  has con­
tributed  to the dilution  of her  language.  In  any event, she seems ill at  ease in these  more  structured   poems, hampered,  forced  into  vague,  thin  phrases.  The frequent  use of end-rhyme  becomes simplistic:  "Death  ... breath; you ... shoe; four ... more;  back ... track."  Punctuation is also used more often  than  before, and  like the  other  devices, controls  and  hems in  a  writer  whose style cannot seem to survive such  bounds.  In  Shadow-Maker, poetry is no longer  written  as discovery. Instead  MacEwen  has  adopted  a  poetry of calculation. Spontaneity

TO  SEEK A SINGLE SYMMETRY

disappears; the  poetry  of  effects  takes  over. The  tacked-on,  clever endings  of "The Red  Bird  You  Wait  For",  "Invocations", "Poem", "The Sacrifice"  and others attest to this tendency.
Not  every  poem  in  The  Shadow-Maker fails, however. Some  of the  better efforts reveal a pattern  evident in Breakfast  for Barbarians, the movement to encompass  other  times, other  places. "I say all  worlds, all  times, all loves are one,"  claims the  author  and  she travels to exotic places to explore the truth  of that  statement.   Sometimes  the  trip  is an  actual  one,  as in  her  poems on  the Middle  East, sometimes  an  imaginary  one through  space to the  future.  Always the trip stands for the more fascinating  inward  journey to the hidden  recesses of the human  mind, a terrain  MacEwen  prefers.
"One Arab  Flute", perhaps   the  most successful poem  in  the  book,  reports such  an  outward-inward  journey  in  a  vivid, memorable  way. Certain  pictures from it remain  in a reader's  mind,  persisting with Kodachrome clarity:  "a blue­ eyed Arab/ with a wild profile, standing/ in front of blond stone''; "a small girl carries  a  loaf/  of  bread  that  reaches  to  her  knees";  "To  reach  Jerusalem  you ride/  through  ribs of dead  jeeps/ and  rusted wreaths of war"; and "The  chalk­ white/  salt  of  bleached   houses,  white-/  faced,  wide-eyed  towns."  Here  are  no shadowy, misty evocations, but rather  hard, bright, real images. Workers scratch­ ing dirt  from an  archeological  dig become emblematic of modern  alienated  man searching  for roots. They  relate  to the one in "The  Last Breakfast"  who eats in order  to  conjure  up  the  sight  of  dark  men  running  "on  their  naked,  splendid feet".  The  "I" of the  sequence,  the tourist, is  "the  disinherited" from the New World  who seeks links to an ancient  past. The  tourist's desire for the wholeness and   continuity   of  tradition  gains  hope  from  observing  the  Arabs'  tenacious survival in a hopeless situation:

But I have seen
trees that grow sideways
in Esdraelon, fighting gravity;
their bark is strong
and corded with patience
and their leaves rush upwards in incongruous dance.

In  several other  poems MacEwen  goes further  back in  time than  the  Judeo­ Arabic  world. In  "Dream One: The  Man-Fish" and  more successfully in "The  Heel",  she regresses through  evolutionary eons to pre-history when man emerged from  sea-life. She  blesses those  ancestors who  "came  from  the  waters/ scaleless and  shrewd,  and  walked  with  unwebbed  feet/  to create  memory." Longing  for a share  in  their  fortitude,  she asserts her kinship with those  unknown  creatures as she feels "the  holy waters lapping  just behind my heel." ("The Heel".)
Shadow-Maker does more than  attempt to contain the "black fields of history",

TO  SEEK A SINGLE SYMMETRY

however.  Many  of  the  poems  travel  forth,  usually  via  a  space  ship,  into  the future. "First  Song from the Fifth  Earth", "Second Song from the Fifth  Earth", "The   Hollow",  "Fire  Gardens" and  "Letter  to a  Future  Generation" attempt to  reach  forward  in  time.  Unfortunately, few of these are  well-realized enough to be convincing.  Most work on the level of simple assertion:  "I say all worlds, all times, all loves are one."  (italics mine)
The  theme  of  the  trip  as  an  inward  journey  shows up  most clearly  in  the haunting  "Dark  Pines Under  Water". Here the terrain  explored  is explicitly the interior  landscape.  "This  land  like a mirror  turns you inward.... Your memory is a  row  of sinking  pines."  The  poet wants  to  examine  not  only  the  furthest reaches of time and space but the mysterious world of the sub-conscious. " ... the dark  pines of your mind  dip deeper ... There  is something  down  there and  you want  it told."
In  earlier  volumes  MacEwen  implies that  sexual  union,  mystical  experience and  art  can  each  bring  about  the integration  necessary to an  earth  that  is "the right  half of a  bisected  goddess." Tiamut  reappears  in Shadow-Maker;  "angel, look again-/ it  is only that  these seas are  blood,/  this continent  the torso of/ a tougher god than  we can name.... " ("First  Song for the Fifth  Earth".)  Who shall reunite the sundered  parts? The thesis around  which this book seems to have been conceived is that  art  must integrate  all, even the blacker sides of existence. In   "Dream   Two:    The   Beasts",  the   poet  does  bring   about   a   momentary reconciliation  of opposites. The  warring  tiger and  dog are  transformed   and  lie down together, one on her right side, the other on her left. A new order emerges, that  of the  peaceable  kingdom.  The  moment  of perfection  lasts but  an  instant, however. Law,  order,  the forces of convention appear  in the person of a  police­ man:    "'Nobody  brings  the  beasts  together,/ It's   illegal,'  he  said"   ("Dream Two:  The  Beasts".)  For  the first time in MacEwen's works, a sense of  despair becomes prominent. Formerly  the  effort to contain  a divided,  various earth  was admitted  as hopeless, but  the attempt  to do so counted.  It occasioned a bursting, bleary laugh  rather  than  a sigh. Now the complexities of living elicit  resignation tinged with a whiff of self-pity:  "And  beyond the freest reaches of  our sight" lie realms we shall  never  comprehend,  bound  as we are  by "the shores of pain."  ("Dark Stars".)  Neither  art,  nor sex, nor  mysticism nor  even  love can  bridge the  painful  spaces  that   keep  man  from  wholeness.  Unfortunately, since  the pervading  despair  and  occasional  affirmation in this volume  are asserted  rather  than  proved, both  attitudes  become ultimately  unreal, devoid of impact.
The  Shadow-Afaker, then,  represents an effort to incorporate  even the darker
realms  of  human   existence  into  its  author's   vision.  In  that   sense,  the  book continues  MacEwen's plan  to create  an  all-embracing  myth  that  demonstrates "all  worlds, all times, all loves are one."  In  the  pattern  of the  inward-outward journey  she  reaches  back  into  history, forward  into  space  and  down  into  the

TO  SEEK A SINGLE SYMMETRY

subconscious in  an  attempt   to integrate  all these possible regions of being. Too often,  however,  tightness  of form  and  vagueness of language  prove  barriers  to effective  poetry.  Much   of  the  verse fails  because  the  shadowy  realms  remain shadowy,  unreal,  not  linked  to  a  concrete  reality  existing  outside  the  writer's mind.  A reader  is left puzzling  whether  MacEwen's vision or technique  is most to blame. That is, is the problem  that  the poet cannot see evil as operative in the world or is it that she cannot  communicate  evil in anything  but bloodless phrases? Whatever  the reason, the world of holy terrors, nightmare  and  darkness remains, for the most part, unarticulated in this book.




ARMIES OF   THE   MOON, MacEwen's   1972 collection, may well represent  a plateau  in her development. The  language in Armies modulates from  formal   to  colloquial,  depending   on  the  requirements   of  the  particular poem. Thus,  one of the Arcana  pieces begins:  "now as I wear around  my neck a  necklace/  of  a  million  suns,  you  come/  undead,  unborn,  thou  Ghost  of the
morning!"  ("Arcana in  Seven".)   The  somewhat  rhetorical,  elevated  tone  fits
the remote, stylized tale of love, death  and incest in ancient  Egypt. On  the other hand,  "Memoirs  of a Mad  Cook'' starts with the slangy observation that  "There's no  point  kidding  myself  any  longer,/  I  just  can't  get  the  knack  of  it."  The everyday  language  suits  the  everyday  problem  of meeting  other's  needs which the poet poses in terms of preparing  edible meals, an everyday chore.
Happily,  MacEwen  returns  here to poetry as discovery. Though  a reader  can never  know  definitely how  a  writer  creates,  Armies projects less of the sense of calculation   which  characterized   Shadow-Maker. Rhyme  has  disappeared  once more; line length  and stanza  breaks are organically linked to thought  rather  than existing  as a  preconceived  imposed  structure.  "Apollo Twelve"  proves the  poet can  in  fact  work  within  a conventional  form, but in general  her  more exciting verse avoids such  predictable  patterns.  "Into whose future  am  I  moving,"  asks "A  Letter  To  Charas'', and  many of these poems give the impression of growing and developing to a climax previously unknown.
The epigraph  to this volume indicates the turn MacEwen's myth-making has gradually  taken.  The  Laurens  van  der  Post lines say, in part,  "It was then that I first realized  that  the  war  I  was fighting  was in me long before it was in the world without." Despite  the  astronaut  and  space ship imagery,  this poetry does not  communicate the feeling of frenetic  movement evident in earlier  books. The impulse  to  orbit,  encircle,  enclose, take  in  the  universe has  changed  in  favour of a  more  microcosmic approach. The  traveller  chooses the inward  journey to encompass the self, a trip that began in Rising Fire.

32

TO  SEEK A SINGLE SYMMETRY

Goodbye, goodbye
the planets have resigned
and left me all alone;
you have collapsed to a microcosm
where your brilliant secrets
no more masquerade as stars,
there are no more galaxies
there is no more moon....
("The Telescope Turned Inward")

The  search  for  integration   has  become less cosmic, more  personal.  Instead  of comprehending the universe, one must comprehend the self.
Not that  MacEwan  has abandoned her desire to create a myth, a world-view. Both the opening  title poem and  "Apollo Twelve" suggest the need to orbit  the universe  and  thus  contain  it,  force it  into some  comprehensive  whole.  As in earlier space poems the movement is ultimately thwarted.  The  earthmen  die and "become   one  with  the  gorgeous  anonymous  moon,"   a  fate   that   hints  at  a reunion   of  Tiamut's  divided   parts.  The  astronaut   of  "Apollo  Twelve" does indeed  become "the  satellite  of  his own dream"  and  succeeds in  orbiting  "the white world of his youth".  But the moment of completion is, again,  fleeting, for, that  accomplished,  he "climbs/ Through  vacuous doorways to the gasping  dark beyond."  What  is most significant  about  these two "cosmic"  poems however, is their  placement  in  the  volume.  Coming on  the first and  last pages, they  them­ selves enclose the more personal, intimate,  often domestic lines of the rest of the collection. MacEwen   thus  suggests that  while a  world-view  must  be  sought  it remains  a frame  within  which  the implications of such a vision are  worked out in individual daily existence.
Some  of  the  most  successful  poetry  in  Armies   begins  in  the  world  of  the
ordinary.  The  poet starts  with  simple experiences in the  realm  of the  domestic and,  without straining  to do so, endows housewifely tasks with mythic  meaning. In  "Meditations of a Seamstress  (I)", for instance, she retreats  to wine and  the sewing  machine  when  the  universe starts  to fall  apart.  "I make  strong  strong seams  for  my dresses/ and  my world."  And,  if the  job isn't  done  by nightfall "everything  will come apart  again;/ continental  shelves will slowly drift into the sea/  and  earthquakes  will tear  wide open/  the worn-out  patches  of Asia."  Here the  need  to create  a world  where  "everything  fits at last"  comes close to being the  myth  itself. The  world-view,  the  vision of completeness  becomes  precisely the  picture  of man  searching  for  perfection. The  domestic poems about  eating and  house-cleaning echo  this notion  of a  personal search  for  wholeness. Again, the  search  will fail,  but  the  process itself, rather  than  the  goal sought,  attains cosmic significance. In  "Dining   at  the Savarin,"  the  poet,  as in  Breakfast   for Barbarians,  eats to the bursting  point in an attempt  to capture  the essence of all

33

TO SEEK A SINGLE SYMMETRY

things.   "Forgive   me  this  second'/ unreal   hunger," she  pleads,  "Lord   of  the infinite  buffet."  In  "The Vacuum  Cleaner Dream," the "best  cleaning woman/ in the world" succeeds in consuming everything with her "extra-galactic vacuum beast." Such perfection,  however, ultimately destroys the very life the poet hoped to  capture.  "And   when  I opened  the  bagj to empty it  I found: j a dictionary of  dead   tongues/  a  bottle  of  wine/ lunar   dust/  the  rings  of  Saturn/ and  the sleeping  body  of  my  love."  In  "The   Aristocracies,"  the  moment  of perfection stunned   the  poet  into  silence,  the  need  to  speak  vanished   when  integration occurred.  Here  too,  the  "dictionary of dead  tongues''  suggests that  once every­ thing  is caught,  taken  in,  synthesized,  the  need for  poetry  will be  gone. Thus, both poetry and life exist not as completion, but as process.
At  first glance  "The Nine Arcana  of the Kings", MacEwen's sequence based on  obscure  events  in  ancient   Egypt,  would  seem to afford  an  opportunity  for presenting  a  vision of  completeness. That  is, while the  present  and  the  future defy any attempt  to encapsulate them, remaining stubbornly ongoing, open and processive, certainly  one can see the past as a whole. The  tale itself has elements of  myth:   heroic  figures,  a  royal  brother  and  sister,  strive  to  throw  off  the tyranny  of an  oppressive parent-ruler. Their  incestuous love survives death  and two millennia  of waiting  until  resurrection occurs. Even here, however, the poet refuses to freeze the  past into  lifeless completion. At the end of the poem-series, the  prince  only half-heartedly embraces  his nubile sister-lover. Instead,  he longs for  the  homosexual,  self-destructive  relationship  with  the  old  king. The  reader guesses that  the sequence  is actually  a cycle of recurring events, a representation of  the  ceaseless struggle  between  fecundity  and  sterility, freedom  and  domina­ tion,  life  and  death.   Even  antiquity   cannot  be caught  once  and  for  all. The pattern  it suggests is not synthesis, but one of change, evolution, struggle.
During  the  past  decade  Gwendolyn  MacEwen  has worked  to create  a myth,
to make concrete and  particular a cosmic view. She has used images of the circle and   the  dance,  has  dwelt  on  themes  of  consuming  and  the  inward-outward journey  to  point  up  man's  need  for integration.  She has indicated   that  mysti­ cism, love and  art  can  all, at least momentarily, heal a Tiamut-divided  world, a "split  organ of chaos."  Ultimately,  however, her vision remains open, unfinished. The  process of searching  for  wholeness rather  than  its attainment  becomes the myth.

NOTES

1 C. Hugh Holman,  A Handbook to Literature, p. 335·
2   F. Davey, "Gwendolyn  MacEwen: The  Secret of Alchemy," Open   Letter, Second
Series, No.4 (Spring 1973),  p. 19.




34

TAYAOUT,
UNE QUETE MYSTIQUE



Louise E. J.lelson-Vanhee


a
Yves Theriault. Ses  nombreux  livres nous  mettent  face      une  realite  contem­
poraire  brulante: celle de l'homme  moderne  dans  une societe deshumanisante. Dans la  plupart  de ses livres tels Aaron, Ashini, Agaguk,  Yves Theriault nous a fascines  par  une  technique   visuelle propre  a son  art  de  conteur,   par  un  sens
poetique  englobant   les plus simples  realites  d'une   atmosphere  quasi  mythique et  surtout   par  son  amour   pour  l'homme  primitif,  que  la  civilisation  ne  peut corrompre.  Cette lutte continuelle entre les valeurs traditionnelles  et les nouveaux standards d'une  civilisation de consommation,  se retrouve  dans  beaucoup  de ses romans. Bien qu'Yves Theriault se pretende etre un ecrivain non engage, il est certainement le defenseur  d'un  humanisme  fondamental  en voie de disparition.
Pour  Theriault,  l'homme   veritable  est celui  qui,  uni  intimement   a la  nature,
trouve  l'epanouissement   du  corps  et   de  !'esprit;  c'est  l'etre  qui  a travers  les
realites physiques atteint  le domaine  privilegie de la vraie sagesse et de la connaissance.
Dans  cet  article,  nous desirons montrer  que  dans  Tayaout  il y a  plus que  la simple histoire du fils d'Agaguk.  Toute  une symbolique mystique transparait, car en fait nous trouvons indeniablement un message metaphysique dans ce livre exceptionnel.
Homme  de  feu  dans  un  desert  de glace, Tayaout   nous  apparait comme  un etre  privilegie, defenseur de toute  la race esquimaude.  Tayaout  est le fils d'Aga­ guk.1 Tayaout  est la continuation  du pere, le fils reincarnant le chef de famille. Agaguk, !'Homme, renait  et se perpetue  dans son enfant.  Or,  rappelons-nous  le
physique  d'Agaguk:  "a la  place  du  nez ... il  n'y  avait  plus  qu'un   immense
trou".  Agaguk dans son combat  contre le loup, sort victorieux mais mutile.  Son
visage n'est plus qu'un "masque  hideux".
Ce  visage  d'Agaguk  qui  avait  ete  decrit  avec  minutie  dans  les deux  livres concernant  le pere, n'est  plus effieure dans le livre au sujet du fils. Tayaout voit son  pere,  jamais il ne fait  une  remarque  sur !'aspect  quasi  monstrueux  que  ce visage offre. Agaguk,  l'homme  sans visage, introduit   l'esquimau  sans  arne  qui

35

UNE QUETE MYSTIQUE

vendra ses statuettes et  done  sa  propre  vie aux  Blancs. Agaguk  au  lieu  de sortir heroiquement de  sa  lutte   contre   la  nature et  la  civilisation  est  defigure   par  la noble   bete  et  despiritualise  par   un  mercantilisme materialiste. L'epreuve etait surhumaine! A  la fin  du  livre  Agaguk,  l'homme avait  atteint une  grandeur peu commune, le sommet de !'amour et de la purete. L'homme dominait les elements, survivait grace  a un  courage sans pareil  et etait  regenere  par !'amour vivifiant  de la  femme.  Le don  de  vie s'echangeait de la femme  a l'homme, de l'homme ala femme  qui  ratifiait le droit  de vivre de l'enfant-fille. Ala fin d'Agaguk, le couple Iriook-Agaguk formait le couple  reetabli  au  paradis terrestre,  paradis de glace et de feu.
Au debut  de T ayaout,2  nous retrouvons un Agaguk  totalement different, vieilli, change, mate  en  quelque sorte.  II a abandonne la vie solitaire  trop  isolee, i1 s'est reintegre au groupe, il a choisi la voie facile, lui l'homme du  Nord,  jadis indomp­ table.  L'esprit de  conquete et  d'independance qui  l'animait, a cede  a !'esprit de confort  facile, de securite  endormante.
Tayaout herite de la lourde tache de perpetuer !'Esprit de la race:

Avait-il done ete choisi pour retrouver Ia pierre verte de Ia mer? Et ramener aux Esquimaux  de  toute  geographie  et de  tout  dialecte,  Ia possession ancienne  de la fierte et du recommencement?

Tache impossible,  car Tayaout est condamne d'avance. En Tayaout, de l'homme­ enfant  qu'Iriook avait  deja  sculpte,  !'enfant va retrouver la pierre venue  du fond de  la  mer,  mais  l'homme ne  pourra survivre,  car  l'homme a  depuis  longtemps deja  perdu  son  visage. Tayaout herite  du  pere, et en tant  que double,  que  reftet du   pere,  il  sait  que   le  pcre  n'est   plus  qu'un mirage,   un  etre  inexistant, "un  monstre  nocturne". Au  fond,  Tayaout est un instrument du destin  comme  l'etait Oedipe:

... il retrouvait  des humilites qu'il ne se connaissait point. N'etre qu'un  instrument et  non  la  main  maitresse;  n'etre  que  lui-meme,  tel que  toujours  il  a  ete,  avec seulement  une  assurance  en plus, celle d'etre  observe par  les dieux,  jauge et pese, et charge de mission pour qu'il l'accomplisse en silence et sans gloire.

Oedipe  epousait   Jocaste  et  l'inceste   ainsi  avait   lieu  contre   la  volonte   meme d'Oedipe. Iriook,  la  mere  de  Tayaout, rejette  Agaguk,  le despiritualise. En  fait, Agaguk  est devenu  agnostic: "II  n'y  a plus de pierre verte", dit  Agaguk. "II  n'y aura   plus  jamais  de  pierre  magique. C'est  fini  pour  nous.  II est  trop  tard." Ce manque de foi exprime le desert  spirituel  d'Agaguk. A-t-il compris  que  les dieux memes  ne pourront sauver  sa race de la decheance, de l'asservissement de la chair et de I'esprit au materialisme?
La  femme  a le role de vestale.  A elle echoue  la tache  de garder la ftamme  de vie:

UNE QUETE MYSTIQUE

N'etait-ce  pas la  pierre ancienne qu'autrefois les Inuit  formaient  patiemment en lampes immortelles, dont  jamais la flamme ne s'eteignait? Cette flamme qu'on
portait d'une halte a l'autre  dans le pot de meme pierre, qu'il etait du devoir de
toute femme de garder comme sa vie, comme ses yeux, comme le coeur battant  en
elle, comme la langue de sa bouche et la vie croissant dans ses entrailles.

Iriook  est conciente de son  role de vestale. Elle sait comme Tayaout que:  "Les esprits ont  repris la pierre,  et l'ont  rejetee au  fond de la mer,  et la  Femme  des fonds, qui protege les phoques, ne la renverra pas ... "
Dans  cette  mythologie esquimaude  nous trouvons les deux  elements  masculin et  feminin  intimement  assembles. La pierre, element  de virilire, est trouve  dans l'eau,  lamer, element maternel  du debut des siecles. Toute  vie est issue de lamer. La  femme  est origine  et  defenderesse de  la  vraie  vie, de  !'esprit  de  l'homme. Iriook  en ce sens, continue  le role de protectrice de l'fune humaine. Elle assume la  tache  sacree  de  garder   intactes   les  traditions   millenaires.  Elle  a  compris qu'Agaguk  avait commis le crime impardonnable, celui de defier les dieux, celui de  nier  !'existence  d'une   arne,  celui de  regarder  la  pierre  comme  un  vulgaire caillou, non  comme !'expression  indelebile et ineluctable  d'un  destin  plus grand que l'homme, plus mysterieux qu'une  nuit polaire.
Cette pierre des Esprits, pierre qui "ne perissait jamais, ne se craquelait jamais, ne se consumait pas plus ... ", devient peu a peu !'instrument des dieux condam­ nant  les mortels. Elle  donne a son fils les droits du pere, elle lui confere son droit de  vie et de mort,  l'autorite d'un  chef de famille. Elle  l'investit  du  droit  et du devoir de tuer  Agaguk. "11 doit mourir et tu dois le tuer."  11 y a plus ici qu'un  simple  parricide.  Pere  et fils sont si intimement  unis,  si foncierement  lies qu'en tuant  l'un, !'autre  se suicide. En effet, Tayaout succombera  aux griffes de l'ours et sera comme son pere defigure. 11 est impossible pour Tayaout de survivre ala disparition de son pere, de son double.
"11 dechargea  l'arme  en plein visage de son pere." Remarquons que c'est cette figure inhumaine,  monstrueuse  que Tayaout  vise. La vision-mirage  a eclate. Le miroir  est  brise. Agaguk  au  visage defigure n'etait  que  le reflet de Tayaout, le pere  reincarne.   L'enigme   du  sphinx,  du  chasseur  de  la  statuette est  resolue. lntimement lies, Agaguk et Tayaout  avaient sculpte dans la pierre le meme "Esquimau  visant  une  bete  au  loin et s'appretant a  tirer  le coup  mortel".  Si Tayaout  s'etait  reconnu  d'emblee  dans  le  chasseur  delivre  de  la  pierre,  il  ne pouvait  imaginer  la cible visee. Voici la victime devoilee enfin! En acceptant de tuer son pere, Tayaout  se condamne  d'office. Lui qui d'un  coup de pierre faisait detaler  l'ours, alors qu'il  n'etait  qu'un  enfant,  le voici impuissant  devant  la bete sauvage,  ayant  oublie  de  donner  les offrandes  propitiatoires.  Est-ce  une simple negligence? Nous savons pourtant  que Tayaout  a toutes les qualites  de l'homme mystique. La solitude l'enrobe,  favorise un lent cheminement  vers la  meditation et  la  comprehension  des etres  et des choses. Son oubli n'est  que  la  ratification

37

UNE QUETE MYSTIQUE

inconsciente d'un  doute   fondamental. La  decouverte  du  Graal a  elle seule  ne suffisait  pas  a sanctifier le hero.  La  pierre  verte  trouvee,  ramenee, reintegree aux
traditions n'a  pas  pu  transformer les ames.  Et  sa signification  est  perdue   a tout
jamais.  La  pierre  a  ete  profanee, vendue  elle est  desacralisee. Elle  perd  a  tout jamais  son  charme magique. En  elle, l'Esprit esquimau restera  prisonnier, car les mains  se sont  souillees de  dollars,  les formes  delivrees de leur  gance  de pierre ont ete vendues  comme  de vulgaires objets de commerce.
Tayaout, victime   d'un fusil  deficient  et  surtout d'un   manque de  foi,  meurt,
mais  en  mourant il realise sa  faute; il pressent  la mort  comme  une  justice fulgu­ rante   des  dieux.  11  aurait pu ... i1 durait du  penser  a  offrir  ces  offrandes pour l'ame  de I'ours! Tayaout a-t-il  inconsciemment defie I'existence des esprits? A-t-il tente  de  nier la validite  des rites ancestraux? A-t-il connu  la tentation du  pere de renier   lui  aussi,  l'Esprit?  Dans   cette   perspective,  Tayaout  devient   une  quete  metaphysique. Le  livre  traduit  l'angoisse  fondamental de  l'homme face  a  son destin,  face a la mort,  seul avec  lui-meme et le visage inconnu de l'au-dela.
Ala  minute supreme et derniere, Tayaout ala vision lucide du monde  spirituel. En  un  eclair,  i1 realise la fulgurante et foudroyante realite  de l'esprit. C'est  pour­ quoi  le  corps  dechiquete de  Tayaout importe peu.  Ce  corps  meconnaissable a accouche enfin d'une arne, quelque errante qu'elle soit:

J'habite le sommet du monde. J'y suis depuis des millenaires l'homme  continue!, je suis sans age car  j'ai  tous les ages. Je suis sans trace l'ancetre  parce que  je suis l'ancetre  en meme temps que la continuation  ...

Le cercle  est retrace. Le drame est termine  ne pouvant se perpetuer faute  de fils, Tayaout etant reste  celibataire. Les  jeux sont  faits.  Agaguk,  homme, a disparu. Tayaout, Lancelot sans  corps,  ombre  fantomatique de l'Esprit esquimau erre desesperement dans  les glaces  du  Nord  pour  retrouver un  jour  un  visage  peut­ etre disparu a jamais, le visage de l'Homme vrai et libre.


NOTES

1 Yves Theriault, Agaguk  (Insitut litteraire du Quebec, 1958).
2    Yves Theriault, Tayaout, fils d'Agaguk (Les Editions de l'homme, Montreal, rg6g).

THE DIVIDED SELF



Gary Ross




"the  labyrinth  holds me"  ("A night in the Royal Ontario
Museum")
"I am the cause" ("It  is dangerous to read newspapers")



IN The  Animals in That  Count,y,  as m hec othec volume<,
Margaret Atwood  gives her  poems direction  and  movement. This  book  takes  the
rough  shape  of a  journey: it starts  with a departure, moves progressively  closer to a confrontation with  horror, then  finds an  exit and  moves toward it. The  volume deals  less with  discrete  experiences than  with  modes,  patterns. The  poet  imposes a  grid  on  experience in  an  attempt to  expose  the  elements  of  myth  and  ritual, characteristics beyond  the  thing  itself-in  an  attempt, that  is, to make  sense of what  otherwise  would  be an  incomprehensible avalanche of minutiae.
Things assume  a  kind  of legitimacy,  a tentative order,  when  viewed  as  repre­ sentative  types,  signs  of  something  more   fundamental and   widespread.  The  animals "in  that  country" exist in formal, ceremonial situations:

the fox run
politely to earth,  the huntsmen standing around  him, fixed
in their tapestry of manners

the bull, embroidered with blood and given
an elegant death, trumpets, his name stamped on him, heraldic brand.

("The  animals in that country")

These   circumstances-fox  hunting and  bullfighting-are ones  in  which   men brutalize and  victimize  animals. Perhaps we move  toward  an understanding of our   institutionalized  cruelties   by  focusing   on   the   ritualistic  elements   of  the slaughter; as the  poet  writes in "The festival",  "it  is the ceremony/ they say, that gives  a  sacramental/ meaning to  butchered meat".  Why  does  man   bother  to

39

THE DIVIDED  SELF


dress  his  killing  in  dignity?   Perhaps because  the  bull  "is  really  a  man". Then, man  recognizes  his own  mortality each  time  he sees life end?  Surely  not,  or why would  he be causing the  cessation  of life? Perhaps we kill simply  because  we like to kill, or  because  we'd  like to kill ourselves, or other  people, and  animals are  the best substitute.
Just  where  or  what  "that country" is, is not  clear;  but  it doesn't  matter. The
only  difference  between   there  and  here is that  in "this  country" the  deprivation of  life is unintentional, and   thus  not  ritualized. The  animal victims  are  anony­ mous,  inhuman  (they   have  the  "faces  of animals", of "no-one") ;  their  deaths  are  "not   elegant". Nor  is it  clear  which  country  Atwood  belongs  to. The  word "this" might  seem  to tell us, except  that  the voice in the  poem  is flat and  disem­ bodied.  She  may  belong  to either  country,  or both.  Each  is horrifying, since each is a landscape of man-inflicted death.
"The trappers" pursues  the  themes  of violence  and  mortality. The  poet  writes of  "the  abstract hunger j to  trap   and  smash/ the  creature"; but  as soon  as the hunger is sated,  the  trappers feel guilt  both  "because/ they  are not animals" and "because they  are". Again,  the  person  who  exploits  an  animal's  vulnerability is reminded of his own; the man  who dictates  life and  death  to other  creatures holds no  such   power  over  himself.  In  "The festival",   what  are  we  to  make  of  the hunters who  "circle   tensely  among the  trees",  waiting  "for  the  god  to appear,/ crossed  in  the sights  of  their  rifles"-especially when  the god  turns  out  to be "a man  with antlers"?




GRADUALLY, inevitably,  the poet arrives  at a painful realiza­ tion:  the  only  difference between  a random world  and  a structured one is form.  The  disheartening content is  unchanged; indeed, the  framework of  myth  and  ritual, like a gift-wrapped, empty  box, only serves to emphasize  what  it encloses. The  exploration of modes  of experience tends also to give universal dimensions to the  findings; these  are  not  isolated  incidents,  after  all. As an ordered place, a set of  rhythms, rituals,  repetitions, the  real  world  is simply  a  landscape of  futility, constriction, desperation, slaughter. The  further into  the  book  we  proceed,  the more evident  that  fact becomes.
Atwood   conveys   this  aura  with   images   that   are  always   telling,   frequently brilliant. "The  surveyors" have  left  a  "trail of single  reason" through the  bush, but the trail is now merely a collection of

signs without motion, red arrows pointing in no direction; faint ritual markings leached by time
of any meaning.

THE DIVIDED  SELF

It would  not  be far-fetched to suggest that  the  trail  bears  a certain  resemblance to  the  path  of  the  poet's  life. She  inhabits an  atmosphere of impermanence in which even the most basic natural laws are without  meaning.

The  plates are on the table to weight it down.

I call you sometimes
To make sure you are still there.

Tomorrow, when you come to dinner
They will tell you I never lived here.

( "Roominghouse,  winter")

Somewhere along  the  line  something has  gone  wrong.  Priorities, logical  orders, have  been  inverted. The slain  green  giant  is not a murder victim,  he's an "essen­ tial/ fact  for the  practice of their  [detectives'] art,  these cool/ dissections" ("The green  giant   murder"). "A  night   in  the  Royal  Ontario  Museum" stands   as  a microcosm   of  the   poet's   journey   toward   pure,  monolithic  horror,  and   as  the ultimate metaphor  of  human isolation.  The  condition is one  which  offers  little
hope of escape.

Under  that ornate
golden cranium  I wander
among fragments of gods, tarnished coins, embalmed  gestures chronologically arranged,
looking for the EXIT sign

but in spite of the diagrams at every corner, labelled
in red:  YOU  ARE  HERE
the labyrinth  holds me.

She  exists  amidst   stopped life,  living  a  sort  of  death   in  life;  she  realizes  her predicament, seeks a  way out,  but  is trapped. Physical  escape  is not  only impos­ sible, it's  literally  unimaginable. Subconscious  attempts just to envision  flight  are
futile:

and when I dream images
of daring escapes through the snow
I ... wake up shouting.

("The  landlady")

As in  The  Circle Game, the  need  for  love  is an  unfulfilled   constant. As it remains  unsatisfied,  it  transmutes itself into  an  irrational, desperate hunger that

THE DIVIDED SELF


becomes a "wish  to assimilate", to draw  "everything into its own/ space" ("More and  more"). But  too many  conflicting forces are at work, and  the  poet is unable to  take  refuge,  to  find  comfort, in  another. Attempts to  do so are  useless,  one­
directional:

If he could cram his mind into my body
and make it stay there, he would be happy.

The attendant emotions  are solitary or frictional, and without  value.

Across the table each of us reflects
the despair of the separate object. Paper  despair.

("Part of a day")

What possible sustenance remains? For  a poet, the final  resource  is words, but they by themselves  are inadequate.

Why do you need
the blanket of another  body

Aren't  there enough words flowing in your veins
to keep you going.

("The shadow voice")

Like  people,  words  have  become  encrusted, altered. When  the  poet speaks of "an armoured skin/ that  is a  language", she is at  once  defining  the  failure  of  com­ munication, and  explaining it. The  currency  of language has lost its significance and   precision,   making  interpersonal  commerce   all  the  more  difficult.  Clearly,  something has been  lost. The  missing element  is meaning-in its broadest sense, and its most specific one.

The words lie washed ashore on the margins, mangled
by the journey upwards  to the bluegrey surface, the transition:

these once-living
and phosphorescent  meanings
fading in my hands

I try to but can't  decipher.

("Notes from various pasts")

42

THE DIVIDED  SELF


IN The   Animals  in  That  Country, the  physical,  perceptible wilderness -lakes, mountains,   cut  stumps,  glacial  rock-is  condensed   and incorporated into a larger setting. We still encounter  trappers  and  totems in these poems, but  we also come across Frankenstein,  giant  tortoises, Captain Cook, the green giant:  fictional and  historical and fantastic beings. They inhabit  a rarefied, rootless place, a "blank  void" of which the physical world is simply a component.
Atwood  is  progressing beyond  the  personal,  "real" world;  she  adds  imaginary fragments  to her vision. This new landscape is more intimidating, more terrifying still: it is all-inclusive.
The  poet's  explorations  describe increasingly larger orbits  about  the self. She moves further  away, into different,  more forbidding atmospheres. But though  the orbits grow larger,  they are concentric;  always at the centre is the hollow, bleak self. The  vision is elaborated,  moves through  the personal toward  the universal; and the landscape expands proportionally. This movement-the journey men­ tioned  earlier -takes  place on  two levels -an inner,  psychological one as well as the surface, quasi-physical one. The  psychological movement is towards abso­ lute schizophrenia,  a total  division of the self, and  the eventual  escape takes the form of reintegration.  The  poet sets up  this dualism  quite  deliberately,  and  we can follow inner progress by noting outer signs; the expanded landscape  operates on both literal and figurative levels.
The  title poem presents a bifurcated  world -"this country" and  "that  coun­ try".  The  poet's  place may  be uncertain,  but  her very dissociation  prefigures a more basic separation.  By the  time we reach "The  shadow voice", a persona  has detached  itself ("My  shadow said to me/  What  is the matter"). In "A fortifica­ tion"  there  are  two  distinct  selves; body and  mind  have  diverged: "I get  up, extend  the feet/ into my body which is a metal spacesuit." Moreover, she is fully aware  of  her  schizophrenia.  In  her  awareness  lies the  possibility that  she  has consciously created it.

Still for an instant I

catch sight of the other creature
the one that has real skin, real hair, vanishing down the line of cells
back to the lost forest of being vulnerable.

Her  only escape from  the outside  world is invulnerability  to it,  and  she can make  herself invulnerable   only  by severing  herself,  making  two  selves. It's  as though  one  part  of  her  being, a sort of nebulous moon, is circling  around· the physical being-that part of the self that cannot escape. The moon drifts further and  further   away;   the  connection  between  the  two  parts  grows  weaker.  In

43

THE DIVIDED  SELF

"Speeches  for Dr.  Frankenstein" the alter ego has broken away, gone careening off into "a  flat void/  barren  as total freedom". The  poet has created another  self all right,  but she has taken  her creation a step too far. She has made it complete, autonomous  ("I will not come when you call"). In effect, she has made a monster of herself.
More important, she is aware  that she has done so. Here, for the first time, she implicitly accepts responsibility for her state. The effect of the outside world is paradoxical: it  both  alienates  and implicates. Her schizophrenic stance  is defen­ sive;  the  world  forces  people  into  self-protective  postures. It  would  be  simple enough to leave it at that,  to say the world is brutal, irrational, responsible: it has made  me what  I am.  But such an assertion fails to consider  that  the world, like all  human  institutions,  is  moulded  and  governed  by  people.  An  army  can  be regarded  as an  abstract,  devastating,  faceless entity, but  to see it exclusively that way is to overlook an important point-an army is composed of individuals. To use an analogy more appropriate to Atwood, the error in perception is like failing to see the trees for the forest.
Thus  the issue of personal responsibility is raised. At what point is an aggregate horror  the result of individual  horrors? The  problem is introduced  directly in "A night in the Royal Ontario Museum".  The opening lines are more germane than they  may  seem:   "Who locked  me/ into  this  crazed  man-made/ stone  brain." The  museum, a metaphor for the poet's dilemma, is "man-made"; and while someone may have locked her into it, she no doubt entered of her own accord. So the dilemma  may be not only man-made,  but self-made.  (I don't  want  to draw too  many  convenient   implications   from  one  poem,  but  that   much  is surely reasonable.)   She  feels victimized  by  others,  yet she  is  aware  that  others  are similarly  trapped,  equally  victimized. She recognizes, in other  words, that she is an inflicter of misery and  isolation, as well as a sufferer: "each of us reflects/ the despair of the separate  object."
A more subtle illustration  can be drawn from "A fortification". When the poet says "I have armed  myself, yes I am safe:  safe", she makes a striking, and  I'm sure  not  unintentional observation.  Arming  is more than  protecting,  or at least it's a forbidding  genre of protection: it's potential  retaliation.  It is easy to justify arms-physical  or  emotional-as  defence.  Unfortunately,  the  situation  can only perpetuate  itself; everyone must follow suit lest they be left vulnerable;  and the pool of latent  violence swells. The following line-"The grass can't  hurt me"
-demonstrates  the  paranoia evoked by an atmosphere,  a landscape,  so intensi­ fied. In  two lines, she conveys the general harm done in the  name of  individual welfare, and shows at the same time that the alienating  process is one from which she herself is not exempt.
The  question  now is, how to restore meaning,  to break out of the circle game
of isolation? There  appears  to be little hope of an answer. "It  is dangerous to read


44

THE DIVIDED  SELF

newspapers" indicates  the   profound   extent   to  which   the  poet  is  trapped,  the totality of her helplessness.

While I was building neat castles in the sandbox,
the hasty pits were
filling with bulldozed corpses

and as I walked to the school washed and combed, my feet stepping on the cracks in the cement detonated  red bombs.

As a child,  she inferred a connection between  her own  actions  and  violence. She sees herself now  as endangered by  the  world,  a  potential victim  to be sure;  but also as a source of harm,  an unwitting perpetrator:

I am the cause, I am a stockpile of chemical toys, my body
is a deadly gadget,
I reach out in love, my hands are guns,
my good intentions are completely lethal.

When  she writes

Each time I hit a key
on my electric typewriter, speaking of peaceful trees

another  village explodes

are  we  to  think  that,   as  an  adult,  she  has  simply  accepted a  logical  fallacy­ argument from  correlation to cause-or is she actually  convinced of, and  correct  in  assuming,   a  causal   link  between   herself  and   destruction? This  is  the  most terrifying  possibility of all:  perhaps the logical bridge  is not fallacious:  the  world is simply beyond comprehension, and beyond remedy.


"GETTING  AWAY WAS  EASY", writes the  poet in  "Astral traveller", "Coming back  is an  exacting theory." \Vhy, then,  try to return at all? Why  not  abandon the  self to its secure  division?  The  answer must  be that isola­
tion,  the  emotional fortress,  is not  worth  it. The  security  it  affords  demands the absence  of all genuinely  human association,  and  for  the  poet -or  anyone,  per­ haps-that is too great  a  price. She's  like a city dweller  who  grows increasingly paranoid  about   the  crush  of  humanity around  her-the  unpredictability, the

45

THE DIVIDED  SELF

chance  of harm -and  builds  and  inhabits  an  igloo in  the middle  of nowhere, to be safe. Inevitably, she must realize that the sterility of her shelter is worse than the things she fled in the first place.
The  return  to  humanity   takes  the  form of the reintegration  of the self. The poet's  task is  to  become  whole  again,  to overcome her inability  to contain  the polarities of self, the  two halves. This  process is not unlike the one she describes in  "Chronology". She must  peel away the  built-up  layers of protection-not  a simple  task, because  by doing  so she revokes her most prized quality, invulner­ ability. She is fully aware  of the  risks ("I  will be unshelled"), yet  chooses-a conscious effort is involved -to trade  her dead security for the precariousness of "blank  innocence".
As in  The   Circle  Game,  such  a  reintegration  can  be  achieved  only  in  the presence of another.  In  "After  I fell apart", it is another  person who is actually performing  a  reconstruction.   Perhaps  because she  herself takes  no  active  role, she remains  two beings, one there, submitting  ("my  neck turns,  moved/  by your mending  fingers"), the  other  outside,  observing  ("With   what  taut/ attention  I watch  you/ fitting  me back together"). It's only when she sees the equivalent  of her  condition  in  others   ("I search  for  you/ in  your  body"), only  when  she appreciates  the  unifying  function  she too must serve, that  progress is made. "A pursuit"  is in  fact  two simultaneous  pursuits -the seeking of another   ("I  look for you/  in this room"), and  of the self ("Through the tangle of each other/ we hunt  ourselves").
The  movement  toward  an  integrated  self is  paralleled  by a  return  from  the rootless, rarefied landscape to the physical one:

Through the wilderness of the flesh across the mind's ice expanses
we hunt each other

I keep being afraid
I will find you dead in the snow.

Perhaps  the final step can never be taken, the unification never achieved  ("These expeditions/ have no end") ; but the direction is clear, and  has been deliberately determined.  It leads inexorably "towards  that undiscovered/  cave, heavy/   archaic treasure:/ my own/  obsolete  body,  my face,/  my own fingers"  ("Astral  travel­ ler"). It leads  at  the  same  time  toward  another's  completion.  Human  touch is reciprocated,  and  as it is the landscape is infused with the burgeoning wholeness of those who would deny its chaos:

Axiom: you are a sea. Your eye-
lids curve over chaos

THE DIVIDED  SELF

My hands
where  they touch  you, create small inhabited islands

Soon you will be
all earth : a known
land,  a country.

( "Axiom")





OROZCO'S CUPOLJI: JISTRONJIUT JIND JISTRJIL SELF

Tom Marshall


man  of fire hurtles  into  air
for sustenance of gods 	angels what  you will

consuming  himself

I had  not seen him when  I wrote
"burning man  fall outward
into  ardent space" ten  years  ago

now I want  to be a man of air cool  dry  air
be consumed
infinitely  slowly 	beautifully by god rising without flame or movement
entered by sun 	water

leaning  over earth floating  as trees
clouds 	house 	island 	planet 	stones 	float

eaten  away  by air

47

LAURENCE AND
THE USE OF MEMORY


LeonaM. Com

LMARGARET  I.AURENCE', Canadian novel, The Stone Angel,
A ]est of God, A Bird in the House/  The  Fire-Dwellers, and, most recently, The
Diviners, perhaps  her most important technique  involves the use of time, and  in particular  her use of subjective  time as memory. Hagar,  Rachel,  Vanessa, Stacey, and  Morag  each  are  deeply defined by their  Manawaka pasts, and  they plunge frequently  into  these pasts; their  memories, particularly  those of Hagar,  Vanessa and  Morag,  become  as important as their  presents. Significantly,  The  Diviners opens with the sentence,  "The river flowed both ways," the river obviously being the river of time. There  is not,  then, for Laurence, simply a forward  movement of time, but a backward  flow as well, into subjective time 2  and into memory. Like Ford, she believes that  to get a vivid impression of any fictional character, "you could not begin at  his beginning  and  work chronologically to the end. You must first get him in with a strong impression, and then work backwards and forwards over his past."3
In  the first of her  Canadian novels, The  Stone  Angel,  which is, interestingly enough,  paralleled  most  closely by  her  last,  The   Diviners,  in  its  emphasis  on prolonged  memory-segments,  the  reader  participates  as actively with  Hagar  in her fictional past level as he does in her fictional present level. Since the memory process is so crucial  in the development  of this novel, then, its misuse is the most serious  artistic  flaw  in  the  work.  Consider  what  Mendilow  says of following a character's mental  processes:  "flashes of the  past jerk in and  out of his present consciousness, telescoping, coalescing, disintegrating, breaking out of sequence, starting   off  chains  of  unpredictable and  sometimes  untraceable   associations."4
Memory,  then,  does not follow a temporal  "logical" sequence, as common sense
accustoms  us to expect;  rather  memory must be seen as a form of disorder, as a violation of objective, serial order.5  The  Stone  Angel, obviously, does not use this principle of disorder  and  distortion  of events in memory, a principle basic to the stream-of-consciousness   writers.  In   fact,   Hagar's  recollections  on  the  second narrative  level could be set apart  from the present-tense sections of the novel and become a most coherent  and chronologically-developed story on its own. Although Hagar  speaks of "the  junkyard  of my memory," it is a junkyard  in which all the

LAURENCE AND  THE USE OF  MEMORY

discarded memories are organized in a linear sequence, from Hagar  remembering herself at age six to her memory of her last trip to the Manawaka cemetery with Marvin  and  Doris. Surely this is a highly artificial and contrived  use of memory, which follows no sequence  of time, especially over interruptions and  passages of time  in  the  present.  That  details  or events in  the  present should  almost always cause  Hagar's reminiscences seems to indicate  that  Hagar  had  no preconceived plan  to tell her story chronologically;  Laurence  herself admits  that she is "not  at all sure  that  flashbacks ought  to be in chronological order,  as I placed  them in order to make it easier to follow Hagar's life."6
It  is  unlikely, then,  that  Clara  Thomas  is correct  when  she says that  "any questions about  a forced  tidiness of form are  hushed  as Hagar  takes shape  and authority; this is the way she would remember, forcing order  on  her own mind as she had  tried always to force her own order  on all those around  her.111 What Thomas  does not account  for here is the fact that  Laurence  also uses associative memory. If Hagar  could  have forced "order  on her own  mind,"  her  memories could not have been triggered continually by some sight, sound or thought  in the present,  for  these  "trigger   mechanisms",   to  use  Edel's  phrase,  do  not  evoke memories in  a neat  chronological  progression, but shuffle them  out of sequence. Like Proust's Marcel, Hagar  is led into the past by a sensory guide in the present:

But when from a long-distant past nothing subsists, after the people are dead, after the things are broken and scattered, ... the smell and taste of things remain poised a long time, like souls, ready to remind us, waiting and hoping for their moment, amid the ruins of all the rest; and bear unfaltering, in the tiny and almost impalp­ able drop of their essence, the vast structure of recollection.8

Thus,  as the crumb  of madeleine with tea and  the phrase from Vinteuil's sonata evoke memories  for  Marcel,  so are  the  memories  of  past  activities  for  Hagar evoked by similar activities or objects in the present. As she drinks her tea (which, unlike  Marcel's,  "tastes  like hemlock"), the  "sense of being alone  in  a strange place, the nurse's unseeing stare, the receding heat of the day-all bring to mind the time  I was first in a  hospital,  when Marvin  was born."  The  waiting  in the doctor's  office reminds  her  of the "many  years I  waited  at  the Shipley  place"; her moving to the seashore reminds her of the other move she made,  away from Manawaka; the children playing house make her remember "some other children, once, playing at  house, but in a somewhat different  manner". Although  George Robertson,  who  prefers  "to  have  the  jumps,  when  they  come,  to  be  abrupt, disconnected,"  may  be right  when  he accuses the transitions  between the narra­ tive levels of lacking "deftness,"  and  of making  the reader  "too  much  aware  of them  when  they do  occur,"9   these trigger mechanisms do  operate  according  to the principles of associative memory.
Laurence, however, does not rely exclusively on the long excursions into Hagar's


49

LAURENCE AND  THE USE OF  MEMORY

memory on the second narrative  level to reveal Hagar's  past, and  it is when she incorporates  brief flashes of memory into the first narrative  level that  the process seems most natural, most true  to the  principles of associative memory. Thus  the colour of her lilac dress reminds Hagar  of "the  lilacs that used to grow beside the grey front  porch of the Shipley  place," and  the brief paragraph-long description is an  especially arresting  one,  precisely because it does not fit into  the order  of the  second  narrative level,  which  has  left  the  reader  with  Hagar   Currie,  not Hagar   Shipley.  Similarly  effective  is the  mention  a few  pages  later  of  Bram, whom the reader  has not  yet met, but  whose name consequently is implanted  in the  mind  at  an early  point in the book. The  best use of such anticipatory hints, however, concerns John.  Hagar  first mentions his name in the first chapter,  and Laurence  feels no need  to explain  more than  this:  "John's eyes were grey, and even near the last they looked the same to me as the boy's, still that  hidden eager­ ness as though  he half believed, against all reason and knowledge, that something splendid  would  suddenly  occur."  His name slides easily into  Hagar's conscious­ ness several times before his birth,  eighty pages later, occurs in the second narra­  tive level, and  the  cause of his death  remains tantalizingly  mysterious until very late  in the  novel. Hagar  tells the  woman in the nursing  home that  she had two sons, one  of whom  "was  killed-in  the  last war";  but  although  she admits  to the reader  that  this is not true, she does not elaborate, and  the reader  must wait until  her scene with  Lees before he understands,  finally, what is true,  and  what Hagar  really means when she tells Lees, "I had a son, and lost him." The impact of her revelation is greatly heightened by the anticipations.
Excellent as the  purely associational  jumps into the past are, however, in The
Stone  Angel  Laurence   has  committed  herself to  the  use of a  sustained  second narrative level, and  it is unfortunate that  she realized only in retrospect  that  the flashbacks might  have been more effective if not in chronological order.
Yet in The  Diviners Laurence  returns to this basic structure.  Although she does
make  use of some of the  technical  and  typographical  devices she developed in The  Fire Dwellers, it is the form  of The  Stone  Angel, with its two parallel  plot lines and  two Hagars,  that The  Diviners uses most as its model. There  is an even dearer separation  of the  two narrative  levels, and  the reader  spends even more time with the younger Morag  than he does with the younger Hagar. And, perhaps most significantly in terms of this study, both novels have their second narrative levels move ahead  chronologically. The  obvious question is, does it work for The Diviners where it failed in The Stone Angel?
What   must  be  considered  first in  proposing  an  answer  is  whether  or  not Laurence  uses associative memory,  the  "trigger  mechanisms,"  with  Morag. The answer seems clearly to be yes. Granted,  the causal connections are  much  more subtle than  they are in The  Stone Angel, and there are occasional instances where there  are  apparently  none  at  all;  but  in  most  cases, Morag's   "memorybank

so

LAURENCE AND THE USE OF  MEMORY

movies," as she calls them, unwind  on a definite cue from their director.  Seeing a picture  of Brooke in the  paper  begins the series of film-flashbacks about  her life where she met him. Thinking  of lost languages leads her to-and  quickly past
-reflections on  Dan  McRaith, Christie, and  Jules;  it is only when  she thinks
of  Brooke and  his forgotten  language  that  she stops, and  the second  narrative level resumes, conveniently  where it had left off, with her life in the midst of her marriage   to  Brooke. Later,  her  reflections on  her  "need  to  make  pilgrimages" and her "quest for islands" leads immediately into a memorybank movie called "Sceptr'd Isle";  the title makes the thought-connection  obvious, and  the follow­ ing  memory segments quite  plainly are explanations  of the older  Morag's reflec­ tions.  Finally,  her  last  series of  memories is preceded,  on  page  336,  with  her observation  that  "the  Canada geese were flying south"; the second of the subse­ quent memory segments ends with the same sentence-paragraph.10
On  this  basis alone,  then,  it  is possible to conclude  that  Laurence   was not particularly  serious in her statement  about reconsidering her chronological arrangement of Hagar's memories, for in The  Diviners she falls prey to the same inconsistencies concerning the memory process; again she tries unsuccessfully to reconcile   associative  and   chronological   memory.   However,   before   accusing Laurence  of not having learned  her lesson, there are two other points to consider: first,  the  actual  form  of these  flashbacks, and,  second,  Morag's  profession -a writer.
Morag's  earliest memories are contained in photographs, and she presents these
to  the  reader  chronologically,  which is only to be expected;  "Order," after  all, "flowed in Morag's  veins, despise it though she might," so it is reasonable for her to  arrange  her  photographs  in sequence,  causing them  thus  to become  chrono­ logical,  associative stimuli.  The  same  is true  of the  four  early  photographs of Pique,  which  Morag  has arranged, chronologically of course, in  an  album,  and each  of which introduces  a memory  bank  movie; since this set  of  memories has already  been under  way for five "reels",  the use of  photographs is gratuitous  to legitimize chronology, but makes an interesting parallel with the childhood  snap­ shots of Morag.  The  use of photographs,  however, is not a sustained  technique,  and  may at best represent frozen frames in  Morag's longer mental  movies.11  It is the convenient arrangement of these reels in Morag's consciousness that  seems to be contradicted   by her  own  admission that  they are "sneakily  unfolding  inside her head"  (my emphasis).
This rather  dreadful  mixed metaphor  might, however, provide the reader  with
a  clue as to the  real  role of these memorybank  movies. A film cannot  be  "un­ folded",  but  paper  can,  and  Morag  is, after all, a writer, a "wordsmith",  whose novel unfolds for  her even as Laurence's  unfolds for the reader.  And  Laurence  gives us strong  hints throughout The  Diviners that  the novel on which  Morag  is working is actually a verbal  transcription  of the movies she is playing. Thus,  the

51

LAURENCE AND  THE USE OF  MEMORY

movies actually become chapters  in Morag's novel. She even speaks of her writing inspirations  in cinematic  terms:  "Last  night, sleepless until  three  A.M., long and stupendously vivid scenes unfolded. Too tired to get up and write them down, she still couldn't  shut  the  projector  off for  the night".  One  of the  mysterious "key words" she has jotted down is "Jerusalem," which turns out to be part of Morag's subsequent  memorybank  movie;  elsewhere Morag  tells Pique,  "I don't  know if I'll  want  it  [the  novel-in-progress]  published when it's finished."  Indications  are strong,  then,  that  Morag  is actually  writing an autobiographical novel. The final words  of  the  novel,  after  Morag's  movies have  caught   up  with  her  fictional present,  reinforce  such  a  view:   "Morag returned   to  the  house,  to  write  the remaining  private and  fictional words, and to set down her title." That  the close of Laurence's  novel should  parallel so closely the conclusion of Morag's  is hardly coincidental.
If Morag's  novel, then,  is really her memorybank  movie sequence, a stronger case can be made for the chronological arrangement. Morag,  is, in effect, writing down the movie sequences simultaneous  to the reader's reading of them, and that she, as a competent  novelist, should  be organizing  her material,  chronologically as it happens, is certainly  not unusual. The associative stimulus becomes the point at which Morag last left off her novel and to which she returns with intentions to resume  writing.  Laurence   never explicitly tells us that  Morag  is translating  her film images into  words,  but  the  clues are there. Frequently,  immediately  after a prolonged movie sequence,  the next reference that  occurs is to a sustained period of Morag's writing. After the memory series culminating in Christie's death, Morag speaks of words "rushing out in a spate so that her hand could not keep up with them".  More often,  the return  to Morag's  present is preceded by such phrases as "work over for the day.... "

Tus,IF  THE READER  is aware that what  he is actually read­ ing, in Morag's  memorybank  movies, is her novel, the chronological arrangement seems  much  less contrived,   and  indeed  necessary. Laurence   has  preserved  the
technique  of The  Stone  Angel and legitimized it. For the most part, however, she has dispensed with those brief and out-of-sequence flashes of memory that worked so superbly with Hagar. There  are occasional references to Dan  McRaith  before the reader  actually  meets him, but they have none of the subtlety or effectiveness of Hagar's brief references to Bram and John,  perhaps because, when the reader at  last  meets him,  Dan  is a  disappointment  as a character  and  is certainly  less significant in Morag's life than Bram and John were in Morag's.
A  ]est of God, which is free from the rigorous demands of two distinct narra­
tive levels, handles the memory  process much more naturally,  although  there is a

LAURENCE AND THE USE OF  MEMORY

sense of manipulation of Rachel's  recollections, simply to give the necessary exposition. On  the whole, however, it is well-integrated  with  her present state of mind and  her thoughts, and although  her memories are not entirely associational, they at least avoid the restricting chronology with which Hagar  is faced. The most effective  use of  memory  in  A  ]est of God,  however,  concerns  those  recurring memories,   usually  very   brief,  that   involve  some  painful   experience.   "Such moments,"  Rachel says, remembering  the young couple on the hill, "are  the ones that  live forever.... I wish I could forget that  day, and those kids, but I can't." Frequently,   the  memories  are  ones of events in  which  the  reader  participated earlier in  the fictional  present;  it is a technique  Laurence  uses excellently in the flashbacks in The   Fire-Dwellers. For  Rachel,  perhaps  the  most painful  of such memories  is the  Tabernacle scene:  "I remember  everything,  every detail,  and will never  be able  to forget  however  hard  I  try. It  will come  back  again  and again,  and  I will have to endure  it, over and  over." She recalls it as she talks to her  mother,  and  to Calla,  and  she is "back  there in that  indefensible  moment, trapped  in  my own alien voice, and  the eyes all around  have swollen to giants' eyes. How  will I ever be able to forget?" The  memory of her making  love with Nick is likewise characterized  by a mocking painfulness, by a sense of the absurd : "I can  see  myself now,  the  frenetic  haste,  like a  person  in  some  early  film, everything speeded-up  comically." The  memory is very similar to Stacey's mock­ ing flashback in The  Fire-Dwellers of her hurried loving of Luke:  "Stacey, touch­ ing him too urgently-now, now, no time to waste, I haven't  got all day."
Stacey, of course, is frequently  struck  by such  unpleasant  recollections of her recent  behaviour.  As she watches Katie  dance, she relives her own dance  scene, seeing herself as a grotesque;  she torments herself with memories of her behaviour with Thor; she cringes from Ian's shrill "Can't you just leave me alone?" because it recalls Mac's words. Her memories of her more distant past, outside the fictional time covered by the novel, have in common with Hagar's the trigger mechanisms which  integrate   the  flashbacks  into  the  fictional  present.  Mac's   bitter  words, "You  do,  eh?  You  really  think  you do?"  suddenly  provoke  a  flashback  of her father, locked in the mortuary,  saying the same words to her mother. The almost­ automatic  love-making  with Mac  recalls the magic of their early years together. Luke's mention of horoscopes creates a flashback of her  job with Janus Uranus.  The  trip to the morgue inspires a memory of Cameron's  Funeral  Home. And the name of Vernon  Winkler, as "the  recollection filters blurredly back," gives rise to a  flashback  of  Stacey  in  Manawaka  watching  a  fight.  Although  the  trigger mechanisms in Stacey's  fictional present might  be accused of the same obvious­ ness  that   Robertson   believed  was  a  problem  in  The   Stone   Angel,  they  are generally  handled   much   more  deftly,  and   Godfrey's  criticism  of  The   Stone Angel's  transitions, that  "a  good deal of space is wasted,ms would certainly  not apply to the sharp and sudden jumps in The Fire-Dwellers.

53

LAURENCE AND THE  USE OF   MEMORY

The  use of memory in A  Bird in  the  House  is, although  the basis of the book, less interesting  than  that of the other novels. The entire novel is memory, recalled by the forty-year-old  Vanessa, whom the reader meets only at the end. As in The Stone   Angel   and  The  Diviners, the  memories  are  recounted  chronologically,14 and although  the reader can accept this disciplining of memory into a linear order because it is recounted  deliberately and without interruption, in the past tense, by the mature  Vanessa,  he cannot feel the same excitement he feels at one of Stacey's sudden  flashbacks. The  memories become memoirs, recapturing not the visions of childhood but the reflections of the writing adult. Even when sudden associative memories strike the young Vanessa, such as the memory of driving in the car with her grandfather, they are so elaborately  prefaced that their effect is dulled.
If, however, memory is examined  according to Mendilow's concept of it, where
"the  event in  the  past at the time of its occurrence is not as it is recalled later," where  "the  reaction,   not  the  action,  is important," and  where  "something  has changed-the perceiver,m 5    A  Bird  in  the  House  becomes a  more  interesting study  of  memory.  That   the  recollected  event  differs from  the  actual  is readily apparent in both The Fire-Dwellers  and  A  fest of God,  where the reader can see for himself how Stacey and  Rachel  distort in memory significant eventS, usually painful  ones;  however, it is only in A  Bird in the  House  (and  to a lesser extent, The Diviners  and The Stone  Angel) that the entire novel is devoted to a revalua­ tion of the past, by a character  attempting  to understand  herself in  time present. It may be this search  for integration  of self that  leads Kent  Thompson  to such praise for the technique  of A  Bird in  the  House, in which he says Laurence  has avoided  the "usual  dangers  of this method"  and  "accomplished  the virtues.... In  the same period  of time different  things occur in the life of Vanessa. She does not recognize their significance. However, the  narrator-by looking at different patterns in that same sequence of time-does." 16 Although the novel really never gives a precise sense of the adult  narrator  against  whom the younger Vanessa is played,  there  is a  use of the  double  perspective,  or the  "double  focus," which interested  such much  earlier  writers as Sterne, Richardson,  and  Defoe.17
Richardson's comments on the "two characters" that the author  has to support are  relevant  here;  the author,  he says, "has  to consider how his hero felt at the time of the events to be related, and  how it is natural  he should feel them at the time he is relating them."18  Furthermore,

lvluch  more  lively and  affecting ... must be the style of those who write in  the height of a  present distress; the mind tortured by the pangs of uncertainty ... ; than   the  dry,  narrative,  unanimated  style of a  person relating  difficulties and danger  surmounted,  can  be ... the relater perfectly at  ease; and  if himself,  un­ moved by his own story, not likely greatly to affect the reader.19

It  is easy to  place  the  Vanessa  who narrates  A  Bird  in  the  House  in  the latter


54

LAURENCE AND  THE USE OF  MEMORY

category, relating events "when  curiosity is extinguished"  and  "passion  cooled." 20
Thomas,   however,  appreciates   the  novel  for  just  this  distance   between  the character  who experiences and  the character  who narrates  "from  a platform  of adult  awareness.... Hagar   and  Rachel  were characters  embroiled  in  intensity and  requiring  intense  response;  Vanessa, the  narrator, provides a calmly consis­ tent viewpoint.m 1 Even if one does not dispute the "calmly consistent viewpoint" of the narrator, as Laurence  herself does/ 2  it is debatable  whether  the sacrifice of the   more  immediate   perceptions   of  the  experiencing   Vanessa   is   worth   the restrained style of the adult. The  distance between the two characters is too great for the reader  to accept  Vanessa's credibility as a child, or to participate in the life which she herself looks back on with relative uninvolvement.
There   is another   problem  involved  in  working  with  the  two  characters,   a problem  Mendilow  notes  in  Moll  Flanders, where  "two  characters   are  super­ imposed one upon the other,  and  the impression of the one who acts is coloured and  distorted by the interpretation of the one who  narrates."23  In order to retain Vanessa's  childhood   perceptions  while  at  the  same  time  presenting  an  adult evaluation  of a situation,  Laurence  is forced to overuse both  the  eavesdropping device and  the listening-but-not-understanding device, both  of  which  allow the child  Vanessa  to remain  "only  partially  knowing"  while the older  Vanessa can use  her  as  a  medium   for  presenting  an  incident.  The  young  Vanessa,  then, frequently  must  say,  "I could  not  really comprehend  these  things"; "her  face became startled,  and  something  else which I could not  fathom"; "at  the time· I felt only bewilderment." The  strain  between  the  two  Vanessas  becomes one  of the greatest  problems in  the novel, and it often  requires an unwilling suspension of disbelief on the part of the reader to accept both the understanding of the child and  also the detailed  and  more objective recall of the older Vanessa,  whom the reader never actually gets to meet and evaluate for himself.
The  two Hagars  in The  Stone  Angel present much more of a challenge to the
reader, for he is continually  evaluating  not only the younger Hagar,  but also the older Hagar  who remembers  her; thus the narrating  Hagar  is of greater  interest precisely because  she  is  not,  as  is  the  older  Vanessa,  a  fully  self-aware  and objective  character.  And,  having  realized  that  the  old  Hagar   is anything   but infallible, the reader become increasingly interested in seeing how she restructures and  revaluates her past life. Evidence of a change in Hagar's attitudes is easy to find, and, like Vanessa, she frequently  uses the "now-then" distinction to show an increased  understanding  over  the  years,  but  her  understanding  is often,  and significantly, a movement  from a definite assessment to one of doubt. Seeing her father with Lottie Dreiser's mother, she "felt no pity for her nor for him. I scorned them  both.... Yet now, remembering  their faces, I'd  be hard  put  to say which one of them had been the crueler."  Elsewhere, she says of Dan that  he "cultivated illness as some  people  cultivate  rare  plants.  Or  so  I  thought   then."  And,  "it

55

LAURENCE AND  THE USE OF  MEMORY

seemed to me then that  Matt  was almost apologetic, as though he felt he ought to tell me he didn't  blame me for her dying, when in his heart  he really did. Maybe he didn't  feel that  way at  all-how  can  a person tell?" Remembering her life with Bram, she recalls, "It was so clear to me then who was in the wrong. Now I'm  no longer certain"; "I have to laugh  now, although  I was livid then." This greater  understanding of her earlier self, and her final acceptance  of the necessity of needing  other  people -shown,  for example, in the juxtaposing  of her earlier refusal  to  "cry  in  front  of  strangers,  whatever  it  cost  me"  with  her  present discovery that  with the man at the beach she is "not  sorry I've  talked to him, not sorry  at  all,  and  that's   remarkable" -is made  possible by  the  two-character technique.
The  Diviners of course also uses this method,  presenting the reader  with two
Morags,  but  there is less reader  interest in the older Morag  than  there is in the older Hagar. The  older Morag,  unsure as she may be as to the best way to handle situations,  particularly   with  Pique,  is  nevertheless a  self-aware  character,   and probably  more secure in  her  identity  than  are  any of Laurence's  heroines. The reader  thus is rarely able  to see more than  Morag  herself does, and  the woman that  is introduced  at  the first of the book is not significantly different  from the woman at the end-which is not the case with Hagar.  Morag  grows and learns, particularly  in  her  relationship   with  Christie,  throughout   the  second  narrative level, but  does not move toward  a significant character  development  on the first level; she has, in a way, like the narrating  Vanessa, already  "arrived" when the novel  begins.  She  has  new  experiences,  of  course-some  with  new  friends (Royland,   the  Smiths)   and  some with  characters  the  reader  encounters  in her memories   (Pique,   Jules)-but  she  does  not  change  significantly  because  of them. Nor can the reader see her change because of what she learns from her memories.
This  latter  condition  is true  because Morag  not only understands herself, she
understands the  memory  process. She  realizes her "invented  memories,"  as she calls them,  are  unreliable  as documentaries  of fact,  that  they are  "maybe  true and  maybe  not".  "A  popular  misconception," she says, "is that  we can't  change the  past-everyone  is constantly  changing  their own  past, recalling it, revising it. What  really happened?  A meaningless question." Reflecting on a childhood memory, she seems even to be addressing herself to Vanessa's  problem:  "I can't trust it [her first clear memory]  completely, either, partly because I recognize anomalies  in it, ways of expressing the remembering, ways which aren't  those of a five-year-old, as though  I  were older in that  memory  (and  the words bigger) than  in some subsequent  ones.... " Morag's  consciousness, then,  of her editing, and  of  her  "refilming" her  memorybank  movies, makes her  aware  of her own unreliability  as  a  projectionist.  The  reader  cannot  be involved  in  this editing, this revaluation  of her  past,  as he is in Hagar's,  for Morag  is aware  that  there

LAURENCE AND THE USE OF  MEMORY

can  be no  totally factual version   of "what really  happened." Hagar attempts to give   the  facts, with   retrospective footnotes; Morag assures the   reader that  the footnotes would   have changed the  facts.  They are  equally valid  ways  of dealing fictionally with  the  memory process.
In terms of  the  two-character technique, however, its  use in  The Stone Angel
is much more significant and successful than it is in either A Bird in the House or The  Diviners, for  there is more dialogue between the  two  Hagars, and between them and the  reader, than is possible  with  the  two  Morags or  the  two  Vanessas. Compared  to   the   dynamic  Hagar-who  changes  most,    not   on   the   second
narrative level,  but   on  the  first-Vanessa  in  particular is a  static narrator.  As for  Morag, it  is interesting that   the  reader takes  leave  of  her,  as  well,  where he had   first  met   her:  watching the  river  that flows  both  ways  and looking "ahead into the  past,  and  back into the future, until the silence".
It is what Morag does  best.  It is also, of course, what Margaret Laurence does
best.  She  has  launched her  novels  like  boats  on  the  river  of  time, her  characters in  them swept backwards and forwards in  their  search for  a mainland that will give  them, at  last,  an  unclouded view of their little  island of Manawaka.


NOTES

1 A Bird in the House has been considered as other  than  a novel, albeit  as more  than a collection of short  stories;  Thompson may be closest to an  accurate classification when  he calls it a "whole-book," in which  "some stories re-examine the same chronological period  as other  stories,  but  examine them  with  a  new  focus  and  a different pattern of events." For  the purposes  of this paper, however,  it will be considered a novel.
2    The distinction between  objective, conceptual or linear  time,  and  subjective, per­ ceptual or psychological  time has frequently been made, and  can  be applied readily to  Laurence's characters, who each  are  strongly  influenced  by their  internal  time­  clocks. Memory is only  one aspect,  albeit  the  major  one, of  subjective time.
3  Ford  Madox Ford,  quoted  by Wayne  Booth, The  Rhetoric  of Fiction,  191.
4    Mendilow, A. A., Time  and the Novel, 221.
5   Remembered events,  however,  do follow each  other  in a causal  relationship; there is an  orderly  progression  of B follows A, C follows B, etc. The point  is. as Meyer­ hoff  explains,   "that this  peculiar order  of  the  inner  life  appears as,  or  must  be judged   as,  a  form   of  disorder  when   it  is  compared  with   objective   temporal sequence" (Time in Literature, 23).
8    Laurence, "Ten Years' Sentences," Canadian Literature 41, 14.
7    Thomas, Clara, Margaret Laurence, 38.
8   Proust, Mance!,  Swann's  Way, part one, Vol.  I  of Remembrance of Things  Past,
61.
9   Robertson, George,  "An  Artist's  Progress,"  Canadian  Literature  21,  54·
10  The  second  sentence,  to be consistent,  is in  the  present  tense, and  uses "are", not "were"; this  serves  only,  however,  to  emphasize  the  similar  situations on  the  two narrative levels, on two temporal levels.

57

LAURENCE AND THE  USE OF   MEMORY


11  It might  be noted  here  that  her memorybank movies are in the present  tense, while her  real  present  is narrated in  the  past. The  exact  reverse is true  with  Hagar. The reason  for  Morag's memories to  be  told  in  the  present  is implicit  in  their  movie format; there  is an  unaging presentness in both movies and  memories,  and  the film medium lends  itself,  for  this  reason,  readily  to  flashback.  It is no  contradiction, incidentally  (as  will  be  discussed  later), for  Morag to  say  her  movie-memories have  "been  refilmed, a scene deleted  here,  another added  there" (D,  23),  for this does not affect  their  quality of immediacy.
12  An interesting parallel might  be drawn  here with  the artistic  satisfaction of Woolf's Lily  Briscoe  in To  The  Lighthouse,  who ends  the  novel  by finishing  the  painting she  had  been  working  on  throughout: "With a sudden  intensity,  as if she saw  it clear for a second, she drew  a line there, in the centre.  It was done; it was finished. Yes,  she  thought,  laying   down   her  brush   in  extreme   fatigue, I  have   had   my vision"  (p. gro).
13  Godfrey,  Dave,  "For Bonfires," Tamarack  Review  XXXIII, 92-4.
14    Individual stories,  however,  move  ahead   in  time  beyond  the  fictional  present  of the  next  story,  but   the  general  movement of  Vanessa's  memory  is chronological rather  than   associative,  both   within   the  separate stories  and   in  the  novel  as  a whole.
15  Mendilow, Time and the Novel, 219.
16  Thompson, "Margaret  Laurence:  A   Bird   in   the   House,"   The   Fiddlehead
LXXXIV, rog.
17   Mendilow includes  an  interesting discussion of these authors and  the double  focus, in a section  called  "The Time Locus of the  Pseudo-Author," pp. 8g-g6.
18   Richardson, quoted by Mendilow, Time  and the Novel, go-r.
19   Ibid.
20    Ibid.
21   Thomas, Margaret  Laurence, 55-6.
22     Speaking of  her  grandfather, she  says, "I think  I honestly  kept  on  disliking  him until  I got  all  the  way  through those  stories, ... when  I realized  not  only  that  I didn't dislike  him  anymore, but  that  there  were  things  about  him  that  I greatly admired." (quoted by Wigmore, "Margaret Laurence," 52) .
23    Mendilow, Time  and the Novel, gr.



CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY  OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
207S WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T  1 W5  / 228-4741

BATTLES WITH THE TROLLS
 





Peter Baltensperger


1:ASSERTION  OF   Magnus  Eisengrim  near  the conclusion of The  M anticore, "I am what  I have made myself," and  Liesl's postulate in the
same  chapter   that   "the   modern   hero is the  man  who  conquers  in  the  inner struggle"  crystallize the theme which underlies all five novels of Robertson  Davies from Tempest-Yost (I 95 I )  to The  Manticore  (I 972). It is the theme of  psycho­ logical growth  toward  wholeness which is based on the existential struggle carried on  in  the  interior  spaces  of  the  mind  and  culminates  in  the  fulfilment  of the "yearning   for  greater   enlightenment   through  mystical  experience."   (Tempest­ Tost)
This  theme  runs  through  the five novels in a three-fold  manner.  In  its most
obvious form it serves as the framework in which the events and  the characters evolve and  progress  within  the  boundaries  of  each  novel.  Whether   the  inner growth  of the principal  characters  is painfully slow and  barely recognizable as in the early novels, or far-reaching  and symbolically significant as in the later ones, it is embodied in a specific way in each of the five books.
The  series of novels viewed as a whole reflects the same theme  in the progres­
sion from its embryonic  expression in the form of unrest and  dissatisfaction and the  "yearning   for  greater   fulfilment"  through   various  stages  of  development toward levels of insight and into realms of wisdom and serenity.
Thirdly,  as manifestations  of a  creative consciousness as it has  found  expres­
sion  in  and   through   language,  the  novels reflect  the  existential  struggle  and growth  not only of their  principal  characters  but also, and  more importantly,  of the author  himself.
A  neo-Romantic   novel  exploring  the  interior  spaces of  the  human   mind  is
essentially the  expression  of a  creative  consciousness at  a  given  point  in  time, while the body of work of an author is the manifestation of the growth of that consciousness as it has moved  through  time. Robertson  Davies has posited in his novels the patterns  and  the essences of his life in ways which enable the reader  to take  part  actively in  the  developmental  processes of the  author's consciousness and  to  follow  his  quest  toward   the  realms  of  fulfilment,  self-realization,  and mystical revelation.
Whether  the struggle  of the  striving individual  is conceptualized  in  terms of
Jungian  individuation and self-realization, in the symbolism of the Superior  Man


59

BATTLES WITH THE TROLLS

of Eastern  philosophies, or as a Kierkegaardian progression toward the leap of transcendence  in  which  the  temporal  body and  the eternal  mind  fuse to create spiritual  totality, it is always conceived of as a struggle without end. The  processes of  psychological  growth  are  not  directed  toward  definite  goals  which  can  be attained  and  directly comprehended, but rather  into  higher, more complete and more  spiritual   realms  of  awareness  and   wisdom  which  can   be  glimpsed  in moments of fulfilment and totality.
Nor  is it  a  quest  for  happiness,  because  happiness is a  state  of  repose and therefore stagnation. Self-realization is a dynamic  process which for ever reaches beyond itself in  often  painful  struggles  with  the confines of existence.  None of the main  characters  in the five novels ever achieves happiness. Those among the secondary  figures who appear  outwardly  happy  and  securely complete  function as  foils for  contrast  and  often  satire  because  they  have ceased  to  become and therefore to be alive in the truest sense of the word.
From  Hector  Mackilwraith through  the Yarrows and the McGorkills to David Staunton's trolls,  these  characters  are  never capable  of any  significant  kind  of insight or growth. The novels therefore never conclude with a "happy ending" because at the conclusion of each  book the main characters  who are involved in the struggle,  and  who live because they grow, have not come to the end of their road  but  rather  to a new plateau  which points to a new height and  not to itself.
As they in tum  focus on different  aspects of the theme of growth and  at their
conclusion  point  to the  next step,  to another  Chinese box inside itself, to a new struggle and  a new attainment, the novels form an ascending succession of stages representative  of the many levels of individual strife. From one novel to the next, the  main  theme  becomes more  and  more  pronounced,  its treatment more and more  complex  and  refined,  its  boundaries  more clearly defined  and  its  compo­ nents  more sophisticated.  It  is in  this respect that  they reflect the  psychological growth of the author. Attainments which are merely hinted at in the early novels are realized through  later  protagonists, and themes sketched out for the Salterton characters  become  fully developed  in  the lives of  Dunstan  Ramsay  and  David Staunton.
The   basic  movement  in  the  psychological growth  process is the  progression
from "confident  innocence  through  the bitterness of experience toward  the rueful wisdom  of self-knowledge"  (A  Mixture of Frailties), in  which  the  task of the seeker is to fuse the temporal  with the eternal so as to posit spirit and acquire true individuality.   The   initial   experience  of  a  growing  consciousness on  its  road toward  self-realization  is extemporalized  in the conflicts arising from the restric­ tions and  obligations  caused  by the parent-child  relationship.  Filial predicament  and  the guilt caused by the struggles of the young to liberate themselves from the parental   bondage  permeate  all  of the  novels. Robertson  Davies makes one  his mouthpieces express this theme in A Mixture of Frailties.

6o

BATTLES WITH THE TROLLS

I think the most disgusting and immoral relationship is between mothers and sons
-no, on second thought, between fathers and daughters.

The   father-daughter  as  well  as the  mother-daughter conflicts  are  in  reality more  easily resolved, though  the  effect of  the struggle stops short  of  transcen­ dental  attainment. It is the mother-son conflict and, to a somewhat lesser degree, the  father-son  confrontation which Robertson  Davies finds most  difficult and  at times almost impossible to resolve.
All the variations  of the  parent-child  relationship  are  utilized in the  novels to initiate the struggle of the main characters after their leap from innocence into experience. For the protagonists in the earlier novels it is also their last significant act;   they  are  incapable   of  moving  on  to  higher  levels of  liberation.  For  the modern  heroes in the later novels it is merely a beginning, the first though  deeply significant  link in a long chain  of traps  which have to be recognized  and  over­ come.
Hector  Mackilwraith  is the first figure to liberate himself successfully from the maternal   bondage,  but  since  his is  an  act  of intellectual  determination rather than  of self-realization it is of little psychological significance and  does not result in any growth.
Solomon  Bridgetower and  Pearl  Vambrace  are much  more deeply involved in
their  predicament,  though  their success is still limited. Pearl succeeds in asserting her  individuality  and  resolves the  conflict  with  her  father,  but  Solly's struggle with  his  dominant   and  demanding  mother  extends  over  all  of  the  first  three novels without  resulting in relief from the unending  pain imposed  on his life by his chief troll.
Bridgetower is in  this  respect  characteristic  of  the first two Salterton  novels.
The  protagonists  are  presented  primarily in unsuccessful battles  with each other and  only peripherally in significant encounters  with their innermost  selves. Some are  capable  of  resolving  the  problems  arising  from  interpersonal   relationships, usually with the aid of one of the early mentor figures-Humphrey Cobbler, Valentine  Rich, and  Elspeth Fielding. None can come to grips with their internal discrepancies.  Their   formative  years  are  narrated   in  retrospect  but  are  rarely analyzed  psychologically as they  are in the later  novels. Characters of  predeter­ mined  personalities who act out their lives according to predictable patterns,  they are  pre-psychological types whose mental growth  is restricted  to ordinary levels of maturity and whose involvement remains on unassmning planes.

kE MAJORITY of the characters  in all five novels are frozen into  this  kind of spiritual  immobility.  The  figures representative  of the negative forces in  life are  incapable  of developing  psychologically and  experiencing  any

6x

BATTLES WITH  THE TROLLS

deep kind of change.  They  are the foils against which the struggles of the heroes take  place,  the  trolls with  whom  they have to battle, the Shadow  figures which they have left behind. The  personifications of the positive forces are immobilized at  relatively advanced  levels of development as they are deemed sufficient for the immediate  purposes. These are the influential archetypes who guide the heroes on their  quests, provide  cues for  their  movements, and  represent sources of insight and revelations.
In   the  first  two  Salterton   novels  the  latter   types  are  only  rudimentarily developed  while  the  former  ones constitute  the  main  content.  The  main  pro­ tagonists are  not significantly  differentiated  from them as yet, so that  the  theme of psychological growth  is practically  non-existent except in a few isolated cases. Yet it is contained  in both  and  foreshadows its greater  development  in  the later novels.
In  Tempest-Tost it finds expression in the form of the embryonic  externaliza­
tion of unrest and  dissatisfaction in the main characters,  coupled with a longing for something more, something  beyond the fruitless battles with the trolls, a "consciousness of a destiny apart  from these unhappy  creatures" and  a "seeking for means by which  he might  be delivered from his fate".  The  author  is groping for  a  resolution of the  conflict,  for a liberation  from the confines imposed upon the  Salterton  characters, but  is not  yet able  to actualize  the  longing,  and  the yearning is not fulfilled.
The same inability  pervades  most of Leaven  of Malice. The  characters  remain
caught  in the absurdity  of existence and in the struggles continues without bring­ ing relief. Toward the  end of the book, Gloster Ridley comes to terrns with one of his ghosts an,d attains  a measure of freedom through  his realization that  "wis­ dom may be rented  on the experience of others, but  we buy it at an inordinate  price before we make it our own forever."
More  importantly, Pearl  Vambrace  manages  to extract  a  meaning  from  her
struggle and become a person in her own right. She breaks through her quiet submissiveness  to  recognize   her   predicament,   free  herself  from  the   paternal bondage and become the first protagonist to move toward a new awareness and selfhood. She assumes a new name, Veronica,  to signify the change, foreshadow­ ing the romantic  flight of fancy and ultimate renaming in A Mixture of Frailties, the similar  though  more  profound  baptism in Fifth  Business, and  the gesture of despair  in  The  Manticore. Yet she cannot  transmit  her  new strength  to Solly, who  despite  his  awareness   of  the  predicament  and  his  desire  for  liberation, remains  chained  to  his impotent   role in  the  drama  of "Mother alone  with her Boy." (Tempest-Tost)
The  questing  figures can  liberate  themselves, but  they cannot  assist others in
the struggle. This  function  is carried out by the Magus in his many forms, those higher figures who have already  attained  levels of insight and  can therefore give

BATTLES WITH  THE TROLLS

advice and  guidance.  But these figures do not come into existence in an effective way until A Mixture of Frailties.
Rudiments of the  Magus  appear  in  the first two novels, though  they operate at low levels of spirituality  and  have little effect upon those they attempt  to aid. Hector   Mackilwraith  is  the  initial  personification  of  the  Magus,  but  he  fails drastically  in  his supposed  role of "honest  counsellor" and  "oracle  of wisdom" (Tempest-Tost), when  he loses himself in  his  own dilemmas.  Elspeth  Fielding effects a rudimentary liberation  in Ridley, but only Humphrey Cobbler  displays a significant  potentiality  as Solly's friend, confessor, and  advisor. With  his inde­ pendent approach  to life and his insights into human  predicaments  he succeeds in starting  Solly on an initial course of positive action. Little comes of  this, however, because-as Cobbler  himself realizes-the framework  within  which  he has to act is limited. "You are a prisoner of circumstances,"  he lectures Solly, "and  it is my considered view that you are not one of the tiny minority of  mankind  that can grapple  with  circumstance  and  give it a fall."  (Leaven of  Malice)  In  his own right, he is nonetheless a worthy forerunner  of the later Magus  figures. His flash of insight with which he tries to launch  Solly on a course of self-realization fore­ shadows much of what  Dr. von Haller will teach David Staunton in The Manti­ core. "Everybody  is trapped. The  best you can  hope for is to understand your trap and make terms with it, tooth by tooth." (Leaven of Malice)
The  true Magus figure takes a more positive approach  than  that.  He treats life
as  a  challenge  which  can  be  met  successfully to  the  ultimate   benefit  of  the contestant.  Solly's final  triumph  over his  life consists in  "giving  up  caring  too much  about  anything" and  "blunting the  edge  of  fate  by  being  stoical."  (A Mixture of Frailties)  This  would  not suffice for the later seekers, but  without  a true  Magus  it seems the  best which can  be accomplished  within  the confines of Salterton.
The  Magus  comes to maturity  and full effectiveness in the figure of Sir Bene­
dict  Domdaniel.  This  new character  possesses the attributes  of the  Wise Man: his  personality  has  a  controlled   forcefulness  which  is  awe-inspiring   to  those around  him, his hold on life is firm and  determined, and his philosophy of life is a  creative  union  of  imaginative  and  materialistic  forces which  alone  can  lead toward self-knowledge and fulfilment.
Robertson Davies is not yet able to create "one of the tiny minority of mankind
that can grapple  with circumstance and give it a fall" to match  the dominance  of Domdaniel,  but in the character  of Domdaniel's pupil Monica  Gall the capacities for  intellectual  quest  and  awareness  have  been  sufficiently developed  to  make A  Mixture of Frailties  a successful novel of gmwth.  The  novel is still rooted in Salterton  and  peripherally  continues the  analysis of Solly's and  Vemnica's con­ flicts with  their  world,  but  the  main  focus is on  the more mature  and  psycho­ logically more  successful Monica.  By exchanging  the  local scene for  the  inter-

BATTLES WITH THE TROLLS

national  and  the  individual   for  a  more  universal  theme,  it  moves  beyond  the restriction of the first two novels into realms of genuine discovery.
The  new heroine is still not capable of self-realization and individuation in its true sense. Her  character embodies the basic prerequisites for growth  but not the ability  to  liberate   and   utilize  the  dormant   forces  without   constant   external guidance. The  novel is primarily  a treatise on the role of the Magus in his many forms rather  than  on  the  processes of individuation in the interior  spaces of the mind.  Its main  characters  are  all mentors of varying d grees
through  the  tribulations of experience,  provide  her  with  wisdom and  means of
fulfilment, and are responsible for all her major progressions.
Heading  the array of mentors is Domdaniel, characteristically  European  and characteristically  of the opposite sex, as are most of the mentors in the five novels. His is a multiple  role which surpasses in impact  and importance the dominance of Davies'  professional mentor  Dr. von Haller  and of that  cryptic guide into the darkest  caves,  Lieselotte  VitzlipiitzlijNaegeli. He  lacks,  however,  the  psycho­ logical astuteness of the Jungian analyst and the oracular  spirituality of  Ramsay's devil,  and  Monica's   self-realization  necessarily  remains  at  an  intellectual  and emotional   level  without   reaching   the  spiritual   stages   characteristic   of  total individuation.
Domdaniel  is at once chief guide through  the Kierkegaardian stages of  experi­ ence,  source  of  self-knowledge,  shaper  of  artistic  career,  liberator,  and  future husband   (and,  as such,  giver  of a  new  name) . By managing  the  interactions between his pupil and  his assistants with diligence and purposeful determination, he is indirectly  responsible for her  physical liberation  through  Murtagh Molloy, her initiation  into  the mysteries of passion and  joy through Giles Revelstoke, the refinement  of  her  interpersonal  relationships  through  Amy  Neilson,  and   her intellectual enlightenment through John Scott Ripon and Bun Eccles.
Monica's  story  ends  with  the  integration   of  the  levels of  experience  into  a
balanced  whole, but  her final attainment falls distinctly though  marginally short of the Kierkegaardian leap because of Domdaniel's  essentially intellectual  nature. The  temporal  has not  been fused with the eternal,  and  Monica's  final salvation remains  confined  to a  longing  which she is incapable  of realizing,  the longing which is expressed in her favourite song, "Water Parted".

It meant ... a longing for what was perhaps unattainable in this world, a longing for  a  fulfilment  which  was of  the spirit  and  not of  the flesh ... It  meant  the aspiration  toward  that  from  which she drew  her  strength,  and  to  which she returned when the concerns of daily life were set aside. It was a yearning toward all the vast, inexplicable, irrational  treasury from which her life drew whatever meaning and worth it possessed. It was the yearning for-?

The  novel ends on this questioning  note, with the final fulfilment an unattain-

BATTLES WITH THE TROLLS

able  goal  despite   the   thorough  reformation of  Monica's Self  and   despite   her re-birth into  a new  life,  because  as she  realizes herself,  "not all  the  wise men  in the world would ever tell her."


bE LEAP INTO SPIRITUALITY requires  more than  wisdom and more  than  a Magus  figure.  It  requires  a flash of insight  which  is not of the mind
but  of  the  spirit  itself,  a  mystical   revelation   of  the  essence  of  existence  which cannot be forced  because  it transcends existence and  is beyond  immediate comprehension. It can  only  be realized  in mysterious  moments when  the spirit  is full of itself and  fuses briefly  with  the eternal  to become  its own  wisdom  and  its own   fulfilment.   The   driving force  leading   into  these  moments does  not  come from   the  Magus   but  from  mystical  beings  which  have  themselves  transcended the  confines of temporal existence  and  are in contact  with  the absolute.
It took a twelve-year  span  for such a being to materialize for Robertson Davies and  to make  possible the logical sequence  to Monica's transformation. The influ­ ence  of Lies! on  Dunstan Ramsay and  David  Staunton begins  where  the  Magus figures   leave   off,  so  that   their   processes  of  individuation  transcend   the  self­ realization   attained by Veronica and  Monica into  realms  of wisdom  which  were suggested  but never actualized in the earlier novels.
The   patterns of  growth  in  Fifth   Business  and  The   Manticore  follow  veins essentially  identical to  those  in  the  Salterton novels. The   basic  obstacle  is once again  the  parental bond  which  must  be broken  in order  to move  from  innocence into experience. In  the story of Hector  Mackilwraith's childhood this move was accomplished as a  matter of course  early  in Tempest-Tost, but  since  his mother was  a  weak  figure  and  he  himself  relatively  strong  in  a  rigid  and  purely  deter­ ministic  way,  its significance remained marginal and  in  terms  of  self-realization inconsequential.
Pearl  Vambrace faced  the dilemma twice, in Leaven  of Malice  with  her father
where  it served  to launch her on a new path,  and  in  A Mixture of Frailties with Solly's  mother   where  it  took  in  symbolic  significance.  With  Monica's liberation from  her  mother's dominance, two  important elements  were  introduced into  the struggle: the  concept  of guilt  as an  inherent aspect  of the loss of innocence, and the ability to come to terms with  that guilt by recognizing  and  accepting its source and   integrating  the   experience in its  fullest.  The   narratives  of  Ramsay and Staunton are  built  on this pattern, though  the treatment of the  theme  is consider­ ably more complex and  allegorical.
Ramsay's bondage to his mother is severed  early in  Fifth  Business  without too much  apparent difficulty  and  effort,  but  the  guilt is immediately sublimated into a  religious  kind  of dependency and  transferred on  to the strong Anima figure of

BATTLES WITH THE  TROLLS

Mary  Dempster,  from  whose bonds  he can only liberate  himself late  in  his life and  only  under  the  influence  of  the  cryptic  figure arising  out  of  the  farthest reaches of his consciousness.
David  Staunton  remains chained  to the shadow of his powerful  father  for the best part  of his life although  in adulthood  he defies the parental  intentions  and strives to become a person in his own right. But the bondage is deep-seated and retains a strong influence despite the superficial break.
The  parent-daughter conflicts have by now been resolved and  both Veronica and  Monica  have successfully transcended  the restricting bandages,  but the two sons are forced to suffer long and often fierce battles. The failure of Solomon Bridgetower  reverberates  through  Ramsay's  life with  his saint  and  through  the long  sessions of David's  psychoanalysis. The  personal struggles of  the  two sons are  unsuccessful in this  respect,  and  the influence of their  Magi  is insufficient. They  both in tum  require a transcendental leap to effect their final liberation and complete their  processes of self-realization.
The  externalizations of  the  Magus  figures and  of the  lesser types of  Troll, Shadow,  Anima/ Animus,  Friend,  and  Mentor  of A Mixture of Frailties appear again  in Fifth  Business and  in The Manticore. Where the narrative of Monica's artistic  and  spiritual   education   gathered   together  the  possibilities and  latent patterns  of  the  first two Salterton  novels and  gave them  new significance in  a strictly  controlled  and   purposefully  directed  framework,  the  two  psychological novels  refine  the  extemalizations of  the  psychic forces and  elevate  them  into symbolic realms in two further variations on the theme.
In  A Mixture of Frailties the ambivalence of Humphrey  Cobbler  was resolved in  the  figure of Domdaniel  and  the  range  of mentors  was extended  to include specific personifications  of  the  various stages of growth.  In  Ramsay's  narrative, the Magus  figure is fused with  the hero and Ramsay acquires the self-knowledge and  insights previously provided  by Domdaniel largely on his own. The  mentors are  at  the  same  time  de-emphasized,   though  they  appear   at  the  appropriate phases of Ramsay's  journey in forms very similar to those outlined in A Mixture of Frailties. Diana  Marfleet  assists in the  physical re-birth and  gives Ramsay his new name, Liesl in the emotional  initiation,  and  Padre Blazon in the intellectual liberation,  but  the  main  movements  are accomplished by Ramsay  himself. The novel is primarily a treatise on the role of the Self, and Ramsay's attainments are therefore correspondingly more significant and profound.
The M anticore   repeats  the  movement  a  third  time. David  Staunton moves
through   the  same   phases  as  his  two  predecessors, but  his  actual   movement through   the   physical   ( Myrrha   Martindale),  emotional   (Judith  Wolff)   and intellectual    ( Pargetter   of  Balliol)   levels  of  experience  is  reminiscent   of  the struggles in the first two Salterton  novels in that  it is largely meaningless to him at  the time and  does not result in significant growth. The  emphasis is not, how-

66

BATTLES WITH THE TROLLS

ever,  on  the  actual  movement,  but  rather  on  its analysis in  terms  of  Jungian symbolism  in  a  retrospective  psychoanalytic  setting.  It  is  this  analysis  of  past events which  provides Staunton  with the insights necessary for the integration of his experiences into a meaningful  process of individuation. The  novel adds a third element  to the  theme  of growth,  the  role of the  Psyche, by means  of which  it brings  into  clearer  focus the  tribulations  and  attainments of the earlier  seekers.
The  figure  of the  Magus  re-appears  as a separate  entity  in  David's psycho­
analysis in  the form of Dr. von Haller;  not as a guide  through  external  experi­ ence like Domdaniel,  but  rather  as an interpreter  of the dark  symbolism of the interior spaces of the mind.
With   respect  to  the  movements  through  experience,  the  two  novels  closely resemble  A  Mixture of Frailties,  but  they are  brought  past the questioning note reflected  in  "Water Parted" with  the creation  of the transcendent Liesl, whose visionary  revelations  enable  both  Ramsay  and  Staunton  to attain  the  promised wisdom  of  self-knowledge. With  this,  the  two  novels transcend   all  the  earlier experiences of the author  and move into the visionary comprehension  of existence in  its  many-faceted  temporality  as it  is contained  and  reflected  in  the  eternal truths.  The  struggle ceases with the oracular  revelations of the spirit  of wisdom. The  anguish  of existence, which  created  the dominant  atmosphere  in  Tempest­ Tost  and  Leaven  of Malice  but  which started  to lose its threat  in  A  Mixture of Frailties, is finally overcome by the highly introspective and  psychologically astute maturation  processes of  the  two  protagonists  as  they  move into  the  realms  of enlightenment   and  fulfilment. The  yearning  posited in  Tempest-Tost is fulfilled in the spiritual  re-birth  of Ramsay and Staunton  as they  realize the unity of the infinite  and  the finite which  transcends existence  and arrive  at  a deeper  under­ standing  of themselves and  of their  role in  the  totality of existence. Their  leap yields "some secret, some valuable  permanent insight, into  the nature  of life and the  true  end  of man"  (Fifth Business)  as  they  "learn  to know  (themselves)   as fully human" and  acquire  "a  fuller  comprehension  of (their)   humanity" (The Manticore).
Robertson   Davies  has  moved  through   the  levels of  externalization  of  the creative  consciousness in  the  three  Salterton  novels, in  the  disguise  of  Actor, Editor,  and  Artist,  and  in  that  of Scholar and  Initiate  in the  two psychological novels, in his search for the "flashes of insight  (with  which a great  man)   pierces through   the  nonsense  of  his  time  and  gets  at  something  that  really  matters" (Tempest-Tost). Over  the  course  of five novels and  a  twenty-year  process of growth,  what  really matters  to him has clearly emerged and  has found  increas­ ingly complex and sophisticated  expression in the language of his books. It is the conquest of one's Self in the inner struggle and  the knowledge of  oneself as fully human. It is to be.

L'ESPACE INTERIEUR CHEZ RINGUET



Rene Labonte







LA PERSONNAUTE  d'un
 romanCier  se  revele  de  bien  des

fac;;ons a travers  son oeuvre: par  exemple,  par ses interventions dans  le racit,  son attitude face  a  ses  personnages ou  encore  par  le choix  qu'il  a  fait  du  materiau linguistique  qui   constitue son  roman.  Cependant,  c'est  par   l'intermediaire de personnages en  situation,  c'est-a-dire par  la  fac;;on qu'ont ceux-ci  de  sentir  les objets  et de vivre  avec  d'autres hommes,  que  le romancier exprime  le mieux-et souvent   a  son  insu -une  vision  du  monde  qui  lui  est  propre. QueUe  est cette vision  chez  Ringuet?  QueUe  conception  de  la  vie  se  degage   de  !'ensemble de
!'oeuvre romanesque dcet  ecrivain  quebecois?  Pour  decrire  son espace interieur, nous  avons  recompose dans  ses grandes lignes la demarche d'un personnage syn­ thetique, dont  la conscience, par son acceptation ou son rejet  du monde exterieur, determine un mode  d'existence, qui corresponde a celu de l'ecrivain.
Le  paysan  de  Trente   Arpents  n'a  pas eu  a choisir la direction qu'il  aurait pu
donner a sa vie, car "ce sont  les chases qui ont decide  pour lui, et les gens, conduits par  les chases."  Michel Garneau, lui, a eu a choisir de queUe fac;;on il voulait  "se" vivre: "pour etre  heureux: faire  fortune. Pour  faire  fortune: etre fort.  Ce qui se ramenait a !',equation: pour  etre heureux, etre  dur." Pour  mieux  atteindre ce but, il  a  meme  ete  jusqu'a changer son  prenom,  croyant  ainsi  abolir  un  passe qu'il deteste.  L'argent permettra-t-il, un  jour, a Robert M. Garneau de connaitre le bonheur?  Non,   parce   que,   inconsciemment, il  ne  cesse de  chercher  un   point d'appui et que,  toujours, il fait face au vide.
Le passe de Garneau, peuple  de fantomes,  lui apparait constamment comme  un
abime.  L'image de  la  fosse est  meme  projectee  dans  I'avenir: "le  solei!, qui  s'en
( va)   rejoindre les soleils passes dans  la fosse du couchant" et "le  paysage qui  une fois de  plus  ( va)   s'engloutir dans le gouffre  de la nuit"  ne representent-ils pas le gouffre  de la mort? En effet, le declin du  jour represente  le declin de la vie. Meme si le narrateur ne  fait,  dans  ces deux  textes,  aucune allusion  directe  ala mort,  la fosse et le gouffre,  associes a  un  declin,  signifient  le vide et la mort, le vide de la
mort. Globalement, l'abime  ( la fosse ou le gouffre) symbolise "les etats  informels

68

L'ESPACE INTERIEUR

de !'existence", et au point  de vue psychologique, "il correspond autant a !'indeter­ mination  de  l'enfance qu'a  l'indifferenciation de  la  fin,  decomposition  de  la personne.m
La   representation  que   Garneau se  fait   de  la  mort   ne  differe   pas  de  celle qu'Euchariste se fait  de sa mort,  lorsque celui-ci revoit sa vie, "un chemin  paisible et  long,   ( ... )   une  douce   montee vers  le terme  de !'horizon ou  il viendrait a disparaitre en  une  cassure  brusque et  nette,  en  plein  azur,  un  jour,  plus tard." Sans   manifester  de  crainte ou  de  surprise,   le  paysan   de  Ringuet  voit  le  vide succeder   tout  naturellement a la  matiere.  Il  n'y  a  done  pas  d'appui  au-dela de cette  rupture de  l'horizontale ( la  vie humaine), et 1e  silence  de  Ringuet face  a l'apres-vie laisse entendre que  le  ciel  est vide.  D'ailleurs, entre  ce  demier et  la terre, il n'y a pas de point  de jonction,  la verticale s'arretant ala hauteur du monde visible.
Cette  image  de  l'ab1me ou de la  fosse est recurrente dans  l'oeuvre de Ringuet. Ainsi, on  peut  lire dans  Trente Arpents, a propos d'Oguinase, qui vient de quitter la  ferme   paternelle  pour   entrer  au  college:   "c'est   tout   cela   (Ies  siens  et  son entourage familier)  que   des  choses  et  des  gens  nouveaux et  etrangers allaient jeter dans l'abime du passe, allaient  vider de toute importance." Dans Confidences, l'auteur qualifie  le passe de "puits profond" et parle  de "ces  acteurs d'un jour  la plupart tombes  au  creux  de la mort,  les autres  dans  Ia fosse tout  aussi emelle  de l'oubli".
Dans  le  Poids  du   jour,  le  vide  n'est  pas  uniquement  une  caracteristique de l'abime, il est ressenti physiquement par Garneau, qui,  par  exemple,  ne descendra pas  dans  le puits  d'une mine  pour  en  faire  la visite, car  "les  ascenseurs,  meme moderes,  l'angoissaient fortement". Il n'est  pas  jusqu'au mur  qui  ne devienne Ie vide  a un  moment  ou Garneau se sent impuissant a regler  un  problcme familial: "( il)  tourna 1egerement  la  tete  vers Ie mur,  vers le vide",  nous  dit  le narrateur; pourtant,  le  mur,   matiere qui   limite   l'espace,   serait   tout   indique  pour   servir d'appui  dans   les  moments de  defaillance. On   trouvera  dans   Confidences,  un souvenir  d'enfance ou !'on  voit  quelle  valeur  Ie mur  peut  revetir   pour  l'auteur. Celui-ci parle d'un  apostat bien connu  au Canada franc;ais:  Chiniquy.

Nous etions de  toutes  fa<;ons certains  qu'il  mourrait de Ia fa<;on classique  et obliga­ toire  pour  les apostats: "Trop tard,  trop  tard,  s'ecrierait-il. Et  se  tournant vers Ia muraille il expirerait". Je  ne me demandais pas en quoi le fait  de se tourner vers le mur  etait  un signe certain d'eternelle perdition. Mais le lien s'etait ace point impose
a mon esprit  que  je fus longtemps a ne pas oser me tourner du cote de Ia muraille Ie
soir  pour  dormir.

Cette  hantise  du  mur   pourrait  peut-etre expliquer pourquoi ce dernier ne  peut etre senti  comme  un objet  securisant. Au mur,  est lie !'idee  de perdition eternelle, d'enfer, d'abime.

6g

L'ESPACE INTERIEUR



LE PERSONNAGE RINGUETIEN va-t-il trouver un point d'appui dans  le present?  Certainement pas Garneau,  car celui-ci vit dans  un espace qui est un decor sans fond. Enfant,  n'a-t-'il pas eprouve dans la nature  le "vide eton­ nant  de l'eau  a perte de vue, qui  tout la-bas rejoignait le vide jumeau du  del et se confondait  avec  lui,"  et  Garneau, vieillissant, ne ressent-il pas encore le vide dela  nature  "en  face  de cette  campagne  immense, devant,  cet horizon  repousse a  l'infini,  ces arbres  et  ces maisons  hors de  portee?"  Faute  d'avoir  trouve  un point  d'appui,  Garneau reste demuni.  Pour  abolir  la distance  qui  le separe du monde,  il  lui  faudrait  creer  des  liens,  etre  tendre,  car  la  tendresse  abolit  les distances;  mais de  cela Garneau est incapable.  Et  puisque l'abime  du  passe ne peut  etre  aboli,  la  distance  que  son passe etablit  entre lui et le  monde  ne peut etre franchie.
Euchariste,  lui, a trouve  la securite,  tout d'abord  aupres  de ses parents adop­ tifs, puis dans  la  petite societe  paroissiale dont  il se sait  accepte  et a  laquelle il participe.  Mais  c'est  dans  la  terre,  qui  est  Femme,  que  ce  paysan  trouve  son principal   point  d'appui; que  ce support  se derobe,  pris de  vertige,  i1 ne  peut reprendre pied  sur  un  autre  sol. Le  paysan  de  Ringuet  est  l'homme  d'un  seul temps et d'un  seul espace:  le temps de la nature  vecu sur trente  arpents  de terre laurentiennne.
Cette  presence ou cette absence d'un  point d'appui, on la retrouve  egalement dans des nouvelles de Ringuet.
L'orphelin   de  l'Heritage  sera  rejete  par  la  petite societe  mesquine  et  xeno­ phobe  ou il est  venu  essayer de  prendre  racine. Il ne re<;oit d'accueil  que d'une  orpheline  dont  il sent  qu'elle  est  "la  seule chose de cette  terre  (la  terre  ou il a tente  de  s'etablir)  qu'il  eut  voulu  emporter  en  son coeur."  Et  c'est  ensemble qu'ils  quittent ce milieu  hostile, chacun  d'eux  semblant  avoir  trouve,  au  mains pour un moment, dans l'autre un soutien.
Dans   Nocturne,   un   naufrage,   qui  lutte  contre  l'element   liquide  qui  veut
I'absorber, trouve soudain un point d'appui:

II a touche  quelque chose qui  n'a pas cede, qui a resiste, obstinement; quelque chose qui ... tient  au  sol. Il  a  touche quelque chose qui  n'est  pas de  l'eau  ... (  ... )  Le ciel et I'air et les etoiles et le vent  appuient sur sa tete, ses epaules, ses bras, le collent
a cette  pierre  benie a laquelle il ne peut croire.

Ce  passage,  ou  quelqu'un savoure  l'intensite  du  moment,  est vraiment  excep­ tionnel chez Ringuet,  car son personnage ne s'arrete  pas plus a penser ala mort qu'il  ne s'arrete   a  accueillir  l'instant  dans  sa  nouveaute.  Tendu   vers  un but  a atteindre, ce  volontaire  s'eprouve   dans  la  duree,  car  il a  besoin de  continuite pour  donner  de  l'unite  a  sa  vie, con<_;ue  selon un  projet.  D'instinct,  i1 evite le temps  de la sensibilite, qui  est discontinuite.  Un  roman  de Ringuet, c'est la vie

70

L'ESPACE INTERIEUR

d'un  volontaire, qui se deroule selon un projet, avec la presence ou l'absence d'un support.  De ce point de vue, Trente Arpents finit ou le Poids du  jour commence. Dans  Trente  Arpents, c'est  le point  d'appui qui s'est derobe;  dans  le Poids  du jour,  c'est  le  point  d'appui  qui  est  recherche.  Cette  recherche   d'un   support coincide avec celle du bonheur.
Ou  done  tous ces orphelins  que  sont  les personnages de  Ringuet   peuvent-ils trouver  le  bonheur?  Precisons immediatement qu'il  s'agit  d'un  bonheur  relatif, car le bonheur absolu, chez Ringuet, ne saurait exister que dans la tete de schizophrenes,  qui  vivent continuellement  un reve devenu  l'unique realite. 11 en est ainsi de l'exalte de l'Immortel, qui se tire une balle dans la tete afin de devenir un  dieu, et du  pauvre  ouvrier  du  Bonheur, qui n'a  connu de moments  heureux que  ceux qu'il  a  passes "dans  les oasis merveilleuses de !'illusion"  pendant  qu'il etait   hospitalise.  Ce  bonheur   ne  saura:it etre  trouve  dans  la  ville industrielle, laide,  ou  l'on  se sent  etranger,   ni  dans  la  societe bourgeoise,  ou  dominent  le paraitre  et les sentiments contrefaits, qui ne sont qu'une "fausse monnaie".
La nouvelle Sept  ]ours nous fait voir dans quel cadre  une vie heureuse  peut se derouler.  Dans  un  petit  village, ou  "la  paix  des champs  baigne  les cinq  rues bordees de  maisons basses ( ... )  les gens vivent une existence limpide,  bonasse et  parfois souriante." La, il y a des fleurs, du soleil, une riviere, de l'air  pur, des odeurs saines et  un femme sensuelle qui se dore au soleil. Les petits drames  que les habitants  peuvent  vivre se dissolvent avec "cette  facilite heureuse  propre  aux enfants  et aux simples." Un etranger,  en vacances, qui a sejoume  dans ce village dira: "pendant une semaine, je n'ai vu que des gens calmes, des visages amicaux et souriants. C'est un endroit heureux ou il ne se passe rien, jamais rien."
L'atmosphere  de  ce  village,  on  la  retrouve  a  peu  de  choses  pres  dans  la
demiere   partie  du  Poids  du   jour.  Le  village, cette  fois, est  reduit  a  quelques habitations,  avec au  centre,  une  petite epicerie, lieu de rencontre  des habitants. C'est  dans  ce hameau,  qui  n'a  rien de commun  avec la ville inhumaine ou le village des rentiers et des commeres, que la vie est bonne a vivre. La le monde du  coeur  peut s'exprimer  en  toute  liberte et les rumeurs  de la "grande societe" (la  "crise",  la  guerre)   n'alterent   pas la saveur  d'un  quotidien  sans  histoire. 11 n'est pas indifferent  que ce hameau soit situe sur une montagne,  carla  montagne a  une  action  benefique  sur  ceux  qui  y  habitent.  Elle agit  meme  sur  ceux  qui viennent  y sejoumer  quelques heures, comme les jeunes gens de Fausse M onnaie, qui  ont  sur  la  montagne   un  comportement  autre  que  dans  la  plaine.  Dans  le Poids  du   jour, elle libere de la pesanteur  (l'auteur dit des Garneau qu' "il leur semblait  Hotter magiquement   audessus de  la  terre  deployee, sans  contact  avec elle")  et elle finira  par  liberer  Garneau  du  poids de son passe. Puis, elle purifie aussi; a la purete de l'air  et de la nature  correspond la purete des sentiments.
C'est la, sur cette  montagne,  et en sa fille, dans  une maison  nommee  le Nid, ou  regne  une  atmosphere  de feminite,  que  le point  d'appui sera  trouve.  Grace

L'ESPACE INTERIEUR


a  la  tendre  Jocelyne, en  qui  il retrouve  les traits  de sa mere,  Garneau sera  mis peu  a  peu  en   presence   du   passe  qu'il   s'acharnait  a  fuir.   II  finira   meme  par accepter  que   ses  petits-enfants,  par   leur   prenom,  lui  fassent   revivre  sa  mere (Helene)  et  !'enfant  qu'il   deteste  en  lui   (Michel). Le  salut   n'aura done  ere possible  que  par  la  Femme, et surtout par  la  Mere,  qui,  par  l'intermediaire de
!'enfant, permet  la  reconciliation avec le passe. Le  bonheur ne  peut  done  exister dans  la fermeture au  grand monde  et dans  l'intimite du cercle  de l'etemel retour. Ringuet  rejoint   la,  et  sans  doute   a  son  insu,  son  cher  dix-huiticme siecle,2    ou chez  Rousseau   aussi  bien  que  chez  Bernardin de  Saint-Pierre, on  retrouve  cette image  du bonheur, possible seulement dans la fermeture du cercle.
Moisan   ne  pouvait vivre  que  dans  le temps  de  la  nature; Garneau ne  peut vraiment  vivre  que  dans   le  temps  de  la  mere.  Conjuguons ces deux  temps  et nous  aurons  l'image du  bonheur chez Ringuet. Rythmee par  la vie de la nature,
!'existence de  l'orphelin pourra se derouler  dans  un  temps  sans  histoire,  qui  est celui de la tendresse  maternelle.

NOTES

1 Dictionnaire  des  symboles, mythes, reves,  coutumes, gestes,  formes,  figures, cou­
leurs, nombres, Paris, Laffont, 1969, p. 2.

2    Dans  son  Journal, son admiration pour  Voltaire et  Anatole  France, par  exemple, manifeste son  attachement  a l'humanisme, a la  tournure d'esprit et  a l'ecriture
propres  au  siecle  des  Lumieres. Egalement, dans  un  communique de  Flammarion ( editeur de  Trente  Arpents)' Ringuet declare  ne  pas  aimer  le I 7e  et  raffoler  du r8e  siecle   (cite   par   Valdombre, dans   les  Pamphlets  de  Valdombre, fev.  1939, p. II8-119).



JITTITUDE



Cattle turn  their  horns toward
the unused  spaces that  appear morning and  night between  tree
trunk  and  leaf
and  I
herdsman
on the  routine track
mark  my unknown portion as though
my forehead bore
such improbable remnants.
 

Anne Corkett

OUTWARD BOUND



Sheri!! D. Grace



L•927, aged cighteen,  Malcolm I,owry travelled to  the !M
East  as a cabin  boy aboard the  Pyrrhus. Some  time  after  his return to England
six  months   later   he  began   work  on  a  novel,  his first,  which   was  to  be  called Ultramarine. With  Conrad Aiken's  Blue Voyage  and  Nordahl Grieg's  The  Ship Sails On  as models,  Lowry  slowly  put  together  his story of a young  man's initia­ tion  into  life aboard a cargo  freighter. The  young  hero,  Dana Billiot,  rejects  the present   realities   of  sea-life   and   a  hostile  crew   by  persistently   escaping  into  memories   of  the   past   until   events  on  board   force  him  to  choose  between   a continued destructive withdrawal into  self and  a  dangerous  but  creative  accep­  tance  of  life. This  initiatory voyage  came  to  represent  the  logical  starting point in  Lowry's  projected The  Voyage  That  Never Ends which was to comprise  all of his inter-related and  major  works including Under the Volcano.
Ultramarine, however,   partly  due  to  its  derivativeness and   partly  due  to  the
overshadowing fact  of  Under  the  Volcano,  has  been  consistently   neglected  by readers   and   critics  alike.  That the  continued  neglect  of  Lowry's   first  novel  is unwarranted is the basic assumption of this study.  George  Woodcock, in his "Introduction" to  Malcolm  Lowry:  The  Man  and his Work, emphasizes  Ultra­ marine's importance:

[M]uch of the matter  of his early novel finds its way, transformed,  into Under the Volcano, and  its experiments  with  time and  memory, with the reality of the past making the present unreal, will be repeated in all the major novels. A reading of it is indispensable to a full understanding  of Lowry.1

Ultramarine, originally  published in 1933, was reprinted with some of Lowry's later   revisions  in   1g63.  According to  Margerie Lowry's   "Introductory  Note," it  was intended to be "in  its rewritten  form,  the  first volume  in ... The  Voyage That   Never  Ends." 2     With   this  purpose  in  view,  Lowry  changed  the  name  of Dana's ship  to  the  Oedipus Tyrannus and  made  other  links  with  the  Volcano. Although  the  book  obviously   remains  a  first  novel  and  is  certainly not  of  the stature of Under  the Volcano, Ultramarine  is seldom,  if ever,  given  its due.  For the  most  part,   critics  are  content to  point  out  the  novel's  debt  to  Aiken's  Blue

73

OUTWARD BOUND

Voyage  and Grieg's The  Ship Sails On.3 Lowry himself was ashamed of the book.
In  spite  of  weaknesses, the  structure  of  the  book illustrates  the  tremendous control  which  Lowry  was developing  over  his  materials.  As  with  the  Volcano and  Dark  As the  Grave,  in Ultramarine  Lowry expands  a short  period of time, approximately forty-eight  hours, into the months and years enfolded in Dana's consciousness. Nineteen  years are  contained  within  the small circle of two days passed in one place.
The  structure of Ultramarine  is circular. Beginning in Dana's  mind, the narra­ tive  circles  repeatedly   from   external   action   and   dialogue  back  into  Dana's  consciousness until  the final line of the  book places the reader  within the hero's mind  once more. The  book is crowded  with images of circles and  encircling­ the  engines,  wheeling  birds,  eyes, Dana's  lost compasses-even  the  ship,  the harbour of Tsjang-Tsjang, and  the sea, function  as further  layers  of encircling reality.
Within   the  first  four  chapters,  Lowry  counterpoints  two  geographical   and
spiritual  points along the circumference of the superimposed circles of the voyage and  Dana's  consciousness. The  first geographical  and spiritual  point is the ship's departure for the  East  which  Dana  remembers  as the book opens. It is essential to emphasize  that  Ultramarine   begins as the  Oedipus  Tyrannus is nearing  the port  of Tsjang-Tsjang, the furthest  point of her voyage. In  Dana's  mind,  how­ ever, the ship is still preparing  to leave Liverpool. During  the course of  the first four chapters,  Dana  moves deeper into his past before gradually  circling  his way back again, in Chapter IV, to the time of his departure from home. His memory transcribes  an  enormous  circle until it catches itself up at the crucial moment  of severance, the sailing of his ship. This point in time haunts him because it symbo­ lizes severance  from  his youth  and  initiation  to life.  Furthermore, it is just this initiation  or  birth,  this  breaking  out  of  the  womb-like circle  of his past, from which he shrinks in dread.
The  second  geographical   and  spiritual   point  of  Dana's  vicious circle  is the furthest  point  of the voyage, the harbour  of Tsjang-Tsjang and  the abyss of the present self. While  the ship is idle at dock, Dana,  his mind  and  soul in an  ana­ logous static state,  plumbs the very depths of his private hell. This  hell, projected upon  external  reality  by his distorted  vision, results from  his constant  re-living of the  past in  the  present and  his persistent refusal to welcome life. Transfixed, like a "tinfoil  Jesus",  between these two points, Dana must first learn to recognize the self-inflicted  hell for  what  it is and  then  to move out  of his closed circle of time and space.
By the  end of Chapter I with the  boat  docked and  night falling, Dana,  who
has refused to enter  life by going ashore, retreats to his bunk  and  his memories of the past. The  visions which he has as he falls asleep highlight his spiritual  crisis. Dana   is so  entirely  enclosed  in  self  that  he  cannot  consciously articulate   his

74

OUTWARD BOUND

problem  until  the  end  of  the  book. The  readers, drawn  into  the  maelstrom  of Dana's  mind,  experience  the  claustrophobic  horror  of a consciousness closed in upon itself. Believing that the ship "had a manifold security:  she was his harbour; he would lie in the arms of the ship", Dana glides into a sleep immediately  filled with wheeling screaming  horror:

Above,  the  moon  soared   and   galloped   through a  dark,  tempestuous sky. All  at once,  every  lamp  in  the street  exploded, their  globes flew out,  darted into  the sky, and  the  street  became  alive  with  eyes; eyes greatly  dilated, dripping dry  scurf,  or glued   with  viscid  gum: eyes  which  held  eternity in  the  fixedness  of  their  stare: eyes which  wavered, and  spread, and,  diminishing rapidly, were  catapulted  east and  west;  eyes that  were  the  gutted  windows  of a cathedral, blackened, emptiness of the brain,  through which bats and  ravens wheeled  enormously....

Significantly,  the  vision  is one  of  movement  and  the  breaking  of  enclosing circles:  lamps explode, their  "globes" flying into the sky, eyes waver, and "diminishing"  are   "catapulted  east  and   west";   even  the   enclosing  glass  of windows is shattered  allowing  bats and  ravens to "wheel  enormously"  through their empty frames. This is a vision of the chaotic flux which Dana  must accept. At this point in his voyage he is only capable of seeing this chaos as nightmarish horror.  The  closest he comes here to confronting  his true position is suggested in the  final sensation  of the  dream  and  the  Chapter-without his compasses  (to draw  continual  circles or to locate his own centre)  he is "Lost.  Lost. Lost."
In   Chapter   II,   the  ship  static  in  the  harbour   parallels  Dana's   increasing
withdrawal  into  an  abyss of self. Dana  escapes the  reality of present  time  and space  by dredging  up  time  past  and  pre-voyage places until  they form  a  hard shell of encrusted  memory around  his timorous psyche. The  climax of his descent into self comes, when, with perception inverted and distorted, he envisions the Oxenstjerna, a symbol of movement, life, and a positive growing past, the ox-star "that shines above the lives of men", grounded and oozing death:

It is  the  Oxenstjerna  they  are  talking  about,   the  Oxenstjerna  that   has  gone aground. It is the Oxenstjerna which  now turns  over and  sinks into  the sand,  while the  oil  spreads  a  mucous  film  over  the  Mersey;  and  now  the  white  sea  gulls ... known by name  to the dockers, are dying by the score.

With  the  virtuosity  that  characterizes  Under  the Volcano, Lowry forges here a most striking image of stasis and enveloping death which functions like a magnet within the heart of the book. In one brief passage he enfolds the cluster of motifs surrounding the Oxenstjerna with  the various bird motifs in the novel and  even with the haunting  motif of eyes; "a mucous film" (like all the eye imagery, drawn from  Lowry's  personal sufferings)   recalls the  vision of eyes in  Chapter I,  and fuses with the general theme of Dana's spiritual  blindness. Lowry's technique,  in a miniature  example such as this image of the Oxenstjema, as well as in larger

75

OUTWARD BOUND


structural  units,  is  one  of  enfolding and  encircling. The   image  is superficially quite  simple,  but  it  vibrates with  a plenitude of centripetal meaning. In  addition to  embodying several   motifs,  motifs  which  can  only  be  fully  understood  when viewed  within  the  totality  of the  book, the Oxenstjerna passage symbolizes Dana's consciousness.  Like  the ship  he has gone aground and  "now  turns  over and  sinks into  the sand".




l:E LOWEST  POINT of Dana's descent  occurs in Chapter III as he stumbles  about Tsjang-Tsjang in  a drunken nightmare. This  lowest  point, however,  fully in  keeping  with  Lowry's  concept  of the fusion  of opposites,  marks the  beginning of his ascent; Dana grapples  with the  recognition and  articulation of his position.  His  self-analysis  is still typically  exaggerated and  maudlin but  he at  least  admits  to  these  aspects  of his nature. Enclosed  within  the  rhetoric of his self-portrait is the  further realization that  he alone  creates  his heaven  or hell:

Tinfoil  Jesus, crucified homunculus  (who is also the cross), spitted on the hook of an  imaginary  Galilee!  Who is the crown of thorns dripping  red blossoms and  the red-blue nails, the flails and  the bloody wounds. The  tears, but also the lips cupped to embrace  them  as they fall;  the whips, but also the flesh crawling  to them. The net  and  the silver writhing  in  the mesh, and  all the fish that  swim in the sea. - The  centre  of  the  Charing Cross, ABCD, the Cambridge  Circle,  the Cambridge Circus,  is Hilliot-but every  night,  unseen,  he climbs down  and  returns  to his hotel-while  the  two  great  shafts,  the  propeller  shafts,  the shafts  of wit, laced with blood, AB, CD are the diameters.
Now with  his navel as centre  and  half CD  as radius, describe a vicious circle!

Amidst  a geometrician's paradise of circles, Dana  sees himself  as a cheap poseur, a  Christ   who  climbs  down  from  his self-inflicted  cross to seek  the  shelter  of his bed in a hotel room. The  image of Dana  as the centre of a circle with the four circumference points  making a cross, ABCD,  crystallizes his physical  and  spiritual dilemma; the  points  are fixed,  the radius  is given, the circle is closed, vicious.
Questioning his entire  purpose for this voyage, Dana explains his failure  in the very terms  which  will help  him  break  out of his calcified circle of time and  space. Challenging Janet's belief in him  he cries,

could you still believe in me, still believe in the notion that my voyage is something Columbian  and  magnificent?  Still believe in my taking a self-inflicted penance;  in this  business of  placing  myself  within  impenetrable  and  terrible  boundaries  in order that a slow process of justification to yourself may go on. [sic]

Naming the  names  and  saying  the  words is always  magic  with  Lowry. Dana  will soon   break   out   the   seemingly   "impenetrable  and   terrible   boundaries" of  his

OUTWARD BOUND

self-created hell. As centre  to his circle he will move and  in moving  transcribe an ever new  circumference.
By Chapter IV,  Dana's agonized  attempts to re-inhabit the  past  have  brought him  circling   back  to  the  point  at  which  the  book  opened, the  departure from England of  the  Oedipus Tryannus. In  the  retrospect of his return to  Liverpool after  the  farewell  with  Jarret, the  Mersey strikes  him  as "like  a vast camera film slowly and  inexorably winding. Soon he will be entangled in her celluloid  meshes, and  wound  out  to  the  open  sea."  In  a sense, Dana has encircled  in  memory  his
own  position  (much as he does later  with Andy)  ; he has come full circle.  Now is the  time  to  strike  out  anew.  The   challenge  to Andy  represents his first  decisive action  of the  voyage.  He  does  not  grasp  the  profound truth,  however,  that this intense   moment  which   gathers  up  all  his  anger   and   frustration  is,  in  fact,   a "punctum  indifferens". Life  cannot be seized  and  frozen  in  this  way for it flows on, forever  eluding the grasp.  As the card  players  remark  upon  returning to their game  after  Dana's interruption, "-pass-" "-pass-"  "-pass-".
The  ship  sails on  or,  at  least  in  Chapter V, it  prepares to leave  port.  Prior  to the  ship's   departure, the  culminating crisis  of  the  book  occurs.  Norman's  pet pigeon   (with   consequences that  recall  the  Ancient   Mariner's  albatross)  escapes from  its cage  and  drowns.  Dana and  the crew stand by helple._«sly watching it die while a nearby motor  boat  "its  occupant spinning the  easy wheel  while it circled around gaily ... turned on  itself and  rolled  in its own  swell."  The last  moments of the ship's  stasis at the dock parallels  Dana's inability  to save the bird. Suddenly, amidst   rolling   winches   and   coiling   ropes,  "the windlass   clanking  and   racing around gladly" and  the  tiger  "moulding its body to the shape  of its cage", Dana remembers Norman's grief at the loss of his pet and sees the truth:

No,  such  things  couldn't   happen   really.  But  Norman's   words  made  a  sort  of incantation  in  his  brain.  "Time!   Of  course  there  would  have  been  time.  Time wouldn't  have mattered  if you'd been a man."

This  truth  is useless, however,  unless one knows how to use it, and  Dana is still uncertain. With  the  renewed  peace of  the  vessel under  sail,  he contemplates the roaring fires in the "pulsating and  throbbing" engine room:

Why was it his brain  could not accept  the dissonance as simply as a harmony, could  not  make  order  emerge  from  this chaos? ... Chaos  and  disunion,  then,  he told  himself,  not  law  and  order,  were the  principles  of life  which  sustained  all things, in the mind of man as well as on the ship.

Being  unable  to accept chaos  as. good is Dana's great  sin. In  his efforts  to order and  contain reality,  he  has  only succeeded  in stifling  himself,  and  life, within  a tightly sealed  tomb of time and space.
Now  that  he  has  admitted the  priority  of chaos,  he is ready  to  move on  to a

77

OUTWARD BOUND

reconciliation  with Andy who symbolizes the forces of life into which Dana  must be initiated.  With  the  meaning  of the maelstrom and "a  reason for his voyages" clearly  perceived,  Dana  looks down into  the  engine room once more. There  he sees Nikolai, the fireman, serving the very source of energy and chaos:

The iron tools blistered his hands, his chest heaved like a spent swimmer's, his eyes tingled in parched sockets, but still he worked on, he would never stop -this was what it was to exist-

Never to stop in  the  journey of life, this is Dana's  discovery. Life is flux, chaos, energy,  while  death,   like a  ship  gone  aground,  like a  fixed,  transcribed   circle ABCD, is stasis. Paradoxically,  life exists in the fiery abyss of the ship and  Dana cherishes his discovery while "somewhere,"  as if warning  that  this point of rest is a "punctum indifferens,"  "a  lantern  clanged with eternal,  pitiless movement." Significantly,  Ultramarine  does not end on this pinnacle of insight. Although the narrative   rhythm  reaches  completion  by the  end  of  Chapter V,  the  novel
continues,  mirroring  in  its structure what  Dana  has still to learn.  In  this sense Ultramarine  was an ideal  prologue for Lowry's intended  voyage that  never ends. Dana   Hilliot,   prefiguring   the   restless voyaging  of  subsequent   Lowry  heroes, realizes that  he has  "surrounded Andy's  position"  and  must  move on;  life is a continual  movement of centre and circumference:

(There is ... a stormftood within, as my heart beats with the beating of the engine, as I go out with the ship towards the eternal summers. A storm is thundering out there, there is the glow of tropical fire! Bad, or good, as it happens to be, that is what it is to exist! ... It is as though I have been silent and fuddled with sleep all my life ... I know now that at least it is better to go always towards the summer
... Then  at  last again to be outward bound, always outward, always onward, to be fighting always for the dreamt-of-harbour ... -)

Then,  lest this solution  of life's mystery appear  too simple, Lowry charts  the next  stage  in  Dana's  initiation.  A fireman  is ill and  Dana  is chosen  to replace him;  he must  descend into  the  abyss of lHe which  he earlier contemplated  with acute insight. During  his last moments on deck, a strange craft drifts through  the night  mist morseing her name:  Oxenstjerna. Like a voice from his past this ship calls to  him,  reminding  him that  on the  point of creating  a new circle into  the future  he must  take  the  past with  him -as comfort and  as threat. If he again makes the profound  mistake of withdrawing  into a hard shell of time and space, he will destroy  his world.  For life is perpetual  activity "always outward, always onward".
Certainly  Ultramarine  is not  an Under  the Volcano  but  then  few books are.
That it is a worthwhile  book in its own right is equally clear. In  his first novel, Lowry explored  the  problems of time and  space and  of self-enclosed perception which distinguish  his fiction. The structure  of the book, prefiguring in its involu-

OUTWARD BOUND

tions the structure of the Volcano, supports Lowry's  vision of a mind so turned in upon  itself, so obsessed  with  the  past,  that  only  a series  of shocks  can  unroll  it. For  such  an  individual (for  life itself Lowry would  have  us believe)   the achieve­ ment  of equilibrium is temporary; beyond  one  hurdle  lies the  next,  a worse one;  "that is what  it is to exist."  As a member  of Lowry's  Voyage  cycle and  precursor of  Under  the  Volcano  or  as  an  independent novel,  Ultramarine succeeds  in its portrayal of initiation; the  voyage is begun,  the ship is outward  bound.


NOTES

1 Malcolm Lowry: The Man and  his Work   (University  of British Columbia  Press,
1971),  p. 5·
2     Ultramarine  (Jonathan Cape,  London,  1963),  p. 7· All further  references are  to this edition and are included in the text.
8  See, for example, the first two chapters of Richard  Hauer  Costa's Malcolm Lowry (Twayne  Publishers, New York, 1972). By far the best discussion of Ultramarine to date  is Chapter II  of Tony Kilgallin's  Lowry  (Press Porcepic, 1973).  Kilgallin reveals many further  influences on or allusions in the novel.


ltRTISTS ltND OLD CHltiRS

Miriam Waddington

A puff of wind a stretch of sky
a rush of air - and  Helen
who commands  the stars and  planets
now commands a chair.

Old and whiskered its stuffings thinning-
it wakes up
one  morning
on the junkman's truck alive and even grinning.

Whoosh and thump! It lands
in Helen's garden with a mighty bump; and there among

79

POEMS

three  birds  two squirrels  five marigolds an orange cat and  this
old friend,
the chair  decides
that  life's not over yet it's not the end.

Helen's garden
is nice, the company likewise:  three
birds  two squirrels five marigolds
an orange cat  and this old friend
are quite  enough to make  the chair forget
the leaky huts  and
muddy humps of the world's worst garbage dumps.

The  chair
looks on benign and  sees
the scarlet  runner
climb  and
turn  somersaults
on its own twisty vine;
sees also how
it tickles windows here and  there and how
its curly tendrils
defy all gravity to lean on simply  air.

That's why the chair decides
that  nothing dies or ends,
it only changes,
especially
when artists  bring their loving looks

8o

POEMS

to rest upon old things and  there  discover
in such  unlikely  places
as rocky earthbound  faces the eternal lineaments
of the transforming lover.



THE CONDITION OF THE WORKING CL:21SSES, SPRING 1975

Tom Wayman

A man  is being fired.
He does not know it yet, but another man
is hitting the keys of a typewriter to spell out
let's make this the last shift, okay?

The  man  works in an office. But still, he is being let go.

u   A woman  is accepted for employment.
The  foreman introduces her to the others
and  names one of them  to show her what  to do.

Everyone  looks at the newcomer  curiously standing at  their  stations by the machines.

m   Another woman  is slapped  by her husband.

Her  face has started to sting, tears
are filling her eyes.    But whether these

are  produced by the involuntary reaction to any blow landing close to the eyes
or have an emotional cause is hard  to say.

1v  Men and  women  are also laughing.
I will not tell you what  they are laughing at.

v   Someone  has mentioned that  Wayman's poems are full of defeat.
There is nothing in them about
"what concrete aspirations are we developing
and  working  toward  in the struggle  for liberation."

I walked  through the streets of my City all day. I visited each  place I have been employed
and  many others  where over the years I have applied.

8r

POEMS

I spoke with every friend  I have kept
and  remembered each I worked  with before.

I did  not find this struggle, or a victory. Let  us agree  prizes were won in the past.
Let  us allow the future might  be something else.

But I am sorry.
I cannot crow if I cannot  see the dawn.







OF GREEN STEPS
JIND LJtUNDRY

Ralph Gustafson


The man  will put  a large-headed nail, Shiny as silver, into the green step, Straightening winter's bias and spring
Thaw and  his hammer will knock it crooked, The bird come obtrusively to the bough above, And  it will have  to be done again,  and  that Will be important; and she will hang
Blue and  white shirts and a patched quilt
On  the laundry line that  runs from  the kitchen
Step  to the yard  telephone pole and sheets That smell of winter's cold, and  the pulley Each  time the line is launched will squeak, And  that  will be important; and  neither She nor  the man  pounding the clear air Fixing the green  step with another nail, Will be aware  of the importance, twenty Years later  thought of by him
Who  drove  nails and saw laundry,
Who  thought little of cardinals and  clothespins
And  now loves life, loves life.


review articles




LIKE THE WIND MADE VISIBLE


Kathy Mezei



Complete  Poems  of Saint   Denys  Garneau, translated  by  John   Glassco.  Oberon
Press.


IN 1975 two brilliant  transla­ tions by John  Glassco  appeared-Lot's Wife   (La  Femme  de  Loth  by Monique Bosco) and the Complete  Poems of Saint Denys Garneau.

For some time we have been awaiting the appearance  of  the  Creator, the  poet   who will give the French-Canadian people their own  true  image.  He  will  no  doubt  appear in  his own  good  time,  when  the  substance of the people is strong enough, sufficiently distinguished from all others  to inspire this awaited  genius  with  sufficient  cogency.

prophesies Saint-Denys-Garneau in his Journal in 1938. But, to the contrary,  the pathways of a nation's  literature are fre­ quently  carved  out  by  unobtrusive  and elusive figures. In  his quiet,  unassuming way,  Glassco  has   greatly   affected   the course of Canadian  literature. The  mere presence of this whimsical and  iconoclas­ tic gentleman improves the temper of our culture.  And  Glassco's  deliberate   dilet­ tantism  countering  our  dreadful   profes­ sionalism is a high achievement  for this country.
His  poetry  presents  a  pensive, muted
look at local landscapes and complex metaphysical   spaces.   His   pornography
 
mocks our  puritanical  anglo-saxon-sado­ masochistical  heritage. His  journals  Me­ moirs of Montparnasse, which are there­ flections of a gay boulevardier  in Paris during the '2o's, and "A Season in Limbo" by Silas  N.  Gooch  (Tamarack Review, no. 23, 1962), a wry account  of Glassco's sojourn  in  a  tb.  sanatorium during   the
'so's, are sophisticated ventures into an interesting  genre.  In  these  journals,  hu­ mour,  despair   and   ironic  introspection  reveal more  of the  form  of  art  than  its content.
Pursuing  the possibilities of this genre,
Glassco published the translation  of  Gar­ neau's  journal  in  1962  (The  Journal  of Saint-Denys-Garneau). For the first time a  French-Canadian  work   of   this  kind, presenting an intimate account  of an im­ portant    artist's   creative    process,   was made  available  to  the  English-Canadian reader.  Another  major  step  in  the  de­ velopment    of   our   literature  occurred when  Glassco   brought   out   the   much­  needed   Poetry   of   French   Canada   in Translation  in 1970. This volume gathers together  the  best  translations   of  poems from 16o6 to the present.
Glassco's   introductions  to   both   the

REVIEW ARTICLES



anthology and  the  Complete  Poems  pro­ vide excellent  insights  into  Quebec litera­ ture,  and  together with  Anne Hebert and  Frank Scott's   Dialogue sur  [a  traduction
a propos du T ombeau  des rois create the
groundwork for  a Canadian  aesthetic on
the  translation of  poetry.  For  if, as  Gar­ neau  comments, "A people  forms itself by acting,   by  creating-that  is,   by   com­ municating. It finds itself  through the act of  communication",  then  the  efforts  of Glassco,  F. R.  Scott,  the  journal   Ellipse, Sheila    Fischman,   Alan    Brown,    Joyce Marshall and  Larry Shouldice, to  name a few,  are   not  only  acts  of  creation  and communication but  acts of necessity.
What affinity  has drawn Glassco to the hermetic work  of  Garneau, a  poet  tor­ mented by the  delicate balance  between  spirit   and   flesh,  between  aesthetics  and asceticism,  between  silence  and   speech?  Hector de Saint-Denys-Garneau's story is well-known. A scion of an old seignieurial family,  he was born  in  I 9 I 2 and  began  to write  and  paint  at an early  age. His schooling  took  place  in  Montreal, but  in I928  he was afflicted  with  a heart  injury and  gave  up  his  formal  education. Gar­ neau  formed part  of a group of  intellec­  tuals including Jean Le Moyne  ( cf. Philip Stratford's   translation  of   his    Conver­ gences,   Ryerson,  I966),   Robert  Elie, Claude Hurtubise who  together founded La Releve in  I934· In  I935, after  under­ going  some  sort  of  spiritual crisis, he be­ gan  his journal in earnest and  also started writing the  poems that  were  published as Regards  et  jeux  dans  l'espace  in   I937· Devastated by  this  public  exposure of his soul, a soul whose sincerity  and  purity  he
continually doubted,  Garneau  retreated
 of  Rimbaud, Nelligan   and  Lampman.
It was  out  of  the  drama of  his  inner world,  not  his rather uneventful life, that Garneau span his poems. His innovative verse forms, introspective imaginings and symbolism (especially, trees, skeletons, the wind, flowers, barren winter  landscapes, dead   houses,  the   dance,  the   gaze)   ex­ pressed the isolation  and  alienation of  his generation, trapped by the institutions of church and  state.  Although a later  gener­  ation,   the  engage   poets  of  the  '6o's,  re­ acted  against  the self-abnegation of Gar­ neau,   Glassco  has  chosen   this  poet   be­ cause   he  "initiates  a  new   era   of  both sensibility  and  prosody,  and  invokes  and  announces  the  future" and   because   he "remains  the one  who seems worthiest of a  translation  into  English   of  his  entire mature poetic  output".
The  Complete  Poems, based on Poesies completes edited  by Robert Elie and  Jean Le  Moyne   ( I 949) , consists  of  "Regards
et   jeux  dans   l'espace"  and   "Les  Soli­
tudes",  unpublished  poems   from    I 935-
38, collected  and  arranged by Le  Moyne and  Elie:  Glassco  has  also consulted the definitive  Oeuvres  edited   by  Jacques Brault  and  Benoit Lacroix (I 97 I), which
contains  about   I 3 additional poems  plus juvenalia  as well as the complete journal and  correspondence.
Like   Glassco,  Garneau  is  a   poet   of ideas.

Once  I made  poems
That followed  the  whole  radiant line
From  centre  to circumference and  beyond
As  if  there  were  no  circumference only  a
centre
And  as  if  I were  the  sun:   all  around   me
limitless space


more  and  more  into  silence  and  solitude. He   spent   his  last   years   at   the   family estate  at  Ste.  Catherine-de-Fossambault. His  end   in   I 943  was  sudden  and  dra­ matic.   He  died  of  a  heart   attack  while out   canoeing.  In   its  tragedy and  early ilencing,
 ("Autrefois")

The first  poems  are  stronger  because the abstract concepts and  ambiguities are enclosed  in concrete patterns and  images whereas  poems  in  the  second  part   (and some  of  these  are  fragments)  have  not been  brought   into   quite   the  order   and

REVIEW ARTICLES



form both poets emphasize. One also becomes impatient with such an extreme self -consciousness.1
Like   Glassco,  Garneau  is   concerned with  "making beautifully". His statement "Beauty. Quality  of  the  work  indepen­ dent   of  the  end  pursued"   (Journal)  is echoed   in   the  lines  of   Glassco's   poem "The Last Word":

The   means  are  more  important  than   the end,
Ends being only an excuse for action,
For  adventures  sought  for  their  own  sake alone.

Both  poets seek to explore  "Le  terrain de  !'esprit" and  to  reveal  another "reality". For Garneau the  body of the landscape, the landscape of the body and the  contours  of  the   house  describe   his inner  anguish  and  division.  For example,

I think  of the desolation  of winter
 Through  the long days of solitude
In  the dead  house -
For a house is dead  when nothing  in open­
In  the sealed house, ringed  by woods
("A  Sealed  House")

Or,  a  poem  called  "Landscape in  Two
Colours  on a Ground of Sky".

Life and death  on a pair  of hills A pair of hills and  four  hillsides The  wildflowers on two sides The wild shadow on two sides

Garneau  is  conscious   of   "correspon­ dances"   and   speaks   of   "the  poet   for whom  all  things,  all  life,  is a  sign. And he seeks for intelligible signs, signs formed  to interpret  the  meaning he  has found." (Journal)
The  willows flowing, the  whole  tree Nothing  but silver all lustre  all a wave All watery  foaming  flight
Like the wind made  visible
("Pines against  the light")



COMING	THROUGH

SLAUGHTER
Michael Ondaatje
THE   first   full-length  prose   work   by   one   of  Canada's leading   poets, COMING   THROUGH  SLAUGHTER  is  based   on   the   strange life  of Buddy  Bolden:  barber,  newspaper editor,  man  about  town,  husband and  father, and  jazz  pioneer   in turn-of-the-century New Orleans. Ora w­ ing  upon  memoirs, reported conversations and  historical data, Ondaatje has  recreated the  mood  of  the   period, while  shaping the  actual details of Bolden's life into  a fresh  and  unusual literary form.
THROUGH Buddy, Ondaatje explores the  nature of the  creative process, imagining   the  beauty and  the  violence of  the  creative vision  which  led Bolden    to   his  place   in  jazz   history.  The   story   of   Bolden's  gradual creative disintegration  is played out  against a  brilliantly realized   back­ ground: the   cribs  and  saloons of  'The District'; the  studio of  Bellocq, photographer of whores; the  insane  asylum where  Bolden  ends  his days.
MICHAEl ONOAA TJE  is  the  author  of  four   books and  has  won  the Governor General's Award  for   THE  COllECTED WORKS  OF  BILLY THE  KID.
 

NEW from  ANANSI
















$10.00 cl.  I $4.95 pa.

REVIEW ARTICLES



He  also  despaired  of  both   the  power and   the  impotence of  the  word.   In  the section  titled  "Pouvoirs de la parole" (Glassco  retains the French in the section titles)   he explores  the  relationship of the poet   to  the   word.   The  impotence and terror that  pursued the poet into  his relig­ ious  and  sexual  life  is here  too-"each word  a sucking  mouth". Since  words  for Garneau  are   an   incarnation  of  an  ab­ solute  reality,  "we have  no  right  to play a verbal  game with something that  is not comprised in the depth of our substance." Poetry   paradoxically  feeds   and    drains  him.
His  is  a  divided   landscape  in  which
the gaze, the two-edged blade,  must pene­ trate  as far  inwards as it  does  outwards. Thus  much   of   Garneau's   poetry   is  a movement between  two  elements seeking an  equilibrium. Until  he  is received  and saved  by God,  "It is  there  in  suspension that  I am  at  rest". His poems  reflect  this duality through a deliberately ambiguous syntax   and   meaning.  Glassco's   transla­ tions  are  not  only  eloquent and  sensitive but frequently clarify  some of the elusive­ ness of Garneau without  (and   this  is by far   the  most  difficult   test  of  virtuosity) losing   the   grace    and    subtlety  of   the French.
For  example, "The  Picture of  the dance" is a  complex   poem   which   tries,
through the metaphor of the grace and measure  of dance, to describe  the  relation between   the  poet's  perception of  the  in­ tangible  and  his attempt to communicate it. Here  is the closing stanza:
Or  Ia danse  est paraphrase de Ia vision
Le  chemin   retrouve   qu'ont  perdu   les yeux
dans  le but
Un  attardement arabesque a reconstruire
Depuis  sa source  l'enveloppement de  Ia
seduction.
This  is F.  R.  Scott's rendering of  these
lines:
For  a dance  is a  paraphrase of  the vision
The   rediscovery  of  the  road   the  eyes  had
lost in the search

86
 A statelier  pace slowing  to recapture
From its source an enveloping enchantment.2

Glassco  is less literal but  still  careful   to maintain the difficult  syntax.

So  the  dance  is a  paraphrase of  the  vision
The  road  recovered  that  was lost  by the
searching  eyes
A statelier  measure  slowing  to  recapture
The  all-embracing magic  of  its  beginning.

Occasionally  puzzled   by  a  phrase   in these poems, I've  returned to the  French and  have  always  been  impressed  by Glassco's solutions.  Not only has he main­ tained    the   complexity  of   syntax   and meaning  but   he  has  also  captured  the troubled  sensuality  of  Garneau.

As a stream  cools an island
And as the fluent  wave curls around
That sun-dappled  girl
("River of  my eyes")

Glassco  has  said   that   his  translations are  faithful  not   literal. Scott   who  also has  some fine  versions  of  these  poems  is a  more   literal   translator.3   Yet   Glassco takes  few liberties  with  the  form  or phrasing of  the  originals  (except  in "Flute", which  loses a line in the transla­ tion,  or is this an  error?) . His art  lies in slightly rearranging lines and modifiers so that  the  poem  reads  well  in  English.  He is  much   more   restrained   here   than   in Lot's Wife.
I am irritated by critics  who leap  upon a  translation  and   pull  out  certain   lines and minutely  examine their  flaws. No translator  can   always   find   the   perfect phrase.  Not even  in poetry.  Glassco  him­ self   explains    how   he   borrowed    from Scott   and   others.   Sometimes the  trans­  lator  is satisfied merely  to create the sense of  the  original. Sometimes he  even  re­ tains   the   awkwardness  of  the  original. What  really matters is the  reader's sense of  discovery   and   delight.   As  Garneau said,  "Here is my  box  of  toys / Full  of words    to   make    wonderful    patterns". Translation  is  both  play   and   art.   And

REVIEW ARTICLES



Glassco    has    indeed     made    wonderful patterns from  this disturbing box of toys.


NOTES

1 John  Glassco  in  a  letter   to A. J.  M. Smith, August   24,    1961.  "I  know  how   you  feel about   Garneau's  poetry.   It   sounds  so  rhe­ torical  and  inflated  in English,  but  no less so
 in  French. That   whole  last  section  in  alex­ andrines   [La   Mort  grandissante]  would  get a  horse-laugh   anywhere   except  in  Quebec. It's  good  but  has  the  air  of  being  declaimed  by someone  in  a  frock-coat,  with  gestures."
2   The  Poetry of French-Canada in Translation
p.  10].
a  Saint-Denys-Garneau    and 	Anne 	Hebert.
Vancouver: Klanak  Press,  1962.





HEBERT IN ENGLISH
 


G. V. Downes


Poems by Anne  Hebert, translated by Alan Brown. Musson Books, $8.g5.


SPEAKING OF TRANSLATION in that  mine  of aesthetic lore For Want of a Golden   City,  Sacheverall Sitwell   notes that "all who have attempted Baudelaire have made  fools of themselves, and it is decidedly not fair to judge of Pushkin in translation." This  is, like so many  of his judgments,   dead    on    centre,   for    the greater the  poet,  the  more  intensely  per­ sonal  his  language, and   the  more  com­ plex,   therefore,  the   hidden   network   of allusion    and   association  in   the   poem. Even  its  creator may  remain  partly   un­ aware  of  the  intricacies  involved   in  the final  sound-sense pattern  which  satisfies him,  he  knows  not  why.
Yet   translation  has,  since   the   begin­ nings  of  civilized  intercourse,  been  with us, and  it would  be idle to deny the value to   Western    Europe  of   Dante,  or   the Odyssey,  or  the  Aeneid   merely  because they  have  reached most  of us as  transla­ tions. To  set  up  an  absolute  of aesthetic purity  in  the  matter  would  shut  off  too many  seminal  influences  from  our  minds and  hearts.  Prose,  of  course,  suffers  the least   in   the   transition, although  if  the two languages involved  are very far apart in  the  thinking processes which  gave  rise to the syntax,  or even if they are at differ­ ent   stages   of   development   historically,
 
some curious  results may be observed. French   and   English,   if  reasonably  close in  Malory's time, diverge  considerably at different speeds after  that  (Florio's M on­ taigne  is more  ornate than   the  original) and  it is not  until  the eighteenth  century that   the   styles  seem   to  come   together again.
Poetry,   in  addition,  suffers   from   the peculiar disadvantage  of  its  double  na­ ture,  for  it  is  both  sound   and  sense  to­ gether, all  the  time,  and  neither can  be divorced  from  the other without damage, any  more  than  the  tree can  be separated from  its sap. So what  can  the  translator, with  a  respect  for  his  material, do?  All, actually, that  he  can  hope  for  is to  give the reader  an equivalent experience in his own language with  the least  deformation possible  of   the  poet's  original intention. But  it  takes  prayers,  patience, alms  and vows to wrestle successfully  with  the  con· tinual  challenge offered   by  the  work  ot any  major poet.  In  the  present  instance, I  don't   think  that  Alan  Brown  has  been patient  enough    to  do   justice   to   Anne Hebert's fine achievement, and  looking  at some of the  expressions  he  finds  suitable to  use  in  his  own   language,  I  wonder whether even patience would have helped.
Yet  the  translator of Anne  Hebert en-

REVIEW ARTICLES



joys a certain advantage today  which  may never occur  again. It is true  that  English, in  stress and  vowel  sounds,  produces different effects from  French. But  time is on  his side. For  Anne  Hebert is the legi­ timate   heir    of   Symbolism    and   post­ Symbolism   in  France, in  her  attitudes, her   craft,   and   her   personal   vision.  By legitimate,  I   mean    that    she   absorbed  directly  the   kind   of  French   poetic   ex­ amples   which  have  influenced her  ways of expression.  But  in  this  century are  we not all, except  for recent  American (and, by seepage)  Canadian poets, the children of   Symbolism?   Imagism, Yeats,  Pound, Eliot,  and   particularly  the  critical  work of  the  latter, have  consciously  or  uncon­ sciously   become   part    of   our   accepted heritage.  The  translator   writing  today ought, therefore, to have at his disposal  a tone,    vocabulary  and   voice   peculiarly  suited,  as a  result  of  these  influences,  to the  expression   of   French  poetry   which has come directly out  of the same  period.  Some  loss is  inevitable. But  there  is  no need  to blur the  poetry  of the original by making elementary errors,  by refusing  to grapple  with   the  difficult   bits,  by  using cliches   in   English   which   destroy   com­ pletely  a  delicate, precise,  fixed  yet  un­ dulating web of verse.
For example, in the line "Et  regarde ses mains  que  colorent les jours",  there  is an inversion, common in prose, after  the rela­ tive   pronoun.  Brown   renders   the   line, however,  as "and stares  at her hands that  colour  all the days",  which, apart from its apparent lack  of  comprehension and  the addition of "all",  makes  nonsense  of the next  line  which  reads  "Les   jours  sur  ces mains". In another poem,  the I g6o Paris edition has "Ni  betes ni fleurs  ni nuages" which  becomes  "No  beasts  or  flowers or trees". Unless  there  has been a re-writing of this line  in a later  edition, why should "clouds", which  is consistent  with  the cos­ mic imagery  in  the  rest  of the  poem,  be­ come   "trees"?  In   the   poem   "There  is

88
 surely  someone", the  emphatic and  ele­ gant  "parfait" has been replaced by "per­ fected" which, if it conveys an interesting nuance of meaning, stops the poetry dead. And  in  the  same  poem,  "lost  passion" is a  very  weak  rendering  of  "passion  per­  due", when  "waste" is  one  of  the  com­ monest  meanings of  "perdre" and  when  the theme  of the poem is just that, wasted love.
Sometimes   the  translator,  presumably in a hurry, simply bashes  through a diffi­ culty  as  thought it  were  not  there. For example,
La  fureur  vermeille  jointe  a cotli
Bel arbre de capucines  dans  un gres bleu.

Now this is an extremely precise image: not a bowl of separate nasturtium flowers with  short  stems,  but  a  long  branching frond  from  a climbing nasturtium which has been cut off from  its root  with  leaves and  flowers  intact on  the  central  stem. By translating this as the ineffective "Glow of   yellow   flowers",   the   translator  not only  misses  the   precision   of  the  image (and   its  psychological   correspondences) he  destroys  the  effect  of  "vermeille" in the  previous   line,  by  adding the  vague and   sentimental  "glow"  and   the   non­ existent  "yellow". The flowers  may  have  been  yellow, but  not  in  the  poem.
An  almost  insoluble   problem exists  in
the translation of abstract words which French uses liberally,  precisely, and with­ out   any  of  the   loss  of  force  which   so easily occurs in English.  It is unfortunate, though, that   the  opening   poem   of  the volume  (which,  like La  Jeune Parque, is a  celebration of  the  awakening of  con­  sciousness   at   dawn)    should    face   the reader   with  the  appallingly flat  expres­  sion:

0! spacious leisure ...

Further on, one  finds  the  same  latinized abstractions which  sit so badly  in English "my  accustomed unsurprising acts", and

REVIEW ARTICLES



in a later  poem  "marine vocation mirror­
ing my gaze."
And  why  should  "et" be translated as
"or" between   two  adjectives?  Some  of the  banalities shock,  for  there  is nothing banal  in Anne  Hebert's language: "the frightful present", "fancy's heart", "the seasons  four". In  "A  Small  Despair'' the French reads

Mon  coeur  est rompu
L'instant ne le porte  plus

The  translation "My  heart   is  broken I The  moment fails beneath it" ignores the meaning of "rompu" in this context, and shifts  the  emphasis from  the  heart  which is fatigued, failing,  to a "moment" which is too weak  to bear  its weight.
One  must  certainly grant justice to Mr. Brown for some felicities, such as "Watery Fisherman", and  the last verse of "The Wooden Room". He  has  understood the nuance of meaning of "triste" in "The Small  Towns" (which escaped  a previous translator) and  is actually at his most effective   when   dealing with   the   poems which  are  utterly straightforward, appar­ ently  plain,  presentations of  images  such as "Our Hands in  the Garden", and  also in    the    prose    which    expresses    Anne Hebert's poetic  creed. He  has  found  an
 interesting word  "wig-wag" for a difficult passage in  "A Small  Dead  Girl", but un­ fortunately it is jarringly out  of  harmony with   the   rest  of  the  vocabulary  of  the poem.
Although  readers  who   are   quite   un­
familiar with Anne  Hebert's work will certainly  gather some  idea  of  its  themes and  general  characteristics from  this Eng­ lish version,  they will certainly not under­ stand  why her  reputation stands so high. The  versions  of  Frank Scott  of  many  of these   poems,   which   were   brought  out first  by Klanak Press  of  Vancouver, are more satisfactory. In particular "Le  Tom­ beau  des Rois" -surely one  of the  most extraordinary   poems   written  in   either  official    language -loses  none    of    its strength  or  dignity  in  the  Scott   transla­ tion.   One    really   cannot  forgive   Alan Brown for  wrecking the  first two lines by jamming  in a participial construction and losing the effect  of the full, plain, magni­ ficent statement. It seems  to me  that  the translator is simply  not  sensitive  enough to  the  problems   involved   in  the  transla­ tion  of  highly   complex  poetry,  and   in Canada today,  the second-rate is not good enough  for  the understanding we need  of our  major literary figures.




WORTHWHILE  VISITATIONS

Ralph Gustafson

GEORGE  wooococx,  Notes  on Visitations: Poems  1936-1975. Anansi.  $g.g5.


I   REMEMBER   George   Wood­ cock's  appearance with  a  poem  in  that  memorable periodical edited  by Geoffrey Grigson,  New Verse. I was at  Oxford at the  time.  My  submission  of a  poem  had been  rejected by Grigson   as  "static con­ ventionality."   I    wondered    what     the contributors,   especially   the   Canadians,
 George  Woodcock   and   A. J. M.  Smith, had  that  I hadn't. By the  time  I had  got hold  of  Woodcock's The   Centre  cannot hold,  I too  had   read   Yeats,   Eliot   and Auden. Subsequent to the War, I was appearing with Woodcock in new and old periodicals, Life  and  Letters,  The   New York  Times, Saturday   Review, Tomor-

8g

REVIEW ARTICLES



row. Ten  years ago, I had  George Wood­ cock's  Selected  Poems. Before  that   and  ever since, of course,  we all  have  had,  in him,  one of the most distinguished minds  and  editors in  Canada. I think   particu­ larly   of  his  direction  of  the   periodical Canadian  Literature.
Now comes a further retrospective volume,    Notes   on   Visitations:   Poems
1936-1975, an attractive book in outward appearance and, within, a  presentation of modesty and integrity. Seventy-five poems  are  presented  as  the  quotient of thirty-nine years  of  devotion to  the  art. The  sanity and deflation of this are of wondrous contemplation  in  the  face  of the   current  establishments in  Canada: The   Complete   Works   of  by  Canadian poets of the age of twenty-two, the Cana­ dian  poet  of  twenty-five paying  homage to  the  legend   of  the  Canadian  poet  of twenty-six.
Tribute is to be paid  to George Wood­ cock in several  respects.  Most  new poetry in Canada constitutes not  a structure but a   continuum;  a   process   of   cognitions. Poetry is not a process;  it is a product. In our  comparatively recent  self-awareness, the sufficiency of a poem is thought to be the   evacuation  of   the   sensitive,   social Canadian   soul.  Tone-deaf,  open-ended gestures  dominate. The  formal   satisfac­ tion   of   expectations  is  regarded  as  the property of the dead.  Where it is not for­ gotten, it  is deliberately denied  that  the poet  first of all is neither savant  nor  sen­ sitive  plant. The   man   may  be,  but   the poet  first of all is not.  The  poet  is artist,  the  maker  of what  is  distinguished in  it­ self,  of  what   can   stand   alone   without him;  the   golden   bird    on   the   golden  bough   that  sings  to  drowsy  emperors, as Yeats  has  it.  A  poem  is not  its  content, not  only;  a  poem is a  verbal  disposition that  provides  the  inviolable meaning of the  content. Poetry  is crafty.
And  so it is bracing to come on George
Woodcock's   approach    to    poetry,   he

go
 knows all this; to open  his book and  be at once  aware  that  we are  offered  what  we are  supposed  to be offered  by a  book  of poetry-structures,  visitations that   are more  than   processes  without  form;  co­ gencies   that   don't  exist   on   their   own dramatized self-indulgence. The  refresh­ ment   is  also  environmental:   the  visita­  tions,  although  put   together   in   British Columbia,  miss  the  Americanization  of west coast poetry and skip the piety of the hiccough  school  of  rhythm.
We find out  how this can  be in Wood­ cock's  judicious  Preface  and introductory pages  to  the  six sections  of  his  book   Al Purdy  in  familiar style  also  tells  us  the wherefores  in his perceptive introduction. The   first   poems   in   the   book   derive  straight out  of  the    socio-political scene of  the  Iggo's. Spender, MacNeice, Day­  Lewis,  Auden  were  expressing  this  am­  bience  in  their   poetry; so  was  George
Woodcock-as he  states  in  his  Preface to the  present  collection. The depressing atmosphere with  its apocalyptic dispersal is all  re-presented in  Woodcock's  "Sun­ day  on  Hampstead Heath":

the  pipedreams of men  in braces
Reading   in  Sunday   newspapers   the  end  of faith  and  folly
... may  rise  as  golden  as
Blake
Knew  in his winged  dreams.

It  is a shared  closeness to the other more familiar poets of the  time  rather than  an imitation on Woodcock's part;  the  proof is in  his poem  "Tree Felling"-as good a Thirties poem  as Spender wrote.
Jerusalem's green  and  pleasant land never   materialized   as   we   depressingly know -in  the  Middle East  or  anywhere else. But at that  time in the Thirties there seemed  ways  to  the  promised   land   that were possible-those   pointed out  by Trotsky, by  the  anarchists Bakunin and Emma  Goldman, each  of  whom  is duly celebrated  in   Woodcock's  poems.   The

REVIEW ARTICLES



lack  in the  social poetry  of the  Thirties is the  absence  of the individual. One  senses physical   presence  in  the  poems  of  Mac­ Neice,   but   only   of   the   paradigm,  the parable,   in   his   contemporaries'  work, Spender's  abstract  coward, Auden's un­  known   citizen,   and   Woodcock's  "boys that  are marked to die"  ("Wartime Eve­ ning   in   Cambridge") .  The    world    in general suffers  and  dies.  So  it  does.  But to' stop  at that  distance is to be too far removed from  the heartbeats in the  wrist (the   prosody   chosen,   its   formal,   con­ scious  intrusion, compels   too   the  with­  drawal  of  the  reader   from   the  poem) . The result  of this  abstracted  stance, this all-inclusive tabulation, is that the drama is  always  threatening  to  be  melodrama; the  myth  supersedes  the  human, "Niobe  over   her    dead"  as   Woodcock's "The Ruins of  London"  invites  us  to  remem­  ber.  This  is horror  and  despair by  rote;  the  "ineffectual  misery",  to  use a  phrase  of  Woodcock's.  In   much   of  the   social poetry   of   the   Thirties  one   suffers   an "Arctic   Death";  is  offered   kleenex   for tears.  Even   spring   is  corrupting. Is  it? We have,  not so much  the disparagement of  the particular, as the removing of emo­ tion  in  parable. The  end-result is an  ap­ peal  to the head,  not a movement toward  the  heart. I think  of Van  Gogh's  potato  eaters.
As if aware  of this  danger and  threat, the  sections   of  Woodcock's  book   move into  personal mementos, into  the  area where despair finds its answer and where death  is  triumphed  over   by   the   very thing its  recognition gives  meaning and strength to:  individual love. It is the absence  of this love in  the  "land of mire and  stone" that  "withers all my green" (''Aigues Mortes"). Into Woodcock's "Insular Poem"  comes  love

Till,  exile and  expatriate for  you,
Cut  from  all past  by love's marooning flow,
I  am  Selkirk  standing on  the  only  island
Or  last  man  on  the  last  submerging strand.
 A   fine,   structuring  hand  marks    these poems,  In  the  earlier poems  the  intellect is  satisfied.  This   seems   enough-until one  wishes, once  more,  for  that  personal imperfection,  that    movement  into   the heart. What nonsense  is George Orwell's remark   that   "a  writer's literary  person­ ality  has  little  or  nothing to  do  with  his private character." It is  an  unnecessary loss  that   Woodcock should   agree   with this. One  seizes, he says, on  the incidents and  circumstances in  one's  life  that  can be  transferred  into   myth,   those   which  have   "value  precisely   because   of  their exotic  and   unfamiliar   nature." On   the contrary,  the   village   pump, one's   own backyard  is the  place of  poetry. The rag­ and-bone shop of the human heart. Move that   into  myth,   into  universality  if  you will,  but  start  elsewhere   at  grave  poetic  peril.  Keats  under his  Hampstead  tree;  Hopkins   with    poor    Felix    Randal   in Liverpool!
Surely   is  Woodcock's preference  for the  "exotic" denied  by  his  "First Spring on  the   Island" (written, I  see,  in   the Sixties), as immediate and  personal a poem  as  D.  H.  Lawrence's "Snake"  or W.  W.  E. Ross'  "The Snake  Trying" or Emily  Dickinson's "A  Narrow Fellow  in the Grass"  (Peripheral: what  primordial tie  have  we  to  this  fellow  that   he  is  al­ ways  written about   in  such  fashion?  an ultimate love  excusing  Satan?). This   is not the Audenesque mode  of parable and  personification but  what   Woodcock tells us in  a  Preface  quote in  The  Canadian Forum:  "The  stress  of  deep   and   poeti­ cally  liberating  emotions."
But one cannot wish on to a poet  what we'd  like to hear; one  must  leave  him  to his own  private  temperament; in  Wood­ cock's  case, he tells us  (rather  contradic­ torily  to  that   Orwellian  adherence), to "a temperamental  strain"  that   demands pessimism.  Thus   a   late   section   of  his book is not  affirmation or  love  but  "The End  Man":

gr

REVIEW ARTICLES



On  that  day skeletons  from  all cupboards
Emerged,  shouting the  past,  pointing the
derogatory finger.

His lonely mind  surveys a fragment realm
Of  manless  cities  where  the  rats  remain.
 like the purple  blossom of soldanella
thawing  its way
up  through the  radiant
snow.
 




("Prologue")


The  silence  deafened with fear
As I  saw  through earth  the  shifting eye of
the  fuse.

It is a personal denial  of Faulkner's per­ sonal man  who prevails. It is the  haunt­  ing  eye  of  the  Thirties  that  we  follow again. Woodcock has learned  much from Auden:

Love in this season, as unicorn fabulous
Feeds  in countries  far  away.
Under   the  passionate  heart  and  the
sedulous
Manner the heart  is clay.
("Spoken in  Love")

(Though that adjectival  inversion for the sake of pararhyme  Auden would have eschewed).
The  latest section of the  book shows a
happy unloosening from the metrics, the stanzaic  strictures   and   impersonal   par­ able-mode. Such literary  verbal  tripwires
as "involvulate", "pectoral"  (though  we still come up for air from "chthonian") have  largely been  superseded  by a more demotic   mode.  In   content,   affirmation tends to take over from the "senile", the "sterile",


1'5 AND  EYES
 
We come on "The Game  Shop  in  Col­ mar",  personal,  immediate,  and  as  vital as a heartbeat.  We are  moved;  we  have eloquence  instead  of  elocution.  All  the inhumanity,   irony,  sardonics  of  all  the earlier poems come, in this one poem, to full   vitality   and   authenticity.   Here   is poetry at work; the closing of  that exem­ plary, that  paradigmatic gap  to the per­ sonable immediate :

the power  to change, to grow in the
fluidity  transforming
eternal  dark  to light.
("The Geomantic Dragon")

Despite  his "Ballad  for  W.  H.  Auden", life is found  not  to be "an  artifact."
Notes on Visitations  is a valuable, hon­
est book; an "unsilenceable  voice."

Such  visitations possessed me at  sixteen, and  at  sixty
the gods revisit.

May there be no departure.





E. E. Greenglass


JOE ROSENBLATT, Virgins  & Vampires. McClelland & Stewart. $4.50.
SEYMOUR MAYNE, Name.  Press Porcepic. $3.50.
DAVID   MCFADDEN, A Knight   In Dried Plums. McClelland  & Stewart. $3·95·

IN Virgins  & Vampires Joe Rosenblatt  tells us again  and  again  that his brain or skull contains  just about anything  that  we might  assume  to exist in  the  outside  world. "Transparent  gun­ men/  walk  into  the  vault/ of  my  skull,"
 
we hear,  and  we hear  of "the  shapeless road of my mind," that  "there  are virgins
&  vampires in the  warm cushions of my brain,"  that  "the  fish of  the  brain  fly,"
and  "goldfish swim in  the  brain,"  while
"cows moo in the frost of my brain," and

REVIEW ARTICLES



that  "there are  haunted houses & haunted heads," where  "the  sow of winter whitens the  brain," though  "there are  recesses in the   brain/ where   the   gray   light   clings desperately at  the edges,"  and  "profound brain   tulips   are   manured." Also  "there are those whose brains are pregnant with murder," presumably in  "the brothel  of the  mind," in  which   "the paint   of  the mind  is impermanent," and   the  woman has  "snakes   in  her  head," in  which  the "mental phone  thrums." These  are  but a few  of  the  things  that   are  said  to  tran­ spire  in  the  head   in  this  book.  All  the above   quotations  are   opening   premises of lyrical  poems.
Well,  they  get  boring.  They  suggest  a
formula for making  a poem.  In fact  these poems give many other signs of being manufactured. I am reminded of Wallace Stevens'  reason  for  not  liking  surrealism. He  said   that   he  thought  poetry   should step  toward   the  unknown, while surreal­ ism is a  collage  or  shuffling  of  the  fami­ liar.   After   his  opening   premise   Rosen­ blatt   makes  willed  descriptions of  a  re­ fracted world.  Nearly  every  noun  is pro­ vided  an  adjective. Usually  the  abstract nouns    are    given    physical    attributes: "greeny vision,"  or "hacking hunger," or "cannibal death." The phrases  become even harder to take when the process is reversed,   as   in   "hysterical  moonlight." One  has read  that  sort  of thing  in places one does not frequent any more.
And   that   sort   of   thing   is  not   rare. Consider: "nature ... devours/ the  tad­ poles  of existence/ in  the  white  pond  of being."  I  have  always  thought  that  exis­ tence  is a latinate word  for  being,  and  I am  not  disapprized  of  that  belief  here.
Through  all   the   abstract  statements and   willed  descriptions, it  is difficult  to see how  Rosenblatt feels about  or  in  the world.   Hearing  most   of  the   lyrics  you don't often get to use your imagination, sympathetic  or  shaping. "In  time  all thought is reduced/ absolutely  reduced,"
 says the  poem,  suggesting that  thought is an  individual's contribution, and   that   it will eventually decompose. I  prefer  com­ position,   the   continuous creation   prin­ ciple,   if  you  like,  in  which   thought  is something  people   share,   a   universe,   a place  for writer  and  reader  to meet.
Seymour   Mayne is a  wilfully  descrip­ tive  poet  too,  and  proposes  a  world  less flamboyant  but   as  much   fabricated  as Rosenblatt's. Name  gathers  poems  from some earlier chapbooks and  general mag­ azine  publications. As he  has  done  since his   teenage   days  in  Layton's Montreal, Mayne  offers lyric after  lyric in which  we are  asked  to see how  the  poet  can  supply some  fervid  feeling  and  intensity  to  the things  and  people  outside his mind.   But one   tires   of   those   forced   epithets  and force-fed   verbs.  "Shriek" keeps  showing up, and  "groan." Pins in a game  of bocce have  to be "arrogant." The  ocean, "like a  playful  and  tamed   Behemoth," has  to "yawn." The  writer  is pleading for  the poetical.
One  feels a constant push  here, coming from  the  other  side  of the  poem; Mayne has  always  seemed   a  performer  of  the verses, striving without irony  for  striking similes,  one  after   another. He  does  not appear to have a metamorphical relation­ ship  with  the  world,  so he  manufactures figures of speech.  He seems  to live, or the poems do, with no history, no philosophy, no  cosmology,   nothing  larger   than   the eyes  and  tongue  of  the  poem  itself.  We are aware  of (the basically iambic) poem standing with face  toward  the world,  not naming  so   much   as  signing   its   name.  These lyrics are examples of Barth's liter­  ature of  exhaustion, late  pre-contempo­ rary   poems;   one   does   not   receive   the sense that  the language is doing  anything to   surprise   the   poet.   Mayne  is  one  of those who chose to go ahead without recourse to a muse.
Here   is   the   first   stanza   of   "Mount
Royal":

93

REVIEW ARTICLES



Scared staccato and  rootless he had  watched the  others
behind the  movements of their  securities. Up  the  mountain the  snow  shrieked
its name and  a wind  of fear blew  through his chest.

That is just bad at so many points. The rhymes are obviously finagled  ("scared staccato"?), abstractions qualify  abstrac­ tions  and  music  dies,  purple passages  are called  upon  to work  up excitement, there is  a  trying   for  melodrama  without  the affective    image   that    would    give   it   a chance to  be  interesting. Furthermore, I cannot  imagine  anyone, much   less  that somehow ascending white  stuff,  shrieking the  name  "snow."
Similar  problems abound  throughout the  book.  I  would   like  to  draw   to  the attentions  of   writer  and    reader   these words   from   George   Oppen: "It is  im­ possible to make a mistake  without know­ ing  it,  impossible   not  to  know  that  one has   just  smashed   something.  Unearned words  are,  in that  context, simply  ridicu­  lous-though it  is  possible  to be carried  astray  little  by little, to find  oneself, quite  simply,   trying   to  deceive   people,   to  be
'making  a   poem' ... And   the   poem   is
NOT  built   out   of   words,   one   cannot make  a  poem  by  sticking   words  into  it, it  is  the  poem   which   makes   the  words and  controls  their  meaning."
David  McFadden attests  to  that  belief always. He is a true  post-modem poet. Though  the   poems   present   a  self  (and family)   regularly,  that   self  is  proferred as phenomenon, not  as interpreter of the world  outside.  He  will present  stories fabulous  and  domestic, but caution the reader that  he is not  to be a passive con­ sumer  of  the  exhibition. "Pretend/ for  a moment    I'm   omniscient,"  he  will   say, reversing  the modem poet's  trick. He will tell   a   story   of  manipulating  a   seance, then    expose   his   fake   magician   tricks. Why?  Because  the  spirits  use fake  magi­ cian  tricks  to speak  to  us who  no  longer

94
 believe  in  magic.  Who  no  longer  believe in the willing suspension of disbelief in poetry. Coleridge  probably told us recent­ ly to drop  that.
McFadden  associates   his  fancy   more with  that  of William  Blake. In  fact  he is the  first  poet since  Blake  to see fairies  in his back yard.  Prior  to A Knight  in Dried Plums, readers  familiar with  McFadden's work  will  have  in  mind   songs  of  inno­ cence.  Now  the  poems  of  experience are here,   and   still,  properly,  songs.  All  at once  we hear  what  we  never  had  heard, the  admission  of  pain,  anger,  envy,  and meaner feelings;  but  still  the  full  dream­ like lucidity  of the usual McFadden voice. Check   the   dream   poem   in   which   he tricks  a  brat  into  being  shot  in the  head.
McFadden walked  many years ago through Souster's  street  scene;  Souster  is an atheist  poet such  as Wordsworth, with the   signs   of  Christian  humanism  and ethics  remaining. McFadden says that nature is not supreme -you can  become part   of  nature  by  remaining  blind,  re­ pressed  and   boring,   by  dying,  in  short.  McFadden  the  spiritual  is  still   looking further for  wonder,  for  humour.  Nature never  laughs.
Beyond   the   poem,   too.  We   are   told often  that  what  we are  reading is fragile, that  the fragility  is part  of it. The knight was a California fruitgrowers' statue at a world's  fair, standing in contrast to "mas­ sive  marble sculptures/ in  classical form that  were  meant  to last  forever," as well as  military   and   technological  boastings.  But  dried  plums,  scattered as  they  may be, still have pits in them.
So  there  is a lot  of death in  this  book of  experience,  but   the  main   message  is that   the  awareness   that   death is in  the offing should  make  one  more  sensitive  to life,  as  in  Oppen's terms.  As  usual,  we are  told  charming stories  of real  life in Hamilton, Ontario. All or any larger thoughts should  be limned, said  Blake, .in

REVIEW ARTICLES



the  human form,   if  not  divine   at  least more  divine  than  anything else here.
Perhaps the  last  lines  of  McFadden's book will satisfactorily rhyme  and  answer the title of Mayne's:
 what I am looking for:  fame that will outshine  Christ,
so that someone  1,ooo years from now
will lose a tough pot at poker
and  mutter David  McFadden!



GROVE AS CORRESPONDENT

Margaret Stobie

The   Letters  of Frederick   Philip  Grove,  edited   by Desmond   Pacey.  University of
Toronto Press. $25.00.


WE  HAVE   ONLY   FAIRLY    re­ cently  become  concerned about our  lack of familiar records  of  many  of our  writ­ ers,  and  about   the  need  to  retrieve and preserve  them  because  of  the  light  they throw  on  a  writer's work  and  the  world he   lived   in.   Desmond   Pacey   had   felt the  importance of filling  this  gap  in  our literary history  when,  in Canadian  Liter­ ature  Winter    1962,  he   announced  his intention   to    publish    a    collection    of Grove's  letters.  The volume   which   has now  emerged   does  add   to  our   view  of Grove,   though   on  the  whole  the  letters are  meagre  in content, for Grove  was not a  compulsive  letter  writer, like Yeats  for instance,  needing   to  share   his  thoughts and  experiences; rather, he was a man  in a  mask,  constantly  on  guard,  and   not likely  to  be  lavish  of  confidences. As  a result,  the  letters  reveal  much  about the man  but  rather less about his work.
The student hoping for  insight  into Grove's  development as a novelist  will be baffled  by  his  persistent  obfuscation  of time,  both  about  his life -"the 53 years of my stay  in this country" -and  about his writing. For instance, he says that Consider Her Ways "was  finished  during the  winter   1920I2I" though  the  manu­ scripts in the Grove  Collection show  that,  except  for  the  introduction, it  was  com­ pletely  rewritten in  1933, and  the  intro­ duction  was  probably  written  in   1925.
 
Nor   will   the   student  fare   better  with Grove's  evaluations of his own  work,  for they depend sometimes  on  his mood  and sometimes  on  the  person  he is writing to. Rereading Fruits  of the  Earth  he  says, "so  far  I  don't like  it  overly  well,"  but six days later,  "no  matter what  anybody else says, that's a great  book."
What the  collection  does outline is the shape  of Grove's career  in Canada: from the  teacher-naturalist of  1913 to  the  ris­ ing novelist of the twenties,  coming to the apex  of his move  to  Ottawa at  the  tum of  the  decade, and   then  sloping down  during the  thirties after  his  withdrawal to Simcoe  as teacher-farmer-writer faced with   growing   publishing  and    financial worries, alleviated by a flurry  of  publica­ tions and  honours during the forties,  and moving  to his death of  grievous  illness in August    1948.  Within   this   pattern  are three  main  groups  of  letters: those  to his wife during the triumphal tours  of 1928-
29, those  to  his  publishers, and  those  to friends  who lent  him  books.
The  first of these  groups  and  the  larg­ est-over    150  letters -comes   almost  exactly   in   the   middle  of  the   thirty-six  year span of Grove's known  life in Cana­ da,  and   at   the   pinnacle  of   his  career. During the  three  tours,  arranged by  the Association  of Canadian  Clubs  following  the  publication of A Search  for America,  Grove travelled from southern Ontario to

95

REVIEW ARTICLES



the  Peace  River   country, from   Victoria to Sydney, giving  two addresses,  "Nation­ hood" and  "Assimilation", both  of which he  later   published.  Everywhere  he  was acclaimed,  by  the   intelligentsia  of  the University of  Toronto as  by  the  towns­ folk  of  Moosomin,  and   everywhere he castigated the  people  for  their  material­ ism. The letters  are  often  mere  notes - "the promised   daily  letter" -and  often about homely  details  of  train   schedules,  his  laundry, and  family   finances.   Prin­  cipally,  however,  they  are  about his new experiences as a  lecturer, the  reaction of audiences, the sales of his books, and  the important people  he was meeting. In  this aspect,   he  shows  himself   to  be  gullible, insolent, and overwhelmed by money.  At
a luncheon in Ottawa, "over  roo Million Dollars  were  sitting at   the  board."  In­ vited  for a weekend  to the  country house of "a multi-millionaire," he cannot resist, even  to his wife, the  pathetic boasting so characteristic of him,  "I  have  almost  got used  again   to  having 3  foot-men spring  for  my cane,  etc.  when  I  enter a house."  By  the  end  of  the  tours,  his  devious dealings  with  publishers were  well  under  way:   he  had  offered   one  manuscript to three  of them, he  had  had  his first quar­ rel with  Macmillan's, and  he had  so em­ broiled   the   other  two   that    they   were "sueing   each    other  through  me.   Bad news." The whole  record  of Grove's deal­  ings  with   publishers  is  a  disheartening one,  amply  illustrated in  this  volume  by the  sixty-odd   letters   to  Lome Pierce  of Ryerson's. As Pacey  said  in  his introduc­ tion, Grove  was "at his most unattractive in  his letters  to  publishers. The tone  ... runs  from  arrogant  bullying to  self-pity­
ing  whining."
It is the  third  group, thank-you letters for  books  lent  him,  that   is  possibly  the most  informative, as it is the  most agree­ able   to   read.   Grove   was   no   buyer   of books,  and   his  personal  library,  for  one who  purported  to  be  a  man   of  letters,

g6
 was  astonishingly small,  but  he  was  for­ tunate in  finding  generous  book-lenders, Watson  Kirkconnell at Wesley College in Manitoba during the twenties, and  Rich­ ard  Crouch, chief  librarian for  the  city of London, in Ontario during the thirties.
Grove's comments to Kirkconnell about books on French and  German literature contain nothing unusual for one who had recently  taken  university courses  in those subjects,  but those on authors to whom Kirkconnell introduced him,  including Anatole  France, Saintsbury, Croce,  Dean Inge,  Aldous Huxley, and  Bergson  (some rather  surprising) , are  often   relevant to his  writing. Reflecting on  Abercrombie's
I dea  of  Great   Poetry,   Grove   expounds his own notion  of tragedy, "To be a hero is to  be  tragic", because   of  the  evanes­ cence  of  perfection, a  theme  that   per­  meates  his novels of those  years. Bergson troubles  him, "As for the idea of creative­  ness in evolution, I fail to grasp  it," for it runs  counter to  his  conviction that   hu­  man  evolution  stopped "the moment in­  vention began," a thesis that  persists into  The Master  of the Mill. Similarly, among some  thirty   letters   to  Richard  Crouch, one  returning Franz Werfel's Forty  Days of Musa  Dagh  and  Robert Briffault's Europa  gives a glimpse  into  Grove's  mind at  about   the  time  when  he  was  writing Two  Generations: "Both are  great   and magnificent  works. . . . Both   books   are exceedingly   instructive  to  me,"   but  be­ cause  of  their  passive  pessimism,  "I  find them     ultimately unsatisfying....    For whether revolt  is successful  or  not, whe­  ther  it is even sensible  or  not,  it  remains  an attribute of the  human spirit as such: it  is  necessary   and   fundamentally  hu­  man."
Other letters  may tum up from  time to time,  but  it  is  unlikely  that   they  would be of sufficient  weight  to  warrant a  fur­ ther  edition. It is therefore the  more  re­ grettable that  this heavily subsidized  pro­  ject  has   resulted   in   a   book   that   lacks

REVIEW ARTICLES



competent editorial direction. In  his last years,  of  course,  Desmond  Pacey,  over­ burdened  by  administrative   duties   and suffering from  cancer, unfortunately had to leave  much  of  this  work  to assistants.  But   whatever  the   unhappy  cause,   the book is irritating to read.  The letters  bris­ tle  with  square  brackets devoted   to  ex­ panding	common	abbreviations	that Grove   used-yr.,  hr.,  Sat.,  Vol.-thus destroying part  of  the  quality of Grove's familiar writing. As for  the  footnotes, it is my guess that  if the officious, the repeti­ tive and  the  fatuous had  been  deleted­ there  is  even  a  footnote,  complete with translation, on  D.V.- the size and   the cost of this  book  could  have  been  cut  by at  least  a third. But at  any  rate,  through the  initiative of  Desmond Pacey,  the  let­ ters  themselves are  now available as part
 of  the  total  record  of Grove  in  Canada. There is an  appendix concerned with Felix   Paul   Greve.   As  I  reread  Grove's letters,  I had  increasing misgivings  about identifying him with  a man  who  had  be­ longed   to  the  literary world   of   Europe, even  if only  to its outer  circles.  Because of  my  misgivings  I  asked  two  registered handwriting specialists,  living in different cities,  to  examine the  two  letters   repro­ duced  in  facsimile  in  the  appendix, one by Greve,  dated   Berlin,  April   15,  1907, the other  by Grove,  dated Winkler, Man­ itoba,  September 4, 1913. Each examiner gave   it  as  his  opinion  that   the   letters  were  written   by   two   different  persons.  For  this reason  I am  not  commenting on Pacey's  remarks  about the  Grove/Greve identification,  nor  on   the   Greve   letters
included here.




ZEST FOR THE BATTLE
 


Sandra Djwa


By Great  Waters: A  Newfoundland and  Labrador Anthology, edited by Peter Neary and  Patrick O'Flaherty. University of Toronto Press.


By   Great    Waters:  A   New­ foundland      and    Labrador     Anthology, edited    by    Peter    Neary    and    Patrick  O'Flaherty,  is  a  useful   addition  to  the Social   History   of   Canada  Series.   Like several  of its  predecessors, The  Wretched of Canada: Letters  toR. B. Bennett  1930-
1935   edited    by   L.  M.   Grayson    and Michael Bliss, and  The Social  Criticism of Stephen Leacock  edited  by Alan  Bow­ ker,  the  book  is  meant  to  fill  a  gap  in Canada's social  history.   Neary  and   0'­  Flaherty aim "to  offer  readers a selection of  Newfoundland  writing  which   would illuminate the unfolding of  the province's history  and  culture, and  at the same time merit  attention  as literature." To  a large extent, they  have  succeeded   in  bringing together material  that   covers  the  whole span   of   Newfoundland's  history.  Other
 than    successive   editions  of   Joseph   R.
Smallwood's The  Book of Newfoundland
( r 937), there  has been  no comprehensive anthology  of  writings   relating  to  New­ foundland and  Labrador.
To  read  through By Great  Waters is to recognize  the  difficulty  of  merely  surviv­ ing  in  Newfoundland. The  accounts of freezing  weather, storms  at  sea, isolation,  marauding  French  and    Indians,  fire, disease  and   poverty  make  grim   reading. If we  are  to  judge  from  this  book,  the effect  on  Newfoundlanders  has  not  been give-up-and-give-in but  a certain zest for the battle. Smallwood, in an excerpt from The Book  of Newfoundland,  declares "Newfoundlanders are  great  battlers":

Battling  for   the   opportunity  of   getting a berth on  one  of the  West-Coast English fishing-vessels coming  on  a  summer  voyage

97

REVIEW ARTICLES



to  Newfoundland  in   the   early   days  of  the Island's  discovery;  battling  for   an   oppor­ tunity  to   desert  the   vessel   before   she   re­ turned to  England with  her  cargo of  codfish in  the  autumn of  the  year; then  battling to hew  a  humble home  out  of the  virgin forest  that grew   to  the  salt   water's  edge   in  some small   cove  far   along the  coast  out  of  sight  or  knowledge  of  the  English  fishing-vessels coming  to  our   coast  each summer in  those early  years ; battling  against Nature and  the elements to  wrest a  Jiving  from   the  sea and  the   forest   while   they  were   building home­  steads; battling  against the  dreaded surprise attacks of  pirates, English men-o'-war, 'Fish­ ing Admirals'; battling against the  merciless, ruthlessly  determined   efforts  of   the   early fish-merchants to  amass   fortunes out  of  the toil of the  Newfoundland fishermen: against official stupidity and  private greed: against betrayal, treachery, double-dealing and downright theft.

Undeniably  this   is   rhetoric  but   it   is rhetoric informed by a sound  historical sense. Smallwood knows and explicates Newfoundland's progression from  fishing station to Canadian province and  he carries   the  reader along   with  him.  Un­ fortunately, it  is precisely  this  contextual framework which  the  editors  fail  to pro­ vide for the book as a whole.
Unlike  the earlier volumes  in the series where editors have selected a manageable area  and  provided the necessary guidance of an introduction, Neary  and  O'Flaherty have  adopted instead the  device  of  pro­ viding  brief,  biographical  notes  identify­ ing   authors  who   are   classified   chrono­ logically   under   five   sections:   Part    I ) Discovery  and  Early Exploration, Part  2) Transatlantic Outpost, Part  3)  The Colo­ nial  Era, Part 4)  North Atlantic Domin­ ion and Part 5) Breakers Ahead. This pre­ sents  a  real  problem. Because  the  scope of  this  antl,.ology is so large, spanning approximately  a   thousand  years,   it   is almost   impossible   for   the   reader   to  fit together the pieces of the Newfoundland political  and  cultural mosaic. And the biographical notes are  not always helpful. The heading to an  excerpt from  Sir Wil-

g8
 liam  Vaughan's The  Newlander's Cure, for  example, is  "Vaughan's 'Golden  Is­ land'    Reconsidered   ( r63o) ."   But   the notes  do  not  indicate that   the  "Golden Island" is an allusion  to Vaughan's earlier work, The Golden  Fleece  ( I626), a fan­ tastic  book of  propaganda advocating the settlement  of    Newfoundland.  Literary historians  now  speculate that  The  New­ lander's  Cure  was  a  further attempt at propaganda and   that   Vaughan,  despite the   apparent  first-hand  knowledge  dis­ played   in  his  various   cures   for  scurvy, actually  never  visited  the  island.  Infor­ mation  of this  sort,  indispensable  for  an understanding  of   the  text   cited,  should  have  been  included  in  full  introductory notes or in  a substantial introduction.
As a  result,  I find  myself  reading this anthology with pleasure,  nostalgia  and disappointment: pleasure  that  a  book of this kind, greatly needed, has at last been published; nostalgia  because  many  of the selections  anthologized bring  back memo­ ries of  Newfoundland (and  perhaps this is the best test for genuine social history)  ; and   disappointment   because   the   book suffers from a lack of  critical editing. The excerpted  selections   from   Guy,   Mason  and  Hayman were  all  a pleasure to read and  it  was  good  to  see that   the  editor's catholicity  of   taste  extended  from   the early   Vinland   sagas   to   the   important union  ballad, "Forty Thousand Strong":

By Merchants and  By Governments too long we've  been  misruled,
We're determined now  in future and  no
longer we'll  be fooled,
We'll  be brothers all and  freemen and  we'll
rightify  each  wrong,
We are  coming Mr.  Coaker and  we're
forty  thousand strong.

Also  anthologized is that charming description  by  Sir  Richard  Whitbourne of  his  encounter  in  St.  John's  harbour with  "a  maremaid or a mareman":

a  strange creature which  I saw  there  in  the year  1610 in  a morning early  ... which  very

REVIEW ARTICLES



swiftly  came  swimming towards me,  looking cheerfully  on   my   face   as   it   had   been   a woman-by   the   face,    eyes,   nose,   mouth, chin, ears, neck  and  forehead, it  seemed   to be so beautiful & in  those  parts so well proportioned ... How  it  was  in  the  forepart from   the   neck   and   shoulders I  could   not discern.

The  report  by the Anglican divine,  Julian Moreton, of  the  singular Biblical  names to be encountered in a Newfoundland outport, (he  cites, among others,  Lo Ruharnah and  Jerusha)  brought to mind my  grandfather's  experience at  the  turn of the century when  he was obliged to christen   a  child  Nebuchadnezzar. There is a certain shrewd  wit  in  Newfoundland
outport  life,   a   wit   which   E.  J. Pratt
catches  in  his description of the  old  Salt
inNewfoundland Verse  and  which More­ ton recognizes  when  he recounts the story of  an  aged   parishioner  who,  when  told that   the   martyr  Cranmer   might   have saved  his life  had  he only signed  a  piece of  paper,   replied, "Why,  he  must   have been a proper fool!"
Editorial problems  encountered in this anthology relate  to the  selection  of texts, the  reproduction of  texts  and  biographi­ cal   notes  descriptive  of   authors.  From the  historical   perspective,  it  would  have been   helpful   to  have  explicit   reference  made    to   the   notorious   Star   Chamber Rules  which  forbade settlement in  New­ foundland. Similarly, the French presence in   Newfoundland  is  not   clearly   deline­ ated. The excerpt from Abbe Baudoin's journal gives none of the context of the establishment of a  French colony at  Pla­ centia. Here  the editors  might  have cited D. W. Prowse's History  of Newfoundland. Although they  do  acknowledge that  this is the  most  comprehensive history  of the province,   curiously   they   do   not   quote from  it,  offering  instead one  of  Prowse's occasional  remarks  about   the  building of the  railroad. There is a similar  gap  in relation   to  the  description  of  education in Newfoundland. Were  it not for a stray
 comment, again  from  Smallwood's The Book  of  Newfoundland, we  would   not be aware  that  Newfoundland did  not get its  first  school  until   barely  one  hundred years earlier.  As a  consequence, much  of the   early   written  literature  was   weak while the oral  ballads  flourished.
On  the  literary side,  we are  given  too much  of  the sophisticated observer  view­ ing  the  native  inhabitants along with  the rest  of  the  flora  and  fauna in  much   the same fashion  as one  would  eye odd  speci­ mens  at   a  zoo.  This   might   have   been remedied  by some  digging  for  additional material written  by  Newfoundlanders. In particular, further   selections   from   The Newfoundland   Quarterly  are  indicated. The  editors might  have also drawn on the various   books  of  verse   published  after  r83g.  To  be  sure,  many  consist  of  eulo­  gies   to  "Terra  Nova" and   laments  for "The  Passing  of  the  Beothuck" but  they do   provide   interesting  examples  of  the application  by  Newfoundlanders of   im­ ported    Victorian  modes   to   the   native  scene:   one  of  my  own  favourites  is  an apostrophe  to   "Ye   fishy  children   of  a chilly  sea."   And   why  not   more  of   the popular ballads?  Especially, why  not  the enormously    popular   songs   of    Johnny Burke as contained in The People's Song­  ster, Buyer's  Guide   and  Gems  of Poetry and  Prose  ( r goo)  which  is dedicated "to  the  bone  and  sinew  of  the  country, the Fisherman  of   Newfoundland." A  selec­ tion  from  one  of  Burke's  farces,  such  as the  parody of  The Mikado found  in The Topsail   Geisha:   A   Story   of  the    Wash  House    (rgoo),  especially   the   song   of "The   Amorous   Tom   Cod",  would   do more  to  explain   to  other Canadians one aspect  of  the  ways  of  Newfoundlanders than   all   the   Robert  Lowells   and   the Margaret Duleys in the world.
The  allotment of space to individual authors is, in  some  cases,  disproportion­ ate.  Nine   pages  are  alloted   to  a  nine­ teenth-century   novelist,   Robert  Lowell,

99

REVIEW ARTICLES



whose work  is characterized by a patron­ izing  eye  and   laboured  attempts  at  hu­  mour.  In   one   exchange,  a   magistrate inquires:

"Have you any  alias,  Mr.  Barbury ?"

"No,  sir;   I  drinkt a  morsel   of  tay-Izik Maffen  an'   me,    sir,    afore  we    corned!" answered  Jesse,   mistaking  the   magistrate's technicality.

Margaret Duley  is allotted eleven  pages for   a  description  of   Mageila  Michelet from    an    outport  called    "Feather-the­ Nest".  Mageila  is  described  as  "the seventh  daughter of  a  seventh  daughter, with   healing  in  her  hands   and   infinite  silence   on   her   lips."  According  to  the biographical  notes,  Duley's  novels  "rank among the  most  sensitive  of  imaginative recreations  of  Newfoundland life."  One  Edwin  Pratt  on  the  other hand, is given three  pages  of  text  and  is dismissed  with lip   service   as   "an    established  literary figure  and   an  eminent academic at  the University of Toronto." We might  suspect that  there  is a certain amount of cultural chauvinism  operative  here.   Duley   who remained in  Newfoundland is considered a  better   interpreter of  outport life  than Pratt who absconded (with  his heritage) to   Toronto.  This   is  a   pity   because   a selection   from   The   Roosevelt   and  the Antinoe,  descriptive of the  battle against the sea, or an excerpt  from "The Titanic", especially  that  fine  passage  which  intro­ duces the iceberg  (a passage, incidentally, which  builds  upon   Pratt's  childhood ex­ periences  in  Newfoundland)  would  go a long  way  to provide some  of the  modern  "literature"  which   the   anthology  lacks. In   the  modern  period, most  impressive  were   the   descriptions  of   nature  to  be found   in   excerpts  from    the   work   of Harold  Horwood  and   Franklin  Russell. Russell's description of a trip  to the Funk Islands was particularly gripping.
As the earlier reference to Edwin  Pratt might  indicate, there is a certain arbitrari-

100
 ness in  the  assigning  of  christian  names, even   to  writers   like  D.  W.   Prowse   or E. J. Pratt or Joseph  R. Smallwood who regularly   use  initials.  Editorial  faux  pas
of this and a similar  nature and  the repetition of the same biographical details for  authors whose work  appears in more than  one section of the  text, suggests that this  anthology   is  yet  to  receive   a  good critical  editing. For  this the University of Toronto Press  must  take  some  responsi­ bility.
However,   the   editors   are   responsible for the  transcription of the  text. The  text of John  Guy's meeting with  the Beothuck Indians is particularly unsatisfactory. The editors   use  as  their  authority the  rendi­
tion  given  by J. P. Howley  in  The  Beo­
thucks  or  Red  Indians   ( 1915).  But  as
Howley  points  out,  his citation is from  a handwritten transcription from  Purchas His Pilgrimes. Unfortunately, Howley  did
not understand some of the Elizabethan terms  used  by  Guy  and   he  modernized




Isabella  Valanuy Urawford
Symposium

The  Department of English,  Uni­ versity  of Ottawa,  announces the Isabella Valancy  Crawford  Sym­  posium, its fifth annual conference on  a  major  Canadian  writer, to be  held  Saturday,  May   7th  and Sunday, May 8th,  1977.

For further information  write to: CHAIRMAN, CRAWFORD SYMPOSIUM DEPARTMENT OF  ENGLISH UNIVERSITY OF  OTTAWA
OTTAWA, CANADA    KIN 6N5

REVIEW ARTICLES



the   text   haphazardly. Consequently the version   of  the  text   which   we  are   now given compounds his errors. The  process works  something like this:  a reference  to the  ship  "Indeavour" and  her  "Shallop" or  dinghy   capitalized  by  Purchas  is  re­ produced   as   the   'Indeavour'  and   the
'Shallop' by Howley. The present  editors, modernizing what  they  presume to  be a reference to  two ships, provide Guy  with the   lndeavour  and   the  Shallop. Other discrepancies in spelling  and  punctuation although  not   desirable   are   not   serious matters. But changes  such  as the example cited   and   others   including the  omission of a clause  cited  by Howley  but  absent  in the  present  text are  more  serious  because they   relate   to  the  sense  of  the  passage. Such  discrepancies imply  that  the  editors
 have  not edited  as carefully as they might have  done.
These  cavils  are  made simply  because I  do  consider   this  anthology an  impor­ tant    one.   It   will   be   indispensible  for Newfoundland studies for some  time  into the  future. As such,  it  is too important a work  to be used  without some  considera­ tion  of  its  strengths and   possible  weak­  nesses.   For this attempt to introduce Newfoundland's social  and   literary  his­ tory,  Neary  and  O'Flaherty  deserve great  credit. And  the  fact  that  this  has proved to  be a  difficult  task  reflects  the  absence  of  a  body  of  earlier  scholarship  in  the area.  One   hopes  this  anthology  will  en­ courage  a new interest in  Newfoundland cultural history.





IN DISPR]IISE
OF GRE]IT H]IPPENINGS
 




Ralph Gustafson


Birdsong  and  the midge drinking needfully: Otherwise happenings of summer  afternoons. Such great  fountains tumble water
At d'Este. I at the spring unwanted
At the corner of the patio, my foot in it Unobserved, pull weeds. The  choice Between  weedy violet and  potential Ground-phlox massed in May and  red And white  and  to be propagated, is Troy Fallen  or not, a thing of moment
And momentous choice whether the midge succeed
In swallowing smaller  than  itself or, Should  birdsong cease? Let Helen Waddle down  the street  and  be beautiful. I shall go to bed far later on
And  pull the sheet up over time.
Now I watch  the cataclysmic gulp By midges made  and conjugate What question lies in oriole song
Oblivious of Agamemnon and  a thousand ships.

IOI





ASSORTED CATCH

R.OBIN   SKELTON, Time  Light. McClelland and
Stewart,  $6.gs.
MIKE   DOYLE,   Preparing    for  the   Arc.   Weed
Flower  Press.
MATT   COHEN,    Peach   Melba.  Coach    House
·       Press.

THE  REVIEWER'S  NET often  brings  in an oddly  assorted  catch, and  this  is true  in the   case  of   the   three   books  of   poetry presented here. Their conjunction is somewhat unfortunate  for   Matt  Cohen and   Mike   Doyle,   for   Robin    Skelton's Time   Light  is a  truly  impressive  collec­ tion:    complex,   personal,   powerful  and moving  in  a way  that  is  bound   to domi­  nate  the reader's attention. Skelton  would prefer   one  to  refer   to  Time Light  as  a "sequence" of  poems  rather than  a "col­  lection";  he  speaks  in  his  Preface  of  his attempt  to  "create a  whole  that  is more than   the  sum  of  its  parts", and   of  his arrangement of the  poems  in "a  particu­ lar sequence".
The  sequence  emerges as a form of self­ exploration, and  a quest  for  many things:  a sense of  personal  harmony, acceptance of  one's   ageing,   and   what  one  has  be­ come,  and   for  a  harmony   between   the symbols which  rise up  in  the imagination and   in   dreams,  and   the   more   formal  symbols  of  myth   and   art.  The  central section,   third   of   seven   in   the   book,  is "Travelling  Time", and   there   the  quest of the  book's  theme  becomes  united  with a  literal  journey   to  Europe  undertaken by   Skelton   in   Ig6g-7o.   The  themes   of Time   Light  are  marvellously interwoven here,  in  what   was  for  me  the  most  ab-


102
 sorbing part of the book. This poem on Mallorca,  for  example, concerns   a  very real geographical location:

Through the Caves of Drach above the Middle  Sea clear water  brims the mirror  imagery of hanging  swords
and staligrnitic  heroes that,  half-born,
part  man, part muscling clay, transfixed as stone,
hint  epics of the  upper  world.

But  the  caves assume  the  mythic  dimen­ sions of  antechambers  between  the  eter­  nity  which   precedes   our  birth,  and   the bewildering material   world  into   which we are  born.  Here  is  Mr.  Skelton's  por­  trayal  of  his  emergence from  the  caves:

Boats await.     The  man beside  the oar, a shifting  shape  of black, drives us toward our landing.    Memory
wakes
blurred  voice, blind vision, and  the daylit dark.

If one  senses a  personal   unease  there,  it is  because   the   poem   is  more   than   a literary tourist  piece; its extra  dimension lies  in   the   attempt  to  emerge   from   a personal  "ante-room" in the middle  years of  life,  to  read  the  dreams which  loom out   of  sleep's   darkness,  to  lay  hold  of some firm sense of self to face the years ahead. For  the first  poem  in Time  Light opens with a half-awake night  piece:  a jumble of half-grasped memories  and  the lived-in body which obeys its own secret compulsions:

Listen.    This  is desperate. Listen. I am the nervous start  in the dark before sleeping, the knee jerking,
the twitch  of the lip
at a dreamed  kiss, ..•

and  the  book ends  I I 2  pages  later  in the long  title-poem  with  words  which  resolve the   theme   of  the   journey   in  search   of harmony:

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



finding in  age a new spring
of clearer water,
another  knowledge
turning my face into  the  light.

The various   themes   of  Time  Light: the children, the responsibilities of domes­ tic  life,  the  dark   dreams, the  self-doubt  and  fear of self, the resonance of personal  possessions,  the  effect  of  art  upon  one's ways  of  living  and  seeing,  connect  from poem  to poem  in such  a  way as to make the  book  grow  in one's  imagination with successive re-readings. From  certain quo­ tations,  as well as from  the  total  pattern, one   gathers  that   Mr.   Skelton   admires  Eliot's   Four   Quartets,  and   had   Eliot's exploration   of   time   in   mind   when   he planned the  present   work.  Did  that  im­ pressive  model  have  any  effect  upon  the final   long  poem,   "Time  Light", which seeks  to  resolve  the  entire  sequence? "It is a  time  for  change", this  poem  begins, and  I  felt  a  little  sense of strain  here,  a willed  desire  to  draw  the  book  together, to  come  through  and   find   (or  impose) the  harmony he sought.  The  language is duller  and  less urgent:

So in  this  place
I spell  out
the  soul's  need
to find  wholeness
in carved symbol or open  door
facing the  changing
of the  light  ...

I  preferred  the  less willed  resolution of the earlier, briefer  piece, "Burning Sticks, Mallorca" -one  of  the  many  poems  in which  Robin  Skelton  lives up  to his lines in praise of Robert Graves: "Poetry is studying/ how the spirit soars/ on learned as on simple/ ignorant things."
After  Time Light, the  early  poems  in
Preparing    for  the   Arc   are   small   beer. "arms in my head/ grow long three thou­ sand  miles",  for  example, has  a  page  to itself-page    eight; and    other   poems
 here  depend  on  an  emaciated whimsy  of that   kind.  On  the  other  hand, it  has  to be  said   that   the   sequence   of  forty-six poems  headed   "Noah" represents a  very good  idea.  The  biblical  story  of  the  Ark is made  the basis of a series of reflections, analogies,    quotations   and    imaginings. The   story  is  treated  realistically, to  test its  amazing psychological implications: "Responsibility: to  choose  the  right  ani­ mals/  the  apropriate species/    the  inevi­ table  individuals"; the  symbolic  levels  of the  story of the  Flood  are suggested  by a quotation  from   Yeats:   "All   things   fall and  are built  again/ And  those that  build them   are  gay";  analogies   are   put   for­ ward: "Body  as sea/  mare  nostrum/ soul as ark/ afloat upon  it".
But    Preparing    for    the    Arc    makes rather disappointing use of  this  unusual structure and  theme,  and  the  final  effect is limp; not  only  in  the  one-page poems like "Even  the windowpanes/ wept", but also in the more elaborate and  allusive pieces,  where   neither  the  language  nor the   approach  is   vigorous    and    varied enough  to support the  wide-ranging and demanding form.
Matt Cohen's Peach  Melba, in  its chaste  and  attractive format from  the admirable  Coach   House   Press,  is  a  dis­ concerting set of prose  poems;  forced by the chances  of review  into  a place  on  the bookshelf  between  Time  Light   and   Pre­ paring  for the  Arc,  it  proved  more  puzz­ ling at first than either of its companions. I  came  to see it  as a surrealistic account of a love affair, with  the surprising "com­ parison  of  objects  as remote  in  character as  possible"  which   the  surrealist Andre Breton   claimed   as  "the highest   task  to which  poetry  can  aspire". The woman  in the  affair   is a  singer,  has  a  husband, a lover   (the   writer),  and   a  grandfather (from   the  Southern States).  In  one  of the  poems  we learn  that  the  grandfather had  a  lover  too, one  "who was  in  films. Her   roles  were  always  brief.  She  would

BOOKS IN REVIEW



drift   in  from   the  wings  and   faint." In Peach Melba the most extraordinary statements are made  with a serenity  which gives the  poems  a drem-like logic:

You  are  lying  in  bed  with  your  husband, wearing peach melba.
You  are  thinking of me.     I am  thinking of you. In the
distance we hear old  temples crashing over
the  mountains

Our bodies  can't remember anything.
They are  frantically
turning themselves into  liquids and  soon  the
whole  landscape
will be covered with  their  spotted sign.

If one submits  oneself to this logic, and enters  this world,  there  are delights to be had  along  the  way,  as  in  this  difference of  opinion  between   the  writer   and   the lady:

I tell  you  that my  grandparents were  Rus­ sian.    You   imagine  them    seated   on   huge black  horses,  wrapped in  bearskins,  crossing  the  steppes of  Asia  on  a  sunny  white  day.  I imagine them   huddled  in  villages, retelling old   jokes,  tapping their  teeth   to  see  if  they are  hollow.

On  the other  hand, the surrealistic images in  Peach  Melba ("You're already/ dressed   in   black/ smashing  your   hair/ with  a gavel")  might  irritate some  read­ ers   with    their    apparent   inconsequen­ tiality,  and  I  was  surprised  to  find  that  they  were  not  irritating me.  In  fact,  the more  I  read  the book,  the  more  imagin­ atively accurate they seemed  to be. Noth­  ing  could   be  further  from   the   learned  and  searching poems  in  Robin  Skelton's Time   Light,  yet  Peach  Melba  is  none­ theless  an  absorbing collection. But were I  forced   to  choose,  I  know  which  book I  would   rather own,  read,  and  go  back to in years to come.

CHRISTOPHER  RINGROSE
 A BETTER HARD CENTRE

SYLVIA  FRASER,   The Candy  Factory. McClel- land  &  Stewart, $8.gs.

CANDY FACTORIES can be ambivalent places.  The  manufacture of  candies  can be as mundane and  pointless  as the  pro­ cess  in  any  factory -even   more  so  as their  product is useless from  a  practical point  of view. Yet  this  uselessness allows for   the   possibility  of   play.  Who   could devote  his entire  life to producing a better  hard  centre?   So  in  Sylvia  Fraser's latest novel  the  candy  factory  becomes  a  suit­ able   metaphor   for   our    contemporary society.   Pointless   work   alternates  with other    activity    which    acquires    various  levels    of    meaning   as   the    characters struggle to achieve or maintain an uneasy truce  with  the  world  around them.
This  novel is much  more  ambitious in its scope  than  her  remarkable first  novel Pandora. Eleven  different characters are explored   in  depth,  while   a  number  of others  revolve  on  the  fringes.  This  scope helps create a rich texture to the novel, although the  tendency  is for  the  charac­ ters  to  become  stereotyped,  each  repre­ senting   a   different  type   of   person   in society. Fraser  tries  to avoid  this  through a detailed  exploration of the  background of each  character, but  even  at  their  best they do  not stick in  the imagination.
At   the   top   of  the   novel's   structure, both   imaginatively  and   physically   (she occupies  a loft over the candy  factory) , is Mary   Moon.  The   records  she  has  been keeping of life at the candy  factory  in her "Special  Accounts    Ledger"   form    the greater part  of the book. Throughout the novel   Mary   Moon   is  never   far   away, manipulating  the  characters  into  situa­ tions  in  which  they  are  led  to  a  greater understanding  of   themselves   and,  one hopes,  greater  happiness. The  rose  per-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



fume  she  wears  suffuses  the  novel,  pro­ viding  assurance that   in  this  haphazard world   there   is,  after   all,  someone   who knows what  she is doing.
Charles  X. Hunter, at  the  top of the administrative structure of  the  candy factory,  carries  on  the  family  tradition of making   and   selling  chocolates. Other characters occupy  various  positions  in the echelons of candy production. Beau Whitehead  is  an   industrial   researcher who lives only in his head; Morgan Jones a   black   who   lives  only   in   his  senses; Danny  Steele the stud about town who believes  the  revealed   word  lies  between the  covers  of  Playboy;  Daphne his  well­ meaning  but   confused   girl-friend;  Sam Ryan   the  not-so-young  man  on  his  way down; Charles Hunter's  secretaries Brig­ itte  and  Eve;  and  Celeste,  his wife,  who eventually assumes  control  over  the com­ pany.  All  the  characters are  crippled in their understanding of life, but  not hope­ lessly so. The book is suffused  with  hope that   the   narrowness  of  each   character can  be broadened. In  the  opening  chap­ ters   Mary   Moon,   the   eternal   optimist,  confronts  a  Tramp,  the  ultimate cynic. Optimism wins out. As Mary  Moon  says:

"Look  in my Special  Accounts  Book! I have it all worked out-a program  of modest miracles,   human  miracles,   the   very   thing you have soured on!"

Human  miracles,   as   the   book   demon­
strates,  are at least conceivable.
Ms. Fraser's prose style is as vivid as in Pandora,  her  first  novel,  although  there are  parts,  especially  in  her  description of the  Tramp, which  are  over-written. The repetitive rhythm and  occasionally  the phrasing  appear  to   owe   something  to early  Beckett. At its best her style has the stark   penetration  of  Beckett's   work,  al­ though  too often she becomes involved in long   sociological   dissertations,   at   best mildly  interesting,  and   at  worst  boring.
In  spite  of its readability, the  novel is
 less successful than  Pandora. The  brilliant style often  threatens to overwhelm the characters. What  is  lacking   is  the  im­ pression  that  her  work  is as deeply felt as it   is  keenly   perceived.  In   The   Candy Factory   the   novelist   is  too   much  the manipulator of the  action, and  not  suffi­ ciently   the  creator  of  a  convincing fic­ tional  world.
FRANCIS  MANSBRIDGE


THE GREAT BEAR

MARIAN  ENGEL,   Bear.  McClelland  &  Stewart,
$7·95·
As  WE   ALL   KNOW,  the  animal story  has had  an  honourable past  in  Canada, and
-always-an  essential   ambiguity. On one side lay  the  temptation to anthropo­ morphize the  animal in  the  British  man­ ner,  to  make  him  a  human  being  in  fur  or feathers, hero or victim.  On  the oppo­ site  side  (in  the  American manner)  the animal   was  irrevocably the  Other, ema­  nation   of   the  hostile   wilderness   and   at the   same   time   of  the   irrational  forces within   himself   that    nineteenth-century man feared  as much  as he feared  those of the  natural world.  Even   Frye's   garrison image  really placed  the matter on  too sophisticated a  level;  this  was  pre-garri­ son,  man  versus  beast,  and  Cain   versus Abel, the cultivated life in the literal  sense of  tilled  fields  in  opposition  to  the  un­  cultivated life  in  the  sense  of  the  life of the forest and  nomad  pasture.
For   hunters  and   nomad  grazers   did not share  the settled  man's sense of being separate from  the  animal world.  Recog­ nizing  his  physical   dependence  on  wild bear or tamed  bull, preagrarian man killed his  victim  with  ceremony and  reverence
-as  Spaniards still  slay  the  bull-and acknowledged kinship  to him  (which was the origin  of totemism) and  even at  times spiritual dependence on  him,  for animals

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



were  not  in  his view inferior  to man  and might   be  superior. They   were  different in appearance and  habits,  and  yet a com­ mon  life united  them,  symbolized  in such notions   as  the  Coast   Indian  belief  that  salmon    and    other   creatures   normally spent   their   lives,  either   above  or  under  the  sea,  in  bodies like  those  of men,  and only  put  on  like  garments, their  animal attributes when  they  came  to  offer  their flesh for  the survival  of human beings.
Canadian writers  are  turning back,  in theme  and  symbol,  towards the  concept of man  as part  of the  natural world  and not  as that  Other whose separateness animals  intuitively  feel   when   they  flee from  human scent.  In  this  way  they  be­ come    imaginative  spokesmen  for    the whole  ecological   movement,  whose  bur­  den  is the  need  for  man  to  recognize  his place  within   the  natural  world,  his  kin­ ship  with  the  animal  creation. Recogniz­  ing  that   world   and  creating  instead of combating them,  man  recognizes  also the power of his unconscious, which  is animal and  spiritual; Canadian man  as  a  local strain  of  the   species  at   the   same   time gives depth to his history  by-in animal­ oriented  writing-identifying   with    his land's prehistory.
In   recent    novels   like   Margaret   At­ wood's   Surfacing  and   in  much   of   the work  by  younger   poets,  this  awakening to  the  enigmatic links  between  man  and  his  animal  fellows  with   their   delicately balanced world  of  relationships has  been expressed   with   increasing  firmness,   but perhaps the  most  striking example yet is Marian  Engel's   new  and   fabulist   novel Bear.
Bear  is the  tale  of  a  woman   archivist
-whose  emotional life  has  narrowed to a weekly desktop  copulation among the maps  with  the  Director of  her  Institute
-and who  is given  the  opportunity to
catalogue the  contents of  the  house  of a certain Colonel  Cary,  acquaintance of Byron,  who  received  as his grant of land

I06
 in  Upper  Canada  an   island   where   he built  an  octagonal house,  lived  an  alien­ ated  British  life which  he  transmitted to his descendants (the  last of  them  a virile lady   christened   "Colonel"  to  meet   the conditions of the original Cary  will), and made   his  terms  with   the   new  land   by becoming  fascinated  with   bears   to  the extent  of  making  their  lore  the subject  of desultory lifelong  research  and  of acquir­ ing  the  first of a succession  of pet  bears.
The  last of the  pet  bears  is there  when the  archivist  Lou  arrives  and  the  plot  of Bear  is  Lou's   growing   erotic   obsession with this ageing and strong-smelling plantigrade.  She   swims   with   the   bear, eats with him, caresses him, and in one intoxicating moment  witnesses  his  mag­ nificent  erection   but,  on  turning  herself in animal-fashion towards him,  is merely slashed reproachfully across the back with his  needle-sharp claws. It is  Homer, the neighbouring  resort   owner,   who   enters  her  with  his long  and  serviceable prick; it is Bear she loves.
An  absurd  tale,  on  the  face  of  it, but Marian Engel  is too skilful  to allow such immediate judgments to prevail. She has always been good at the kind of credible, Defoesque  prose which  makes everything, as  Margaret  Atwood   curiously   remarks in her blurb, "plausible as kitchens". The descriptive urge  that   ran  wild  in  Mono­ dromos is tamed  into  an obedient servant  of  the  plot.  And   poor   Lou,  used  by  a succession of men,  rises through clouds of pathos   into  the  self-integration of  those who have pushed  themselves  to the mar­ gins  of   human   possibility  and   survived.  At the end:

She   went   up   the   river   slowly.   She   felt tender,  serene. She  remembered  evenings of sitting  by  the  fire  with   the  bear's  head  in her lap. She remembered  the night  the stars fell  on  her  body  and   burned   and   burned. She   remembered   guilt,   and   a  dream   she had  had  where  her  mother  made  her write letters  of apology  to  the  Indians for having to do with a bear, and  she remembered   the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



claw  that   had  healed  guilt.  She  felt  strong and  pure.
But   pure,   one  feels  inclined   to  empha­ size,  because   of  the  rejecting  claw  that maintained  the   proper  distances  in  an ordered ecology. A prosaic person, Marian Engel,  in  the  sense of knowing  just what prose  can   do,  so  that   in  her  books  the earthy and  the fantastic dance  in proper harmony.
There were two bits of writing that compellingly came  to my mind  through­ out  my reading of Bear. One-the more obvious-was  Surfacing. After  all,  it  is also an island in the Cambrian Shield  that Margaret Atwood's narrator has her con­ frontation with  the wilderness; that  island also is divided  between  house and wilder­ ness, and  the  narrator  becomes  aware  of the wildness  within  her  and  is reconciled. But  there,   perhaps, is  the  operative ele­ ment    of   difference. The   wilderness   is within  Atwood's narrator;  it  is a  matter of   coming    to   terms   with   oneself   and hence  with  the  natural  world.  In  Bear it is different-a matter of coming  to terms with   the  natural  world  and   hence  with oneself.   The   difference  is  crucial  and represented formally  in the fact  that  Sur­ facing   is    told   in   the   first   person   and hence  is avowedly  subjective, and  Bear is told  in  the  third  person  and  has  the curi­  ously  transparent  objectivity of  a  fable. But  this does  not  prevent the  two  novels from  complementing each  other  and forming a  composite   paradigm  for  hu­ manity as an endangered species.
The   other   work  that   occurred  to  me was   Earle   Birney's   "The  Bear   on   the Delhi  Road". And  here  I could  not  help sensing   an   advance-by  both   Atwood and  Engel -out of  the  simplism  of  an­ other   generation. For   with   Birney  it  is really a matter of alternatives. Either the bear  is left  in  his own  world,  away  from man  and  his culture, to follow :
the  tranced wish forever  to stay
 only an ambling  bear
four-footed  in berries ...

or  he is subjected to human demands, as his  teachers

. . .  rear  this fellow up
to lurch 	lurch  with  them in the tranced  dancing of men

For  an  Ainu  or  a  Haida there  would be  no  such  division; no  bear   would   be "only  an  ambling bear", and  the alterna­ tive to exploiting him would  not be mere­ ly to ignore  him. To  recognize  kinship  is the essential  thing,  for  Marian Engel  and also-to  take  sides-for  this  reviewer.

ANTHONY APPENZELL


READING FOR THE MOMENT

E.  G.  PERRAULT,  Spoil. Doubleday, $7-95·
E.  G.  PERRAULT's  The Twelfth  Mile (I 972)   was  a  well  told  tale  of  conflict between  Canadians and  Russians   in  the Pacific  waters  off the  west coast  of  Van­ couver  Island. The  principal "characters" were a Canadian tug boat,  a massive off­ shore  oil  rig,  a  Russian   spy  ship,  and  a violent  storm  and   tidal  wave.  Described  as  "a  novel  of  adventure  and  espionage  at sea," it had its moments of fine drama, powerfully  handled.
In  S pail Perrault returns to the  theme of oil exploration but  this time  he centres his  action   in   the  far   north. For  back­ ground   material (and  here  he is close to another  oil-impregnated  novel,  Richard Rohmer's   Ultimatum,   published    some three  years ago)  he does introduce meet­  ings  of  an  American  President's energy commission;  a  debate  in   the   House   of Commons  and  a  broadcast by the  Prime  Minister;  gatherings of  the  management committees of rival oil companies; and protest   gatherings  by  an   anti-pollution


107

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



group known  as RAPE (the  Resistance Association  for  the  Protection of the En­ vironment).  But    these    are   somewhat stilted   incidental  sections   and   are   used principally  to   indicate  the   tensions­ national and   international-contained within the   unceasing  struggle  for   the development   of  the   earth's  hidden  re­ serves  of  energy.  The major portions  of the  novel all focus on  the site, B16 of the High   Arctic   Enterprise's mighty   oil  rig on   Friday    Island,  five   hundred  miles from   the   Pole,   twenty-seven  hundred miles north of Calgary, and  not  far  from Ellesmere Island, where  Panarctic has actually been successful in finding great reserves of natural gas.
For the most part  the action  takes place in  the  darkness  of  the  twenty-four hour
night   that   shrouds  the  bleak  landscape, with   the  temperature  at  50°  F.  below. The  drill   is  at   the  nine   thousand  foot level  and   all  indications  are   that   High Arctic  is on the verge of a rich  discovery. But tragic confusion comes  (and  it's the climax   of   the   story)    when   a   blowout occurs; the rig is destroyed and  the rich mixture of gas and  oil breaks  into flames. Death comes to some  of the  crew; bodily damage to  others,  and   traumatic  effects are   felt   by  all  survivors.  But   with   the passage of days emergency equipment is rushed  to the site by massive cargo  planes, and  the  spill  is contained. A major  eco­ logical  disaster  has been  averted.
Most of the characters are superficially sketched  -parka-clothed men  moving in darkness,   or  slick   business   men   in   the offices, on  the  streets,  and  in  the  bars  of the  great   oil  town,  Calgary. Only   three characters are  portrayed in  any  depth­ Ian    Danelock,   a    geological    engineer around  whom   the   action   revolves;   Jo­  anne,  a poor,  ill-educated, but  a sensitive and   beautiful  woman  who  brings  some consolation  to   the   confused   Danelock; and  Matthew Utak,  an  uneducated and aging   Eskimo   who  works   as  a  kitchen

108
 hand  and  a garbage disposal  man  at  the site  of  the  rig.  But  Perrault writes  with considerable   knowledge   and    authority about  his subject  and  he is seriously inter­ ested  in  the  impact of oil exploration on the   environment  and   on   people.   As  a result  of his long  periods of  absence  and  ever-increasing pressures, Danelock's fam­ ily life disintegrates and he himself comes close  to   mental   and   physical   collapse; and  the  pathetic Utak, caught up  in  the breakdown  of  his   own   way  of  life,   is driven  to  multiple  murder and  eventual death on  the  arctic  ice as he  tries  to flee from   the   pursuit   of   white   man's   law. Though  he  moves  on  the  edges  of  the main   theme   (the  well's  blowout), Utak  is a  genuinely  tragic  figure,  perhaps the only  truly  memorable figure  in  the  book.
By and  large  the  work  is solidly  writ­ ten,  with  the  pages  devoted  to the blow­ out   and   the  subsequent  disasters  being especially   convincing.  But   by  the   very nature of  its being,  the  book  as a whole is almost  certainly doomed  to a short  life expectancy. The  problems   it  probes  are contemporary   and   they  will  either   dis­ appear or  will  soon  be  accepted as com­ monplace;  readers   will  then   turn   else­ where   for  something  new  in  the  ever­ shifting  aspects  of our  uncertain  civiliza­ tion.
Yet,   for   the   moment,  Spoil  is  good
reading.
S.E.READ


ALIEN WORLD

DARYL  HINE, Resident  Alien. Atheneum, $6.gs.

Resident   Alien,  Daryl   Hine's sixth  and most  important  volume  of  poems,  is  at once   fascinating  and   disturbing.  As  in his previous  collections,  Hine's extraordi­ nary  verbal  energy  and  technical virtu­ osity   are   again   evident   everywhere  in these  twenty-five  poems  that  vary  aston-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ishingly in genesis, subject matter, tone, metrical pattern, and  strophic form. One cannot help  but  be  aware  of  Hine  as a superb  poetic  craftsman and  of his poems as brilliant epideictic displays of linguistic and  intellectual wit.  Hine  is, to  be sure, a "geographer of the  word"; his world  is a world of words. It is not, however, a "rhetorical" world; for  many,  if  not  all, of Hine's  poems  appear to be-at  least, on first glance-masturbatory literary performances with  the poet himself as the principal   audience.  For    Hine,    poetry would  seem  to be a self-indulging, elitist art,  and  the poem  less a referential verbal structure  than   a   mere   verbal   artifact. This self-insulating quality and  the promi­ nent   sense  of  artifice   in   Hine's   poems point  to what  I  believe  is  an  underlying anxiety   in  his  work,  a  tension  which  is difficult  to define  but  which  is neverthe­ less discernible.
Reading  successively   through  Hine's
five  previous   volumes,  one  can  perceive a   movement  away   from   the   explicitly mythopoeic and  the  self-consciously  for­ mal,  away  from  the  deliberate  obscurity and  anonymity of the  voice in  the earlier  poems,  and  away  from  a  subtle  or  am­ biguous   syntax   towards   a   more   open poetic  mode,  a  more  personal  and  collo­ quial  speaking  voice,  and  a more  "facile  and    articulate"    syntactical   structure. There  is  plenty  of  evidence   in  Minutes, Hine's last  volume  of  poems,  of a desire to speak  plainly  and  of a sense of  relaxa­ tion  of  form.  There  is  also  more  of  a sense of a personality and more of a feel­ ing  of  particular  place  in  Minutes than in  the  earlier   volumes,  and   Hine's ten­ dency   to  adopt  pure  fictional   personae (usually    from    classical    mythology   or literature),  which in  his work  suggests a desire   for   anonymity,  has   waned    con­ siderably. In such poems as "A Visit" and "A  Nap", for instance, the speaking voice is  more  assured,   more   convincing  as  a human voice -an individual man speak-
 ing -and  more  immediate  than   in  the earlier poems. Yet, despite the personal, meditative qualities of such poems, Hine insistently  controls  the utterance by the austere  and  ordering effects of technique
-rhyme,  metre,  strophes, and  decorum of  diction. One,  in  short,  is  overwhelm­ ingly  aware  of  these  poems  as  poems­ more as artistic  artifacts and less as mime­  tic human utterances.
This  movement towards a more  medi­ tative  and  open  mode  continues  in  Resi­ dent  Alien,  but  any sense of  security  that  may  have  been  present   in  Minutes has disappeared to be replaced  by an  anxiety  that    is   reflected    in   the   metaphorical dimensions of  the  title  of  the  book.  We are   all  resident   aliens   in   this  world­ and   therefore our  condition is  perpetu­ ally  uneasy  and  unnatural-but Hine's stylistic   predicament   in   the   world    of poetry   is   also  one   of  being   a  resident  alien.  Such  poems  as  "Commonplaces", "A.  B.  C.  Diary", "Second Thoughts", "Linear A", "Letter to Shadow", and  the powerful  "Vowel   Movements" all  mani­ fest a tense concern about  the disintegra­ tion  and   decorum  of  language and   the erosion  of literature, and  they  reveal  the implicit  fear  involved  in  moving  towards  an   open   poetic   form,  a  direction  that  represents for  Hine  a movement towards  the chaos  of  life. Hine  is forever  pausing

For  breath on the  very  brink  of the absurd, The  future of the line  and  of the word Threatened by fundamental incoherence.

He must fall back on to traditional poetic conventions-metre,   rhyme,   stanzas­ and  erudite language because they are his only   weapons   against    time,  fragmenta­ tion,  and  the  essentially  vulnerable posi­ tion  of the self. His  need  to distance life through his art-the self-insulating qua­ lity of so many of Hine's poems-is even more   urgent    here   than    in   the   earlier poems. And  he  will  not  allow  his poems to go beyond  themselves  because  they are

109

BOOKS IN REVIEW



his fundamental defense  against  the basic absurdity of  life  with  its  disorder, moral vagaries,  vulgarity -

... only the most recherche style, the most affected
Can sustain  the weight of time and  tears and  truth-

and  ever-present possibility  of  death: "Every breathless sentence says not yet to death."
This   constant  tension   between   closed
and  open  poetic  modes,  utterance and artifact, anonymity and  personality, tradi­ tion   and   contemporaneousness,  and   art  and  life energizes  all of Hine's poems and  makes   Resident   Alien,  paradoxically, a profound expression  of  the  life that  Hine  seems to want  so anxiously to control.

BARRY  CAMERON



COHEN AND HIS CRITICS

Leonard   Cohen: The  Artist   and  his  Critics, edited   by  Michael   Gnarowski,  is  the   latest volume   in   the   Critical  Views   on   Canadian Writers   series   of  reprinted  articles.   It is  a very    balanced     collection,     presenting    ade­ quately  all  the  facets  of Cohen's art  and  most of the shades  of opinion  regarding his achieve­  ment.   The   first  section   consists   of   the   best reviews of each  of his books. The second  con­ sists  of  five  studies   of  Cohen  as  Pop  Artist. The     third     discusses    "Cohen    as    Literary Phenomenon", and   this  group  of   more  sub-














110
 stantial    studies   contains   pieces   by   Stephen Scobie, Frank  Davey, Patricia Morley, Douglas Barbour,   and   Sandra  Djwa,   and   ranges   in tone  from  the  soft-edged   enthusiasm  of  Des­ mond  Pacey's  "The  Phenomenon of  Leonard  Cohen" to George  Woodcock's  rigorously  ana­  lytical   judgment,   "The  Song  of  the  Sirens: Reflections  on  Leonard  Cohen."  All of major  significance  that  has  been written  on Cohen  is here, and  also some items without  much lasting meaning.  For  "the  verdict   of  print-as  one critic   in  this  volume  remarks-judges more harshly  than  the  juvenile  ear."
A.A.


FROM THE BULGARIAN

EvEN IF  THEY TAKE one  into   areas   outside the  obvious  concerns  of  Canadian Literature, competent  translations from  the   more  exotic literary    traditions  are   rare   enough    in   our country   to  make  them  worthy  of  notice.  The Balkan Range  (Hounslow Press, $g.gs) is des­ cribed   as  a  Bulgarian   Reader;  it   has   been compiled  and  its contents  translated by  Nikola Rousanoff,  who does not  write  English  poetry,  and John  Robert  Colombo,  who does not speak Bulgarian   but  has  refused   to  be  deterred  by such a small  consideration. (After  all, Pound's  Chinese  was  notoriously  meagre!)  The  whole range   of  Bulgarian   literature  is   represented, starting  with  Orpheus,  daringly   claimed   be­ cause of his Thracian  wanderings, and  ending  with   writers   active   in   contemporary  Com­ munist  Bulgaria.  To discuss The  Balkan Range adequately   would  demand  an   essay  on  Bul­ garian  writing  of  a  length  hardly  appropriate to this  journal, but  the  book can  and  must  be recommended  as  a sensitively  Englished  intro­  duction   to  a  literature with  which  few Cana­ dians  are  likely  to  be even  remotely  familiar.
o.w.





ANOTHER VIEW OF THE HUNTERS TWAIN

IN THE WINTER, 1973, issue of Canadian Literature, No. 55,  Dr.  Dorothy  Livesay brought to light  a long,  incomplete  nar­ rative   poem  by  Isabella Valancy  Craw­  ford,    which    she   titled    The   Hunters Twain. The   poem,  in  MS  on  foolscap paper,  written   on  both  sides,  is  in  the Lorne Pierce  Collection  in  the  Douglas  Library of Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario.  When,   some  years  ago,  I ob­ tained  a photostatic copy of  it, Mr.  E. C. Beer,  then   Assistant  Archivist,  had   at­  tached to  two  pages  a  note  which  reads as  follows:  "N.B.  These   two  pages,  (on one  leaf)   were  found  with  'She  had  the full, fell frankness' but  do they  belong  to that  poem?  It is a loose leaf, whereas the other  leaves of the  poem  are  stitched  to­ gether. E.C.B." When   Dr.  Livesay  saw them,  however,  the sheets were  no longer stitched  together, so  that   there  was  no indication  of  where   the   poem   was  in­ tended   to begin.  There  were  twenty-five pages  in  the  bound  set, of  which   12, rg,
20, 22, 24, 26, and  27 (the  last)  are numbered; the  loose leaf  bears  no  num­ ber  that  I  can  see in  my  photostats, but if it  is inserted   after   the  fourth page  of the   original  order,   it   becomes   evident  that   the   leaf   was   accidentally  omitted from  the  stitching.
I am concerned here with briefly setting out  a reading of the  poem  as it appeared in the bound  pages of the MS, with  a few comments on  assignment of speeches.
The first  line  in  the   bound   pages  is
"She   had  the  full,  fell  frankness of  her kind"; in  her  customary manner, Craw-
 
ford  begins  a  tale  with   a  dialogue, this time   between   a   young   woman    and   a suitor  whom she is dismissing  is favour  of a wealthy  businessman. After  telling  him a fable  of a man  bound   to an  imaginary cross, she contemptuously bids him:

"Leap  from  thy phantom little  cross of love.

Love is the deep  dense darkness  of the Soul.
. . . Away with love, away!"
"And  give  us up  Barabbas," said  the  man.

The  dialogue  continues, the young  wo- man  declaring that  she is blind  to Love, who invariably turns   to Hate. The  man, later named Ion, likens her to a falcon, deliberately hooding herself  and  crying "Blame not  the  blind." He  leaves  her.
Then follow the description of the sun­ set which  Dr. Livesay  takes  as the  begin­ ning of the work, and  another of  the cold, desolate  city  by the  lake,  where  despair  is  a  natural growth. On  the  next   page come  the  lines quoted  by  Dr.  Livesay  on page 78 as "another  poem, ... concerned with  the loss of  love." She  finds  this part  of the poem obscure  and  erratic, chaotic, "as if  written by someone  in a disoriented state,  ..." but  if  the  pages  are  read  in their  original  order   it  becomes  an  inte­  gral  part   of  the  narrative,  representing the  sorrow  felt  by  Ion. As  he  meditates on  his despair,  a  prostitute accosts  him, but he ignores her and she passes on: "The sharp   dust  caught  and   veiled   her,  and she  passed."   It   seems   to  Ion   that   the sounds of the city reiterate the cry, "Loose us Barabbas!"
In  the next section  there  is a change in tone   from   the   self-pity   of   Ion   to   the "fierce,   tender   wonder" of  Hugh,  who pities Man. He  longs  to rescue  the starv­ ing  slum-dwellers, and  take  them  to  the fresh  and  teeming  world  outside  the city. Hugh,  as   Dr.   Livesay   puts   it,   "goes through  a  traumatic  struggle   with   his soul"; the strong  soul, at  first contemptu­ ous of the despairing body, and  trying  to break  free of it, finally  realizes  that  body

III

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



and  soul  must  work  together, and  Hugh leaves  the  town  for  the  forest,  where  he camps   with   Ion. When   spring   returns, Hugh   is  refreshed,  body  and   soul,  and determines to return to the city, where  he will "shout such  gospel of the  woods and plains" as  will  draw   the   slum-dwellers out   and   away   to  the  country; "Yes - even  while  they  howl  about the  streets/
'Loose   us  Barabbas .. .' I'll   have   them out!"
It may  be objected that   the  reference
to  Barabbas indicates that   the  unhappy lover is Hugh, but  later  lines echoing the "falcon" image   suggest   that   he  is  Ion. The passage  may  have  been  designed  as a link  between  Ion,  cast  off in  favour  of a wealthy  man,  and  Hugh, determined to rescue the oppressed from the wealthy. Nowhere    is  there    any   suggestion   that Hugh has been disappointed in love. The songs that  Ion  sings are  in sharp contrast with  Hugh's about  the  tent-almost  a gay  burlesque of  "The Lily  Bed"  in  its praise  of such  things  as stains  in the  tent wall. Ion  is, temporarily, it is suggested,  a soured   romantic, cynical   in  his  outlook on the world; Hugh is a practical idealist, conquering his own  fears  in  preparation for  his work for  mankind.
Near   the  end   of  the   poem,   the   two young  men  renew  their   previous   debate about Hope  and  Despair that   Dr. Live­ say discusses. Hugh voices his  belief  that  the  earth is, "God's moulding  place,  ... full of riot, roar of furnaces / Smoke, vio­ lence  and  strife -but  ever  tends  / The storm  to  music,  and  the strife to peace.'' Again  I  must  disagree  with  Dr.  Live­ say,  this  time  over  the  assigning of  the speeches   on   MS   page   24,   (quoted  in Canadian  Literature  55, p. 93) . Her  ver­ sion,  set  out  in  dramatic form,   runs  as
follows:

I on: 	Hope  is your  treed! . . . You cling
To rainbows,  like the elves in picture
books!

112
 You ride  the  moth,  and  clasp  the trembling  reed !
Ion  I worship -sets  my  soul  that way.
And  Hope   is  Pythia   to  the  God  I
know,
Utters  His  will;  and  looks along  His
Hand
Stretched   through the  Coming  Ages
shaping  them.
Hugh:  Shall  I pass  sentence   and  condemn
myself
To   present   Hell,   and   consort   with damned  souls ?
... God is God,  and  Hope
His chiefest  prophet!
Ion: 	Prove that! I'll  be your  pupil  then.

Where   I  differ  is  in  the  first  speech, which I divide as follows, copying the narrative, not  dramatizing it:

"Hope  is  your  creed!" said  Ion,  "and   you cling
"To   rainbows,  like  the  elves  in  picture books!"
"You ride the moth, and  clasp the trembling reed!"
It  is important to note  that  in the  MS the   third   line  is  preceded  by  a  X;  I assume  that  Crawford intended to drop it, and continue with  Hugh's reply, which originally  began  with  the  words,  "Well, I  must," but  these  are  crossed  out  and "Ion I" inserted  above.  The insertion  of a comma  after "Ion" turns  it into avoca­ tive -"Ion,   I   worship -sets   my  soul that  way...." Later in  the speech  Ion  is again   addressed,  though   the   name   is crossed out  to regulate the scansion.  The  rest of the speech is completely in keeping with   Hugh's   philosophy  of  Hope,   and contrary to Ion's  cynicism, so that  I must believe  that  Hugh utters  the  whole  pas­ sage  to  "God  is God. . . . prophet." The punctuation throughout  this  dialogue  in the  MS is uncertain and  misleading.
One  further note:  "The  Dark   Stag" was sung  by Ion,  who says at  the  end  of his speech on page  16 of the MS, "Mean­ while, I'll sing the dawn I love," and  pro­ ceeds to do so.
MARY  F. MARTIN
