$7 -50 per copy



CANADIAN
l]TERATURE N°·97
POETIC FORM

Articles

BY RALPH GUSTAFSON, G. V. DOWNES, GEORGE J OHNSTON, CATHERI NE MC KI NNON PFAFF, STEPHEN  SCOBIE
Poems

BY  HENRY BEISSEL, PATRICK LANE, M IK E DOYLE, RALPH GUSTAFSON,
R. A. D. FORD, ERIC  TRETHEWEY, PAT  J ASPER, ERNEST HEKKANEN, FRED COGSWELL, ERIN MOURE, FLORENCE MCNEIL, GEORGE MCWHIRTER, CRAIG POWELL, R. G. EVERSON, DOUGLAS BARBOUR
Reviews
BY  DAVID WATMOUGH, E. D. BLODGETT, PATRICIA MORLEY, M. BE NSON, TERRY GOLDIE, MURRAY J. EVANS, ANTHONY APPENZELL, DARYL H INE,
DIAN A BRYDON, BARBARA PELL,  HA NS R. RUNTE, L. R. RICOU, DONALD R . BARTLETT, IAN SOWTON, ALEXANDRE L. AMPRIMOZ, KATHY MEZEI,
EVA-MARIE  KR OLLER, P. COLLET, DAVID O'ROURK E,  PATRICIA KEENEY
SMITH, DOUGLAS DAYMO ND, PETER MITCHAM,  PEGGY NIGHTINGALE, J. A. WAINWRIGHT, TARA  CULLIS, IAN  ROSS, DAVID F. ROGERS, GEORGE WOODCOCK, GARY  BOIRE, LOLA  LEMIR E -TOSTEVIN, FRAN<;OISE MACCABEE IQBAL
Opinions and Notes

BY  LIONEL KEARNS, S. R.  MACGILLIVRAY &  J.D. RABB, DENISE DASTOUS
& EMILE DASTOUS, ALEXANDER GLOBE

A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW







RE:FORMING GIANTS







TE PHRASE "IMPOSING  SHAPE" invites   ue  to  think   of giants,  whether statuesque or  incredibly hulking,   whether comic  or  latent with terrible  power.  One  of Brian  Fawcett's stories  opens  with  a  child's  view  of such size:  "I was troubled by the  giants," his narrator writes,  "and I spent  a  lot  of time worrying about  them." The  giants  he animates are  not very nice, and  in any event  by his definition  "don't speak quite  the same language you do"; in  despera­ stitution he seeks elves as allies, and  comes to learn  the chain  of enmities that  con­ stitutes  life. Fortunately these  elves have  power,  too,  and  can  vanquish  rats,  at least while the child grows.
But  I want  to  think  of "imposing shape" as an  active   process  rather than   a passive description: to  think  of it  not  as the  image   we  receive  so  much   as  the thing  we do -which in turn  reveals  the  image  that   we  create as much   as  any we discover.  Margaret Atwood's lines often  tell of  the  vanity  of such  effort:

Things
refused to name themselves; refused to let him name them.
But P. K.  Page's  "Cook's Mountains" tells of results: By naming them he made them.
They were there
before he came
but they were not the same.
It was his gaze
that glazed each one....

We saw them as we drove­ sudden, surrealist, conical they rose....
The driver said
"Those are the Glass House Mountains up ahead."

2

EDITORIAL


And instantly they altered to become the sum of shape and name.

The  terrible  tensions  between  mind  and  matter  take  some  to  discovery  and renewal  and  others  to the  "progressive  insanities" of  the  pioneer. But  common to them both are the forms of sound, space, and saying we must always interpret
-forms  we find and  forms we make, that  animate  art  and  language  alike.
The  "art  and discovery maps of Canada" that Joe W. Armstrong  has collected in his magnificent  From Sea Unto  Sea  (Fleet/Lester & Orpen  Dennys)  offer us one glimpse of people's  efforts to grasp the  unknown  and  wrestle it  decorously into form. "In  all seasons," the editor  writes, "there  are  those who  traverse  the land  and  sea  and  then  later,  with  lines and  symbols,  transfer  the  image  of geography to paper." The earliest document in this collection-a Gastaldi  wood­ cut map  from I 556, showing "La  Nuova  Francia" and  its ultramontane  neigh­ bour  "Parte Incognita" -is  alive with  both  people  and  monsters:   the  people wandering  through  park-like trees that  dot the land,  the toothy monsters emerg­ ing from  the waves offshore. Those  unknown  territories gather  names  over sub­ sequent  years-Septentrio, Anian,  Califormia  Regia -as  Mercator,  Ortelius,  and  Champlain start  to claim  territory  by both  outline  and  word.  Champlain names  the  beasts and  flowers, and  gradually  more ships  than  monsters  fill the seas; the comers of maps later acquire  the cherubs of European  fashion, and  the maps themselves show the measured order of sextant and geometric plane. By the end of the eighteenth  century,  we have records of  people's  imposing  themselves on  the  land -plans  of  the  fortress  of   Louisbourg,  and   diagrams   of  urban  dwellings. In  I 776  there  is a last  imposition  of imagination-Antonio Zatta's  map  of  "Fou   Sang"   (now  called   British  Columbia)    and   the  rest  of  North America's  West  Coast,  with  an  elephant  and  dodo  decorating   it  ("there is a certain similarity,"  the editor writes, "between  the outline  of the  elephant  in the cartouche  . . . and  the  ...  contour  of America,  as a  giant,  profiled  elephant's head with a trunk-like California"). The cartographers from the  q8o's onwards  (Cook, Vancouver, Mackenzie, Rapkin) brought science to bear instead.  Niagara replaces the monstrous beasts, county boundaries define Canada West, and  social order  as well as science establishes the new forms reality takes in the new world. But the giants remain.

* 	* 	*
Maybe it was the extraordinary size and  pressure of the new land  that  partly
drew the idioms of Newfoundland  into existence. Many  local words derived from British dialects, of course, and  the massive, instructive, monumentally  entertain­ ing Dictionary  of Newfoundland English  (University  of Toronto  Press),  which
G. M.  Story, W.  J. Kirwin,  and  J. D. A. Widdowson  have  patiently  compiled,
repeatedly   reminds  us  of  that.  But  other  people's  dialects  are  never  entirely


3

EDITORIAL

adequate for our own realities; and if rerooting the language in our own home therefore takes a certain creative flair, that  is something  which  Newfoundlanders have  abundantly shown  they  possess. Newfoundland   vocabulary,  alive  with metaphor,  domesticates by sound-it takes the potentially  barren  and  alienating spaces of land and sea, the pressures of person and dimensions of difficulty, and by reducing them all to human size gives the people accordingly a measure of power over them.  Consider  the batch  of words that  follows:

bangbelly:  pudding
bay noddy: outport dweller ( derog.)
bubbly  squall:  jellyfish
clumpet: ice pan
duckedy-mud: indeterminately brown
dwall: half asleep
gatch: pompous swaggerer
garnipper: large mosquito
gommel: fool
livyer:  coast dweller (as opp. to a migratory fisherman)
mauzy: misty and close nuddick: bare round hill nunnybag: knapsack ownshook: female fool scrod:  small
slinge : avoid work
tuckamore: scrub vegetation
yaffle: armful
They name certain  difficulties, as often as not, but they declare something  else :  a laconic  capacity  for  play-for  dealing  with  life on  familiar  terms,  with  more wit than  worry, refusing to surrender  to discomfort.  "'Twas hardwood  matches at that  time,' " says the authority  quoted  in  the  Dictionary  as the source of one usage;  "'we used  to  call 'em  hardwood  wait-a-minutes, 'cause  you'd  have  to scrape 'em on an ass o' your pants, an'  he fizz, and  fizz, an'  by and  'by  he burn up that  brimstone he come to a flame.' "

* 	* 	*
To find the words to name reality and shape  experience: this has always been
one of poetry's impulses. As Northrop  Frye observes about  the  poems of Giorgio Bassani  (Rolls  Royce  and  Other  Poems;  Aya  Press):  "the  few  moments  that break through  to the centre of experience are as real now as they ever were, and a  touch  of  their  reality  can  still  make  our  prisons  of  solitude  and  prejudice crumble  into illusion." Time  matters  to Frye,  and  his concern  for  the  existence of centres over  time  describes a  pattern  all  its own.  The  poems  (translated  by Irving  Layton,  Greg Gatenby,  and  others)   reveal different  senses of the  shapes of perception; and  the very fact of translation  describes one of them. The  Italian

4

EDITORIAL


texts are-visually-ornate symmetrical designs, signs  perhaps of the  historical order  on which  the  poet  calls even while  he despairs  of memory,  weeps  for  loss, and  fears  for  the  future; the  English  texts,  by contrast, while  appearing to flow with a contemporary idiom,  adhere to a single pattern: they  are  governed  by the uniformity of the  left-hand margin, as though  continuously redefining  order  by a single border, a solitary  edge.
Of  two  other  recent  books  of poetry-by  Ondaatje and  Webb,  from  Island
Press, both  of them  handsome examples  of the  printer's art  and  the  poet's  cast of mind-Michael Ondaatje's Tin Roof is riddled  with  borders  both  concrete  and imagined ("There are  those  who are in  j and  there  are  those who look in"). All are apprehended as the separate poems recount  the poet's  experience living on the rims of the Pacific.  But order  is an elusive quality  if the  borders  are  not to enclose, if order  is to  be found  at  all in flexible  forms;  and  perhaps that  is one  sense of estrangement that  has led so many  recent  writers on a quest  for freedom  through traditional patterns rather than  by rejection  of them.  From  John Thompson, for example, stems  much   of  the  recent  renewal  of  interest   in  the  old  Persian  love lyric, the ghazal. Ondaatje admires  ghazals; Patrick  Lane  has written  them.  And Phyllis   Webb's  Sunday   Water, the   other   Island   Press   release,   dedicated  to Ondaatje, is subtitled "Thirteen Anti  Ghazals" -not,  Webb  adds,  because  her poems  oppose  the  form,  but  because  they  adapt it  to  her  own  purposes.  In  a preface  she explains the  difference  between  history  and  practice: "The couplets (usually  a minimum of five)  were totally  unlike the conventional English  couplet and  were composed  with  an  ear and an eye to music and  song"; but  if the  poems took  as their  traditional subject   a love for  "an  idealized   and   universal  image," "Mine tend  toward the  particular, the  local,  the  dialectical and  private. There are even a few little  jokes. Hence  'anti  Ghazals.' " And  her couplets-unrhymed, asymmetrical, crafted  for  the  pauses  of silence  and   intake   as  much   as  for  the rhythms of utterance-follow:

Ten white blooms on the sundeck.
The  bees have almost all left. It's September.

The women writers, their heads bent under the light, work late at their kitchen tables.

Winter  breathes in the wings of the last hummingbird. I have lost my passion. I am Ms. Prufrock.

So. So. So. Ah -to have a name like Wah
When the deep purple falls.

And you have sent me a card
With a white peacock spreading its tail.

This  is song  waiting for  an  understanding listener.


5

EDITORIAL

"The  form  of a  poem,"  Charles Brasch once  wrote,  "is its principle  of  indi­ viduality."  Well  enough  said-but  the  principles  of  form  say  things  about critical attitude  as well as about  poetic aspirations.  "[C]ontent does not  make  a poem," says Ralph  Gustafson; "Words do." And that,  too, is well said, for  poetic accomplishment  cannot  be equated  with aspiration  alone, nor explained  by  mea­ surements of inspiration. In the appositely-titled The  Insecurity of Art  (Vehicule), we find an anthology  of 25 essays on modern  poetics, edited  by Ken  Norris and Peter  Van  Toorn,  which  addresses some of these  issues. Among  other things  a reminder  of  how  much  poetic  theory  in  Canada  has  stemmed  from  English Quebec  (from  Cohen, Dudek, Glasco, Gustafson, Jones, Konyves,  Layton,  Mor­ rissey, and  more), the book collects a contradiction of views. There  are  celebra­ tions of visual placement, attacks on emotional  performance, enquiries into trans­ lation  and  concrete  and  open  field and  "post-feminism,"  dismissals of what  is deemed the illiteracy of oral culture, and assertions of the  primacy of the intellect in appreciating  the word. These are political  perspectives as well as formal  doc­ trines, open to argument. They  tell us something  about  how some poems work, but seldom why. They  persuade by rhetoric and  chart  by example.  And they are personal  testaments,  too, as when  D. G. Jones  adopts  a  temporal  view  of the progress of dream:

As long as this dream of earth and this hunger for the naked encounter with it remains inarticulate, unconscious or underground, it will remain sinister, perverse, a crazy distorting force in our lives.... It seems to me it becomes more and more articulate in the course of the years, the gradual filling up of the pages, poem upon poem, in this green inventory. It invades the city; it invades the mind, the alphabet, and the alphabet ... begins to become flowers ... sensations, the touched earth.

The desire here is not to impose an order on the world. It is to encounter the orders of the world, in the world. It implies a wholly different set of values and  aspira­ tions.... If it could become articulate in the city ... it would transform the map of our lives.

This is both  a dream  of speech, of contact,  and  a  narrative of political  desire, aspiring to language  in place and  lodged in language  in time.
In  another  context  (Canadian  Fiction Magazine, no.  42), Martin  Vaughn­ James takes up the artistic implications of narrative;  for  Vaughn-James the nar­ rative draughtsman, as words become images, to be seen more than  heard,  they begin to happen  in a different way. "Visual  images seem to have an  immediacy which automatically situates them in the  present,"  he writes;  they are  fixed on the page. But the reader is animate, active, turns  the page, allows the next image to replace the previous one until there is "an  accumulation of replacements  that have nothing  to do with chronology as the entire  process seems to translate  into a series of arrested  movements not so much  through  time as through  space."

6

EDITORIAL

Space,  sound, movement: a  map  of translation:  these  are  the  metaphors of our  understanding.




Metaphor.
 * 	* 	*

In the images  of sound  is language transformed. We  can  manipulate the  forms it takes and  so reshape the  ways we see. Seeing  by saying,  at  one  level we say by seeing too. All we have to do is abandon that  donkey  formula, lift the spirits  with a dash  of formaldejekyll, and  recognize  the  lore of the  letters  we live by. For  by us, they occupy  space,  make  maps,  draw  their  own  conclusions:




a	b
,c"	r	r
FRM	0
\vJ 	f
c
0
I	r
m















They  pun  visually as well as aurally, either  in straightforward fashion-


mat	mat mat	mat



-or with  an extra  twist, asking  readers  to play games  with  the  words  they  know and  at the same  time  to be literal-minded with  the  words  they  see:





7

EDITORIAL





FORUNMED
 
UNIFORM UNIFORM UNIFORM
PARADE



Letters  have  designs,  and  picture  truths. They   join in  "magic squares" and  can be caught  in the act of dissolving:


F
0
R
M
0
G
E
E
R
E
E
L
M
E
L
T

Always on the edge of their  next  possibility, they  invite  the  reader to take  charge of reforming them,  whatever  challenge  that  might  be, and  cast  their  own  spells.

Do such games with words remove us from  reality?  Not at all. Words  are simply some  of  the  elves we  keep on  hand  to  help  us,  while  we  grow,  to  continue to combat the giants  and  quell  the rats.
W.N.

















8

WHITE SPRUCE

Henry Beissel


w ind fingering
my green sharp combing  the early mist the sun brushing  my
cones sliding through my tousled fir into dark stillness
only the green wind sighs
in my arms outstretched the morning branches  the air to weave
dark  brown inner space nest in
spiked green  the pith the spine green spiked hard at the centre  my body grows
[in rings in bark sheath  rising slow]
heavy  through phloem  spring capillary sucking  sweet blood rising up sap my stem my sap up rising
from  dark  earth  wells my roots fetch  salt
water  sickering  from cell to cell branching into green  fingers pointing at reaching  for pulling  the light
down  into dark  chambers melting  the light into green into  cones quivering with  resin drops of light filtering down  xylem canals down
bark
deep root deep dark earth














9

from CHRONICLES
 


Patrick Lane


We remember minutely and precisely
all those things that did not happen to us.

ERIC  HOFFER


I'm  just picking scabs out of my mouth.

JOHN  NEWLOVE



I •

Remember the heart. Fog on the still river. First frost. Passion. Flowers. The  love of windows  in old cities.

The painting is a dead eye. A window  going  nowhere. This one is alive. This  one has a chance to live. This one.

Look in or out. Beauty is starved and  love is afraid.
Dead  children. The  night  in mothers. Remembered delight.

The heart  is an argument with  darkness. Moon  silver. Dead  eye. The room rings. I do not answer  it again.


3·

Magpie, magpie, do not take a lower branch than  this. Last home I dreamed I was night.  Poverty  and song.

Autumn. The  crabapple grows its small and  bitter fruit. The old attend  to their gardens. Under the earth. Love.

The ones who are lost sing longer  than  the ones who are alone. Blind at birth, I want you back. Chrysanthemums in frost.

Return to the garden what  you left when  you left behind. I was thinking  of last leaves. The beauty of beginning.


4·

The noun also moves, incomparable, describing peace. The young man is elegant. He knows the polite  arts.

10

POEM

Even  the highest  bird must descend for the body's sake. No one goes. The  cultural event is no part  of praise.

Shoot  an arrow. Write  well. The  etiquette of the chariot. Improvisational music. Notes from a tired  verb. Reside.

The  correct glass has nothing to do with  wine. Imitations. We have forgotten how to be strangers.


5·
The line is doubtful. The  meaning is clear.  Endure. We remember a boy in wind, a bell in the open field.

Full moon,  I love you, your falling and  your rising. The  cedar waxwings are drunk. Frost on the berries.

Rhythm. Give of your grace. The sun forgives.
I am afraid of nothing. Blow wind. The  bell is lonely.

The new world. The  anvil. The  water  in deep  well. Between  your hips the only parasite is me.

6.

I tried  hard  to imagine  a linen crow, a caftan magpie. I believe I believe. I am the problem  to the solution.

The  rhythms of pride are false impressions.
Troubles in my mind. The  search for complaint, complaining.

She holds the needle but sews no stitch  in time. Holes in my socks. Fallen  apples.  Variance. Systems.

The  love of the naive. The  tender  integrity.
Born in woman  I hide my words in caves. Water-cress.


7·
I crave  the honey yet complain of life. Be vivid. Be. Exclude me. I am not fit to govern. Dictator. Maggot.

Parallel lines are relentless. The death of understanding. Quiet men. I make no sense of this.

And the world is not this, is this and  not that. Forty-three years and still I refuse.


II

POEM

A knife in the life is the official heart.
Give me nothing. A caftan crow, a linen  magpie.


I 2.

Piano  exercises. The  citied islands.
To  make of winds a hand, the sea a birth.

Metonymy. Creating nothing. The  mind. The implacable. Creating something out of nothing. Metaphor. Dancing.

First daughters walking  the waters.
0 foamy dance.

The old man  muttering. Pliny.
Mangroves. He wandered the world.  The trees, the trees.


16.

A bad line, breaking wrong, hurts the eye.
The  road going nowhere  is going nowhere anyway.

A mouth  in a tree cries forgive, forgive.
Like a body fallen  on a bed. A white  bed. A body.

Forgive  me in my sleeping. I did  not know your name.

The eyes that  name  you have no tongues. Old  roads. The  arrival in time. Witnesses.




The child slides from  the bone cage.
Only  the rare eagle, the coyote, the enemy called  man.

The  answer to the answer. The wind  knows where. Eat  the soft shell of the womb. Stormy  waters.

The eye turns  to horizons. Interface. The between.
It is this moment she remembers. Relief.  Recognition.

A wet sack on the snow. Soft pain.
She sings her seed to stand. Binding. The spare  grasses.

12

POEM

IB.

Who  will explain the bones?
The porcupine challenges  my passing. Step  aside.

West of the west is the last thing  you want. Meet  me again  when  I am hungry.

Politeness  has nothing to do with it. The doe breaks  through to clear water.

Old  buck hides. Words come slowly. Or  not at all. Goshun painted the young willows. This  way. Now.





JIFTER



to Mary di Michele

It's  a still life. The  bottle is empty. The room  is empty.
The chairs  in the room are empty,
the table, bare
except  for the plate, with crumbs, the deflated cork,
the butterdish in which  there is only
a smear,
& the dulled  knife
carelessly tossed aside &, flung in a corner, the discarded newspaper.

The room is empty.
The crumbs huddle together to keep warm. The newspaper flutters  faintly
& from  the noise it makes
seems to be reading itself almost aloud.
The  sea murmurs in its green bottle. The afternoon air stirs,
& the knife glints & tautens, ready
 


Mike Doyle

THE SAVING GRACE


Ralph Gustafson

T.SAV.NG GRACE IS POETRY. If One defines poetry as the
enlightenment of fact,  the  worth  of experience, the  attainment of sensibility,  the
establishment of compassion-in any of the ways in contradiction to the dis­ harmony, the  structural collapse,  the  pollution   of  right  ritual, the  violence  and disgrace  of our  times-then poetry  is the  saving  grace.   It is the  saving  grace because it exhibits the worth  of sensible harmony, of man  with  man, of man  with himself, of man  with  nature. We need this worth  if we are  to survive  even on the most  pragmatic level. And  poetry  does not  leave  man  on  a  pragmatic level;  its procedure is  never  toward   the  lowest  common denominator;  its  procedure  is toward the  highest  common  factor; it  is elitist,  it  demands the  ablest  men,  the rarest  quotient; it  is after  the  elimination of  the  mediocre; it  desires  to  be  left with  only  the  most  peaceable  delight,  sensual  and  cerebral. With   a  fraction of this desirable attainment achieved,  our  world  is solvent  and  worthful.
Poetry  fools  no  one  with  romanticism and  sentimentality. Its  commencement is from  the  crudest  foundation of disillusionment, the  wringingest  awareness of irony,  the  very  hatred and  futility  that  is in  historical mankind. Poetry  is restless from  the  absurdity of  not  knowing; the  refusal  of  the  heavens  to  answer  is its subject-matter. There they are, those black  holes stuck  in heaven,

swallowing space Beyond ingestion while we walk streets, The universe up to something and Sophie Buying shoes for sore feet.
Poor Sophie. Poor universe
Not having Sophie know why.
The colossal swirl and mammoth  pinpoint, Children spinning tops, mankind
Screwing openings, birth to incontinency, Dark about the eyes. Meanwhile
The true and starry heavens going Somewhere with the reasons. Redundancy! Infinity turning inside Out while we eat prunes at breakfast.

We are kept  ignorant; we are imposed  upon.  What insolence! We  have  to die  to know the ultimate answer !

GUSTAFSON


I want the answer, I'm  here now with circumstance, Not exalted with God.

In  the aspiring mind, even faith's not enough. Faith  is an  ignorance.
There he  is:  mankind in  mid-Atlantic clinging  to  kindling,

This urge upon his mounting soul, height Magisterial and managed by a wind, Transcendent take-off fiddling Venus.
He  is hero  for  a  hairpin, spilled  milk, an  upright genetive  with  a  creaky  pump, seeking
Himself between his huff and misty glass,

for now we see through a glass, darkly.
His incompletion, mankind's, poetry abundantly acknowledges, not with melan­ choly but with  paradoxical acknowledgement; its stance  is that  of John Falstaff's: Lord,  Lord ! man  made  after  supper  of a cheese-paring:
When a' was naked, he was, for all the world, like a forked radish, with a head fantastically carved upon it with a knife.

Poetry  has  no illusions.  But it knows what  is possible. There indeed  Adam  sits looking  at  permanent apples -and he's no more!
He shifts sitting bare-assed on the sod
Adjusting  his balls to comfort. Alas.
But,  a poet  in  the  beginning if he is a sinner  in  the  end,  he  notes something: The bee sucks. He watches the tendril.
Above him falls syrupy melody.
He thinks a thought. Perception is perceived. He sees himself sitting there, hearing birds.
Not  much. But  he's  got  his senses. At  the  very least,  he  perceives  himself.  He moves on, that  first Adam.
Sometimes The far scent of a downward wind Overtops melancholy, fingers
Build structures of outlasting music.

Mostly  not,  perhaps. Structures of music  sound  little  in  our  day.  We  strive  and something gives  way,  that  flaw  in the  blood  that  has  been  there  anonymous for who knows how  long,  and  there  we are, one  day, stricken, mortal!
What a celestial
Tautology  to get there! fun in the dreaming, Irony in choice, tragedy in the waste, Getting nowhere with in justice.

GUSTAFSON



E      CATCH  UP   WITH US:   life  is brief  and  all  is vanity.  Looking around  itself, poetry is aware  of  not  much  to  praise.  Wallace Stevens's attributive  to poetry,  "A  sacrament  of  praise,"  diminishes  itself. The majesty of man is derided. Youth is crucified in Cambodia for stealing a handful of rice; the bomb is hurled indifferently, a leg comically flies across the restaurant; in County  Sligo a child is blown up in the boat  of his grandfather; a little  girl runs screaming  down  a road in Vietnam  trying  to tear  the  flaming  napalm  off her;  a smell comes from  ovens;  treads  roll in  the  streets  of  Budapest,  Prague, Warsaw;   accident  is denied  admission  at  a  hospital.  What   newer?  The   poet makes his poem out of the unstructured  world;  he is driven to the last expression; he finds his lines in grievousness; his rhythm  halts. His thoughts  are  confined to
narrow  nights:

It would seem that God is in nature
But not in history. Roses bloom
And are pretty. We can smell them. We also
Smell ovens if you know what I mean...
The lack of divine
Intervention is unaccountable.
Loaves and fishes. But divinity since then?
Best leave contemplation of history out of it
And go smell jonquils.

And so he does, the  poet, when the world seems insoluble  and  he gives way. Lacklustre, he gathers in to coteries. He goes to green gardens  and  cultivates  his own shade from the glaring sun. He cuts up useful words into  jots and syllables, scatters empty spaces around. He praises silence. He draws  pictures with his type­ writer. But the game does not satisfy. No one listens. Solipsism won't  do. He gets sick of his ego, he gets bored with pretension. There  is nothing  for it but  negative capability, losing himself to find himself. The  true  world greets him.
He is pitched headlong into irony and clarity. He is made  human.  The  truth  is delight. He is moral.
His defence against  grievousness is the  justification  of his  profession. Hollow pretension is exposed. He is returned  to delight,  the first function  of his art.  He knows that  if his poem lies it is a bad  poem. A  poem  cannot  lie;  its delight  is spoiled -the magnificence of structuring  verbal  music, of moving it through  its form  so that  the very outward  existence of itself is the  equivalence  of its inner conviction,  so  that   the  very  conveyance  is  the  meaning   of  what  it  conveys. Untruth unravels it. He is on the side of love.
In agony he faces the world. He writes it down. Something  is worth while. The poem and  its meaning.  He  will make  what  he says engaging,  significant,  nay,

16

GUSTAFSON


exalted, so  that he  will  force   listening. Revolutionary,  he  drags the   world   into acknowledgement, adjusts what is known
To  new announcements. The rage isn't  easy.
Small  minds  persuade their  triumph,
The  electrode harms  Where no mark  is left, Abraham puts the knife Through the throat of Isaac.  Channels run littleness.

But  the  challenge is the  delight. He  knows  all  about  violence and   mortality;
they  are  what he is writing about with  delight.

Born  to greatness is the man
Who sees his skull :
Again  that  pool
Is come  to that  the torrent splashed  to rainbow­ That love is made  whose finish was all
That there  was though morning was at the shutter
Stars  that  night  would be held by.

We  are  still  naked Adam. But  we want to be, we want to  be! Make the  worst of the  glorious mortality of biology,  biological man! What a  corkscrew of  pumps and arteries and  sluices  and drainages!
Micturition and  dawns,  not one Without the other, current for life. Amalgam of rude  civilities!
Not a naked  early riser
Isn't  in for it, handsomeness
In contempt, aspirations
In contradiction ...
Mortalities of toilet! Wheelchair, swaddling, whatever drinks Has  to go, nothing's for it.
Epitaphs prove  the worth  of repairs, Birthdays confirm  the ending!

0 mortality, 0 crudities! How easy to put  the site of evacuation and  love together! But  not  a man-jack who  is potent but  welcomes the  hard on,
Take-offs, aftermaths and  plumbing. Notice  at brink of dawn  what's  up! Lovers  love it, popes start  washing ...

No  cold  shower for  the  poet!
In the  very  tightest of  straits, notice what the  poet  finds  for  comfort, for  his poem:  comedy; puns, plays  and paradoxes! That's the   saving grace:  art  and

GUSTAFSON

comedy.  Even  in  the  veriest  straits,  the  poet  finds  rescue:   in  affirmations and incongruities. He  who laughs,  lasts. Charlie Chaplin's immortality. The  hitch  of the leg as he walks into  the battered sunset.
Once   upon   a  time  the  day  was  sacred   to  Saturn;  nothing  prevented the
grandeur of bawdiness  and  paraphernalia:

lovers came;

Thoroughbreds mounted; spuds sprouted; Autocracy crumbled;  sails went up
The river, majestic; pinwheels spouted.

Three achieved their poem, the others
Shouted. Everything came off.
Our  Lady (a little tipsy) wondered

What it was really like. Mirth Compounded. Scheherezade gargled, Jongleurs juggled. (No joke).

Irreverence and  uncensorship, these the  poet  does not forget  even though some things  are  sacred  and  the sheriff  beats  at  the  tavern   door  and, like  Falstaff, the poet is left standing empty-pursed at  the  Abbey  door.  Poetry  is never  solemn.
Assumption of comedy,  abilities  of objectivity, these  are  one  way  out  of  the dilemma. It is never easy, that  laughter:

Never stay down
For the count of ten, said the little girl
Running  nowhere, her napalm  on fire,

And that Jewish kid in Warsaw
With his hands up getting
The handout.  Ha, ha.

Nevertheless,  it  is either  that,  sometimes,  or  black  despair   and   despair   is what poetry  cannot   be, being,  as it is, on  the side  of life.
Not  all  is despair. Bitterness  is the  only  emotion   denied  a  poem.  Compassion
and  affirmation, the  two irrefutable instincts  of poetry,  eschew  it, bitterness. Try to  take  the  bitterness affirmation away  from  everyman, the  sensitive  man, and see what  happens. No sir, he'll  none of it.

Even the suffering's worth it. When the ground-phlox  blooms What of the pain; there is cessation; The jonquil is white, the oriole Sings? No? Then surely there is
Remembrance,  that first ecstasy? ...

18

GUSTAFSON

There is a sobering beyond all
Comprehension. It is this leaving
Of suffering, of birds, oriole and elm And  remembrance and lake's side, And  hearing of music.

The poet, everyman, remembers that day, that   epiphany of  experience  how- ever  rarely it  repeats, that first  ecstasy  when it  was  also  love.

Mind-boggling was the day. There was sun and  a clear air. There was no fear of heart

Or  lung  or joint, the beginning of the end
Anonymous, across the world no one
Was inflicting death  but in three  places,

The television  was turned  off,
The  colour  was highly placed,  blue
With  white clouds, a quick  bird

Across, ruby-throated, Lear
Was read  ...

It was the radiance of roots working, natural
Visitation, the iridescence, Green, of a red-headed fly,

Absurdity, evolutions  of
The inexplicable, tendrils,  the wasp, Unswallowable sea-urchins, and of course

The mean  mean  enough  to sit there Insensitive. Someone  pushed  a lawn-mower. Rabelais and Jesus had  just met.

And  why  wouldn't, with  the  world  like that, the  poet  write  down affirmations?

The heart  endures, the house Achieves  its warmth and  where He needs to, man  in woollen Mitts, in muffler, without
A deathwish, northern, walks. Except he stop at drifts
He cannot hear  this snow,
The wind  has fallen, and  where
The lake awaits,  the road
Is his. Softly  the snow
Falls. Chance is against him. But softly the snow falls.

rg

GUSTAFSON



l:E IMPULSE, IN   WHATEVER  KIND  OF   MAN,  is called  crea­ tivity, we call it creativity. The  poet calls it  poetry.  It is all the  same  thing. The  poet is a lackluck, like all of us, but  he targets  love. He  knows  what  he  must  do:
Oh, nothing now but I must out of oceans
Lift leviathan like a Job, my Moby
Dangle on a hook.

That  is to say, nothing's left to do
But drag up god in the wig of my words. The  rest's
A muddle of farewells.

He has believed  that  from  the beginning.  He  ends  up still determined to do that, "drag up  god  in  the  wig of his words."  He  knows  that  poetry  is an  art, that  he is crafty.  His  poem  is not  the  world  but  the  world  with  something done  to  it. Poetry  is not a substitute for anything, above  all for  religion.  Poetry  may  give the poet  solace  and  assurance and  redemption  but  he  knows  that   his  poem  is still only but  a wig of words,  not  the  real  thing; no  less necessary  if divinity  is to  be exhibited, but  still  not  the  incarnation. The  grace,   surely   it  is  and   the   dove descends,  but only by angelic guidance.
His epiphanies are  profane  but  no less of the  nature of  urgent   beatitude. He
says that  no  man  can  live  without   them.  He  finds  them  in  the  most  wondrous areas,  in the  ordinary, the  commonplace, the  trivial.
The choice Between weedy violet and potential Ground-phlox massed in May and red And white and to be propagated  is Troy Fallen or not, a thing of moment
And momentous choice whether the midge succeed
In swallowing smaller than itself or, Should birdsong cease? Let Helen Waddle down the street and be beautiful. I shall go to bed far later on
And pull the sheet up over time. Now I watch the cataclysmic gulp By midges made and conjugate What question lies in oriole song
Oblivious of Agamemnon and a thousand  ships.

A segment   of  ten  minutes   can  cause  in  the  poet   poetry.   Especially  if  those segments  of ten  minutes  are  now few and  mortality crowds  in.  Truth to tell, the mortality has attached itself to the  poet from  the start.
Never having clasped life so tightly
As in the leaving of it, he listens to the call
Of birds as though trees were an ultimate  purpose.

20

GUSTAFSON


He sits in the sun and  grieves on behalf  of those who have  had  to clasp mortality; he acts as though the turning on of a tap is important, as though flowers in a vase are significant. Mankind makes  it easy to have  done  with  the  world  and  get out of it, the world's  sanctification of cheapness  and  the  handwashing. But not the immediate rare  grace  he can  make  of it will he do without, the  morning's  vastly responsible announcements,

Bats, belfry, proclamations,
Bees at blossoms -the whole nightshirt
Get-up and celestial existence of existence,
for the most trivial  happening of a segment  of ten minutes has happened to him: Sun just reached the scarlet geranium
Set out in the antique  fire-bucket.

The  fear  of having  missed a segment  of significant  ten  minutes grips him, grips him  the  more  he has time  taken  away  from  him. Waste  and  missings  impel  him to warnings. Regret  is futile.  A great  compassion  overcomes him,  that  the  world lose the  world,  that  an  awareness of suffering  has been  missed,  that   what  could have  been  exaltation was  indifference. The  most  ordinary happenings of  a  day will bring  this compassion upon  him. The  man  nailing  a step,  repairing the  biases of winter; she launching laundry out  on  a line that  ran  from  the  kitchen  to  the yard  telephone, sheets  smelling  of  winter's cold,  each  time  the  line  is launched, the pulley squeaking, may  have  missed the significance,  how  those  happenings of life quietly  and  lovingly  lived  may  be thought neither  important nor  memorable,
how, as they happen

neither
She nor the man pounding the clear air Fixing the green step with another  nail, Will be aware of the importance,  twenty Years later thought  of by him
Who drove nails and saw laundry,
Who thought  little of cardinals and clothespins
And now love life, loves life.

Too late, too late.
Cardinals and  clothespins, cathedrals and  doughnuts, what  trivia! And  what greatness  when in the truth of poetry!
It all boils down  to love.  Love is the  answer.

Love without hurt
The only choice. The  poet writes it down.

21

GUSTAFSON

The irreplaceable reconstitution
Of desirable experience
Is what  he scrapes out ...

The kettle of fish would  boil over
With  clarity so to speak,
Taps in the midst of heatwaves
Run  breathless
Spring water,

Heaven would put pleas on its backburners
And  buckets of risen bread, That yeast in them, go bust Overflowing
If the world

Listened.

The poet  knows  that   love  is short   but  that it  is for  all  time; he  knows that heaven is miles-high, that  as he drives  west into hostile  territory he will be besieged, driven to draw into circular defences his wagons, but  he primes his guns,

His immediate preference not celestial, But sundowns and  prairies,  pioneers Turning cartwheels to the next corral.







THREE POEMS
 


Ralph Gustafson



THE MIND NEEDS WH]IT  THE POEM DOES

White lilacs and  Berlioz -
Take them as standing for the world  and  what
We make of it. Say it is Berlioz' opera
Les Troyens, and  let us say
They  are white lilacs clipped  from  the bush
That last afternoon of May;
With  late evening,  the dark  fragrance
In  the room and  burning Troy.

22

POEM

Which  was as real as the other? What man  creates in meaning is
The  world  we live in though  the rocky
Earth is what  we ride on. Flowers
At the cost of wooden horses:  heroic
Foolishness.

Stars we got free. Fashioned, finagled  implements.
A door-hinge, wheel, straight nails: Worthier than  the starry  night, What we make of them, histories.

More  than  ourselves, lilacs are amorous
Troy; without the town, abstract
Music  is competent mockery.









R)IIN


The downpour is a cataclysm.  Trees slant,  eaves along  the house Gush,  no one can see beyond the walk.

The mind's drenched. Deserts blow sand. What has that  to do with it? Cellar Windows spill, sills rise.

Each  has his own anxieties  truthfully, Green  is perhaps everywhere dry, Ducks  do not feel like song.

Each  one's comer is his world, Allah
Yelling  and  Christ  hanging and  Buddha supine. What is the god for rain?  Oblique it pours!

Levels accumulate. Worms come out, Lying  on the grass openly,
Depressions wash over. I haven't spoken

23

POEM

Of the noise, the great  swallowing  ditch, Surfaces rush. Generalities
Will no longer do, truth,

Truth, wrong  positions, the universe, Are what  it's about, misapprehension. Watch, outside! It can't last.







IN THE EVERGL]IDES


All animals are holy, They  are themselves.

The birds are sacred, The sky theirs.

The heron stands for hours
On one leg

And the roseate spoonbill
Seeks side to side.

The alligator eats once a week
And slides in

And among  the mangrove roots
His small one waits.

A movement! The spotter
Adjusts  his lens,

He does not know why
But feels worship,

The fat woman  feels worship,
And the camper, and the baseball

Cap,  and bright  eyes. No one is articulate:

24

POEM

The egret  is beautiful and  the blue
Heron and  the ibis.

No one can say why. Each  is itself.

The people do not move, Each  in identity.










TRUCE
 


R. A. D. Ford

«Le coeur, comme  des rois, sous la forme de paix perpetuelle, ne signe  done  que  les treves"

-AMIEL



The war goes on, the words wound Murderously, the blood flows and  quickens, Until the sacrifice is too great
And  the heart sickens.

The emissaries sound  out  the enemy,
Cease-fire  is called,  the barrage dies down, The sky is seen again  through the haze, And  recognizable is the dawn.

Peace for a century should  be ours, But the heart  opts only for a truce,
Though there  is time enough  for a hand-clasp
In  the ruins of those countless Troys.

We think  it is the threshold,
The  going-in, the promise, the rosy
Future. But  the armistice
Is like the wraith of a passing thought,
And our  hearts harden with the sight of peace.

25

ROBERT FINCH AND
THE TEMPTATION OF FORM


G.V. Downes


LWAS   CONSCIOus   CHOICE  mthcr  than  the  "naked   non­
chalance of chance" which  determined the  form  of the  poems  in the  last  section
of Robert Finch's recent  (I g8o)  Variations  and Theme. They  are  composed   of twenty-six   lines  in  thirteen  rhymed   couplets,   a  number  which   even  the   most casual  Tarot student knows has  been  used since  time  immemorial as a symbolic representation of  death  and  resurrection in  the  sense  of  change, becoming, the perpetual flow of Heraclitus where  "Things that  are  known  turn  into  unknown things." Change, paradoxically, seems  the  one  constant in  Finch's poetry.  It is vividly expressed  in his first volume  Poems (  946)  :

Lost at the centre of change, seeing how strange is
New beside old, we move, to stranger  places For as we move, our sorrow moves, and passes Through  us and we through it and so all changes

It is the  subject   of  the  last  poem  in  the  carefully orchestrated  Variations  and Theme, and  therefore of some significance. A recent  academic article  by Finch  is also concerned with  the theme  of change  reflected  in a very different way and  in a different milieu -the use made  of the  Metamorphoses of Ovid  by the  French poet  Bensserade in  the  seventeenth century, a  writer, incidentally, just  as  inde­ pendent of fashionable trends  as  Finch  himself.  "Je suis  dehors," he  remarked.
Such  overlapping of professional  activity  and  private occupation should  alert critics to the  possibility of there  being  more  layers  of meaning, more  subtleties  of association  in  Finch's work  than  have  been  commonly noticed  by  his  reviewers. With  the admirable exception  of William  Walsh,1 critics  have  tended to stress the superficial aspects of form in his poetry  rather than  treating the  form  as part  of a total  vision,  an  expression  of patterns of mental structure and  sensibility,  one  of whose outward and  visible signs is coherent language. The  very expressions  used
-"casual  and  arbitrary brilliance," "careful  and   consummate workmanship," "pure surface image,'' and  others  more  critical, "neat,"  "brisk" -indicate  the emphasis. And  for all the notice that  has been  taken  of his long  involvement with French poetic  theory  and  practice   (the   French  who  are  so  logically  articulate

FINCH


about their  poetry) he might  as well have been studying the culture of the ancient Sumerians.  International,   cosmopolitan, European -these   epithets  certainly reflect  a consciousness  of  his wide  cultural interests  including German literature
-but surely   more   relevant descriptions   are   required, and   careful   studies,   to
bring out  the importance of this French  background.
Reviewers  have,  nevertheless, been  perfectly   justified  in  picking  up  the  effect of the  gleaming surface, the  organized  debris  of experience (sensation, emotion, memory) which  make  up the  poem. For Robert  Finch's eye is fundamentally that of  the  artist, a  painter who  has  had  many  successful  exhibitions to  his  credit between I 92 I and  I 978.  He  is also a  musician, and  in  his academic persona  a critic of aesthetic theory. This  combination of visual experience, musical aptitude, and  understanding of  the  creative   process  in  the  work  of  others  is  unusual in Canada, opening as  it  does  perspectives  in  criticism  as  tantalizing  as they  are impossible   to  pursue   here.  To   mention   merely  one  example,  there  seems  an obvious   parallel  between   the   position  of  the  eighteenth-century   French  poets studied  by Finch  in The  Sixth  Sense, who were looking for  new modes of expres­  sion in  poetry  and  music  to  match  a  changing sensibility,  and  the  early  work  of
A. J. M.  Smith, Frank Scott,  and  Finch  himself  in  bringing fresh  perspectives
into  the  Canadian poetry  of the I 93o's  and I 94o's.
In  considering the  importance of form in Finch's vision, it seems to be essential to take his painting into account; he has been an artist for as long as or even longer than  he has been a poet. From  time to time, there occurs a fusion of the two modes of consciousness,  and  I do not  mean  by that  simply  the  anthology pieces such  as "Statue" or "Train Window" with  their  realistic  evocation of a moment in  time permanently caught on  the  page.  In  "Sea-piece" the  poet  uses pictorial  terms  to conjure  up the image:

The pencil lines of the pale brown deck
explode from the point of the mast's white crayon


and the white net rope of the rails fences this gouache geometry.

Music is not forgotten. There are trombones too.
A more  analytic approach can  be seen  in  "The Painter ii"  from  Silverthorn
Bush thirty  years later:

I first studied bamboo-painting using bamboos Themselves as my instructors. Then I tried, Unorthodoxly perhaps, with an air of humour, In writing, supple, wiry, flowing as wind,
To paint  the sound of footsteps in lonely valleys, The  colour of voices from a drifting night

FINCH

Although  Finch  has experimented  with  many  styles of  pamtmg,  the  element which ties them together, and relates the work to the poetry, is a sense of structure as firm as it is unobtrusive.  This is particularly  so in paintings  where the  nature of the subject  lends itself to patterns  in gouache  or  watercolour  whose original form  is  architectural-blocks,  triangles,  oblongs,    half-circles  of  houses  and
buildings. Their  shapes may be very simply suggested  a la chinoise with  a few
strokes of crayon or wash; complexities of inner space  may  be fully explored;  or
they may be presented flat face, as in a watercolour  of a house in Prince  Edward Island  whose ultimate  effect, while suggesting the  primitive  eye, is nevertheless one of extreme  sophistication.  There  are  also pure  abstracts  where  the  form  is co-terminous with the rich, irregular blocks of colour.
One's first impression is that there are no human  beings at all in this continuing panorama. This is curious, for the poetry is thronged  with people, either observed passing by in park, street, or corridor, or so closely connected  with the author  that certain sequences such as no. 3 of Poems could easily be interpreted as plots for Jamesian   novels  or   dramatic   monologues  reminiscent   of  Browning.   This   is equally true  of individual  poems of any date  up  to the  present,  including  those in the most recent  ( 1981)  Has and Is, such  as "Sight  Unseen"  and  "Enclave," and the complex Variations VIII and IX  whose shadowy  protagonists are known only by the enigma  of their  responses against  backgrounds whose material  decor is elegantly sketched.  The  geography,  whether  it  be town  or  country,  is always more  definite  than  the  identities  even  though  the  psychological  stance  of  the speaker is precisely indicated.
Finch points out that, in addition  to the types of painting  mentioned  above, he has always executed  works arising  out  of fantasy  and  dream   where  figures  of people do indeed play a central role. It would be astonishing for someone exposed to French surrealism  and  the visions of earlier  artists such  as Odilon  Redon  not to bear some traces of these influences. But in the poetry, direct  references to the subconscious are rare, and it is possible that  this aspect  of the  changing  protean psyche has found  its most satisfactory expression in forms  offered  by art  rather than  in language.  There  are certainly dream  worlds in Finch's  literary  work, but they are traditional rather  than  Jungian, idealistic  rather  than  bizarre.
Yet the very absence of the human  element suggests its presence off-stage. As in  early  Di Chirico  paintings,  there  is a  faintly  disturbing   quality   about   the empty streets and cafes, the quays where no boats dock. Even such differing works as a realistic drawing  of ornamental cane chairs  (used  as a  poster for  the  1g 78 exhibition)  and a more complex outdoor scene of two lighthouses at Grau  mani­ fest this sense of otherness. Who  belongs to  these seats  with  their  intertwining  knots, their Tarot  wands-hearts  symbolism? And  where  have  all the  ships gone? A simple trick of perspective, lines meeting on the  horizon,  allows  the structure  to point to more than  itself.

FINCH



ALTHOUGH  THE   OBSERVANT EYE  is  of  course   basic  to Finch's poetry,  the  visual  element, especially  in his early  work,  becomes  merely one of many  in a closely woven  network  of images, feelings, sensation, and  com­ ment. And  perhaps because  his mind  is a naturally reflective  one  as well as being acutely  conscious  of  its own  functioning, one  enters  into  a  universe  where the moral  is as pervasively  present  as the aesthetic.  Birds become  part  of  the  problem  of religious doubt:

pigeons that flaunt the feigned arcade in copper wings and ashen tails,
that sink their beaks in necks of suede, or pinkly drift on smoky sails

("Doubt's Holiday")

The  pond  in "The Hole  in the Day"  becomes a symbol of illusion,  while both  sea and  trees are  constantly invoked  as part  of the inevitable process of human decay in time,  with  its corollary, in Finch's world,  of spiritual growth.
William  Walsh  may  be right,  in a general  way, in pointing out  Finch's kinship with  Matthew Arnold. But  it  would  be more  true  to say  that  long  exposure  to the  French habit  of mind, and  particularly to  the  moralistes of the  seventeenth and  eighteenth centuries, has  been instrumental in forming his marked tendency to  generalize, like  the  Augustans, on  human  experience. And  from   both  these sources  come  the  witty  epigram, the  flourish  of the  rhymed   couplet, the  steady practice of poetry  as intellectual fun  in  vers de circonstance or  verses which  are written  deliberately in order  to become  familiar with  the  possibilities  and  limita­ tions  of  a  formal   metre. The   long  sonnet   sequences   of  Renaissance  poets - Italian, French, English-also come to mind.
"No   poem,  however   light,   can  afford   to  be  less  than   perfect." This   is  the Margaret Avison of 1945,  replying  in the Canadian Forum to a howl from  Irving Layton  over  what  he  considered an  unfair   review,  and   the  statement seems  to express  succinctly  the  attitude of  most  serious  poets  of  the  forties   who  were indirectly or  directly   absorbing the  influence   of  Eliot,   Pound, Yeats,  and   the richly  varied  intellectual scene  in Europe during the  first part  of the  century. As a  corrective  to  parochialism  and   watered-down  Victorianism  this  experience could  hardly  have  been  bettered, and  it is clear  that  in his formative years Finch received  earlier, and  more  directly  than  most,  the impact of  a  point  of view on aesthetics which  transcends fashion  and  which,  apart from  its classical  roots,  can be traced  in modern terms  back to Baudelaire and  Theophile Gautier. The  latter,
pointing  out that  the artist  must  work at his medium, said "Que ton reve flottant I
Se scelle I Dans le bloc resistant," and for the poet the "bloc  resistant" is language,
that  infinitely  tricky medium facing  thought in one direction and  music in another.


29

FINCH

And one must make it clear here that  Margaret Avison was not  discussing the merits  of metrical  or  non-metrical  verse, she  was  talking  about  sloppy  writing from a poet capable  of better things. Finch's  practice, whether  he is using metri­ cal forms or not, brings him squarely  into  Avison's court,  into  the  camp  of the artistes rather  than  the voyants,  artificial though  Marcel  Raymond's famous  dis­ tinction  may  be, and  particularly  so if applied  to  English  texts.  Since some  of Finch's most successful effects, such as "Scroll Section"  and "Campaspe" are not in formal metre at all, one can conclude that  the care for language  which will be adequate to  the  occasion of  the  poem  is for  him  an  aesthetic  necessity  quite divorced from  the choice of poetic pattern.
Useful though  the distinction is for academic  criticism,  I find it difficult as a writer  to accept  any formulation  of the creative  act  which  says or implies  that form is imposed  upon content.  What  the  reader  finds in  the  poem  represents  a final crystallization of language dynamically at work in the mind after an infinite number of starts involving echoes and associations which eventually  create  a text that  the  author   (originally  struck  by a  phrase  or  a  rhythm)  may  never  have intended or expected. In this connection, one can say that twentieth-century explorations  into subconscious mental  processes, and  a  growing  literary  interest in authors'  drafts, have both contributed  to an understanding that  the  poem is a result of organic growth rather  than  a content  poured  into a restrictive form.
Finch  is completely  aware  of  the  complexity  inherent   in  the  poetic  process ("The Reticent  Phrase,"  "The  Poem")  as well as the  ultimate  mystery  of  the origins of  the  word.  But since metrical  forms  do  seem  to  predominate in  his work, it seems reasonable  to enquire  why, and  to ask why he  has  not  followed the paths of Dorothy  Livesay, P. K. Page, and  Earle  Birney, whose first  publica­ tions are  roughly  contemporary  with  his own,  and  who  have  all  shown  more enthusiasm for experiment in various ways. It is not as though  Finch cannot  hear and use the colloquial when he chooses.
One  answer may lie in the Gautier  quotation above, and  in what  Yeats called
"the fascination  of what's difficult." The  fixed form, like Everest, is always there as a continual  challenge. And if by constant  manipulation of a certain  form  the writer makes it part of automatic  or unconscious neurological  processes, it is  pos­ sible to arrive at the stage where the actual  germ of the  poem occurs as a  spon­ taneously  generated   unit  of  language  already  attached   to  a  rhythm  which  is characteristic  of some fixed form. For some poets, such as Paul  Valery,  who left such a valuable  record of his creative life, the  first intimation  of a  poem  in the hinterland  of the mind may even be a suggestion of rhythm  without words at all. The  value of such deliberate familiarity  with form  lies here:  there is  a fusion at the subliminal  level of word and  metrical stress which  allows  experiences to  rise from the depths not just in form but as form.

FINCH


"A shape  to hold  the form  begin to bloom" -there appear to be other  advan­ tages offered  by the  metrical form.  For  those  who enjoy  practising it, there  is an extra  element  of linguistic  tension  added  to the  already complex  variables  which make  up  the  poem.  Undoubtedly the  counterpointing of  natural  speech  against  a basic beat allows the  poet to create  effects which  might otherwise  go unrealized, just as the search  for  a  rhyme  can  reveal  hitherto  unsuspected truths about the realities of a theme  which  may or may not be the true subject  of the  poem. Would  it be fair  to say that  all serious  poetry,  apart from pure  narrative, is truth-telling of a kind,  whatever the temporary masks donned  by the  poet for the exercise, and  that  metrical form  helps in the  process of  listening  to one's  truths? "The word  on
the lips I Only  re-shapes I The  mask it  rips"  ("The Words").



A. J· M.  SMITH uSED TO  STRESS that  poetry-or  any  art
-was a way of bringing order  into  chaos, and  that  the formal patterns of poetry
enabled   the  poet  to  tame  his experiences  by  becoming   more  conscious  of  them through the  very effort  of articulation. Finch's attitude to form  seems to take  the process one step further, because,  as the religious poems in Has and  Is make  clear,
the  poet's  act of creation parallels  the  Word: "And  yet a Poet  by this alchemy   I
Is making what  is His  belong  to  me."  He  has  exploited   an  infinite  number of metrical effects  which,  through the  counterpointing of  voice  patterns against   a basic  beat,   provide a  continuing framework of  musical   expectation  at  a  level which   is  subliminal rather  than   obtrusive.   The   patterns  exist  outside   trends, outside  time,  and  they  do  not  depend  for  their  impact on  the  personality or  the emotionally charged voice  of the  poet  at  a  public  reading. But  the  reader   must listen;  the syntax  may  be complicated.
The  variety  of  forms,  in  spite  of the  ubiquitous sonnet, is matched  by  com­
plexity  of  thought and  feeling.  Finch's   range  is wide.  The   ironic  manipulative wit of "The Rule" where  there  is just one stress in each  line  (except  line 7 where both   monosyllabic adjectives  must  have  equal   force)    represents   a  deliberately
formal  art  which  simply  amuses  itself by its own  expertise: "Adrift I Lest  gift  I
Of  all  I Should pall  I And   much   I At  odds  I With   gods  I And  ends." In more  classic form, the social scene is satirized:

While the refreshments spread and with them girths
As imperceptibly as the conviction That gratified desire has no connection With either deaths or marriages or births

("All Their  Parts")

FINCH

But  this  flourish  of technique is only,  in  a sense,  the  beginning. The   door  then opens  on  more  deeply  felt  experiences  such  as  some  of  the  love  poems  or  the simple  religious certainty of the last poem of Dover Beach Revisited:
Once in a timeless interim I touched it, Alone in a crowd, crowding the other lonely, Unheard, unseen, with nothing at all that vouched it, I touched it, it touched me, once, once only.
("The Certainty")

Some of Finch's most effective work is seen when  the  natural syntax  and  emphasis of  the  voice  breathes so  easily  in  the  formal   pattern that   the  latter   is  simply absorbed  into  the  total  texture of the  poem,  as  in  "Effect of  Snow -iii,"  part of  a  suite  in  Acis in  Oxford  which  in   rg62   won  Finch   his  second   Governor General's award as well as some  criticism  from  poets  who  were  listening  to  the beat  of more  modern drummers. This  poem  is particularly  interesting because, like no. xiv of Variations, it suggests the  world of dream, maya, illusion,  which  is never far  from  Robert Finch's perceptions ("waking self and  sleeping  self")   and exists along with  the perfectly observed  momentary reality:
I have seen the snow like a mirage impending
Upon  the eyelids of the dreaming  air

I have heard it sing one note against another
So quiet only the quiet heart could hear, Or lay its silence down, feather  by feather On the discordant day, the restless fear

The  arabesques of  thought move  out  and  back  until   they  come  to  rest  in  con­
trolled harmony.
The  first poem in the suite is much  sharper in its effects,  both  visual  and  aural, depending as  it  does  on  the  contrast  between   black   and   white,   dark   sky  and white ground, recalling  a chessboard  with trees as pieces. As so often,  the  moment is poised in a perilous  equilibrium:
What is the move? One move from left to right
And the whole wood will move from bleak to bright.

What wood?  An  ordinary Ontario lot?  Dante's? Eliot's?  The   tight  form  allows vistas to open  here,  although frequently in Finch's work  one  finds endings  which seem, because  of the  necessities of the stanza  form, to close off the  flow abruptly. This  is, of course, one of the  real disadvantages of formal verse;  the second  poem in the series illustrates this:
And, with its lacquered cornices of snow
A white pagoda, once a bungalow.

The  descent  into suburbia is disconcerting.

32

FINCH


Looking  at  Finch's work  as a whole, one is struck  not  just by his many  voices but  by the  persistence  of  an  angle  of  vision  whose  probing illumination spares neither the  poet  himself  nor  the  dramatis  personae he  conjures up  and  buries  in his well-wrought urns. The technical interest  for the reader in many  poems of the recent  Variations  and Theme lies in the  way a traditional form  can  hold  a subtle and  mysterious balance between  what  is said  and  what  is unsaid, for  the  poet's Jamesian eye, added to  a  Racinian sensibility,  roves like  the  shifting camera of a  contemporary film  over  scenes  where  only  a  look,  a  profile,  a  moving   hand define  the  progress  of the  action. These  scenes are dateless  and  in  their  own  way timeless, and  once  the ear  gets used to the  convention  of the  rhymed couplet, for example, we are  made  free  of moments  of intensely  realized  drama. There is the ironically presented seduction scene  where  candles  throw   a  Georges  de  la  Tour light  on two  figures  in a claustrophobic dining-room; on  the  next  page,  by  con­ trast,  a sunlit  Mediterranean salon  and  garden,  fresh  as a  Matisse, after  a  deci­
sion which seems also to involve a crime:

Hide, Leave by the window on the other side, From where detection will remain remote. Pinned to the pillow is a pencilled note.

Pinned by a stiletto?  The  high  decorum of Finch's  art  demands that  the  recipi­
ent's  hysteria  remain unsung.
Any  definitive study  of form  in Robert Finch's work  would  be  bound   to  con­ sider  not  only  the  comparatively modern   concepts  briefly  mentioned  here,  but also  the  aesthetic theories  of  the  Renaissance and  the  eighteenth  century  when the dynamic relationships between  the arts  (music,  painting, poetry, architecture) were  not only  more  real  than  they  are  today,  but  also apprehended  more  deeply  at  a  philosophical level.  A  final  word  is  provided   by  Louis  Dudek, discussing  Phyllis  Webb:  "After all,  what  matters   is the  form,  whether  of  joy or  sorrow, when it comes to the ritual  of art."

NOTES

1 William  Walsh,  "The   Poetry  of  Robert  Finch,"   Bulletin   of  Canadian   Studies,
2  (April1978), 1-15.







33

jJND OF THE MEjJSURE OF WINTER WE JIRE SURE

Patrick Lane


(for Miriam Mandel)



You have taken the measure  of winter
 
making

with your craft  a tree no one could climb
so upon  your limbs the star-fruit hangs
with the secret buried  within
the dark  seed in the centre of your world 	molten
red as the moment before darkness
In your lives
the mother  took your moods took your brooding in her
playing the measured  line that  broke you

The music sang to your care 	the achiote the sweet despair
the rare fruit  that  falls in wind

Winter   you have beaten  us again
The  beautiful dead  are lying upon silence their  mouths full of words
unspoken
of sleep    of caring   bf the sweet prayer  they uttered when sound  was gone


and  the note of release 	She
cries on her bed where her body lies
 Grief

all of her gone but the flesh and  the music as of birds leaving

0 winter
 
(I must leave here soon






34


DREJIMING OF RIVERS

Eric Trethewey

One  autumn night in your thirties you bob up from sleep.
You've been dreaming of rivers.
Dazed, warm  in the blankets, you turn the dream  over,
burnish the edges, hidden  corners, before  the glow goes flat
in the morning light.

The Ellershouse River. Begin with  the girl, the spot where  your bodies blazed
in the sweetfern.
The river  noses in there, shoulders the lane,
turns  back to the trees,
and  you trace  the clear water upstream, slowly,
bend  by bend,
pausing to fish as you did then the foam-scummed  pools.
You cross on a deadfall, skirt  rapids  to the oxbow on a lop-stick  trail.
There the land  takes a breath, rises to the bridge  and  thick woods
on the other side. From  below,
you see again  how the trestle hovers, creaks  like death in the air,
and  crossing over, smell that old preserver on the ties. On  the far side the beeches sidle in to waterfalls, black  pools, waterstriders moving
in the gloom. Fishing gets better
and  you bring  the boys in from  the dream, give names  to them,
keep on climbing in your mind toward the thin source of the stream, push on until, short of it,

35

POEM

deep in the shadow of spruce and  straggle  of swale,
memory stammers, repeats itself, and  for all your cunning
this river fades into other  rivers,
all rivers.

Holding on before daylight, you wheel in your circle of loss,
pine and  resin, damp moss fragrant
on memory's  air, and go for one more crack at the orange-bellied trout
where  the water  hooks down
through the trees, through the gorge, around water-honed granite,
past  the trestle to a pause, doubles  back on itself, widens, lightens,
and  eases on down to the lane -
where the hunted Indian, Shires, one step ahead  of the Mounties
leaped  into legend  that  swollen spring­
then  over shoals, under  willow overhangs,
past cutbanks and, highballing on current now, you sweep through alders, by the mill,
the bridge, past Deming's store, and  wind through flat pasture to the big-bend  camp-meeting shallows of baptism
where  the water  leans back
and  foots it under  the elms,
to the swimming-hole full of bodies, breasts, and  one final shoot through a meadow
to the highway  bridge
and  beyond where  you've been yet, ocean  bound  now,
with all those other  rivers blinking  silver through the trees, golden  in the sun
and  though you've lost it again

you know it doesn't end here.






g6

RECYCLING
 


Pat Jasper


The usual ingredients cluttered my mother's sewing basket:
pastel-headed pins, needles, tangled spools and  a rattly  button-box,
in this case, a recommissioned pink Almond  Roca  tin.

Clothes never got thrown  out at our  house until  they were shorn of eye-holing adornment: brass buttons, bone buttons squeaky leather buttons, assembled  for reassignment again  and  again.

On  days she wanted  us out of her hair, she would  let us sort them
into satisfying  patterns,
string  them  into  necklaces or barter them  as coins
in a rainy-day game of store. For lunch  she'd  fix us
tomato soup and  grilled  cheese sandwiches with Almond  Roca  to sweeten
our cranky  dispositions.

Last week, taking refuge from  the rain, I noticed  pink  tins stacked
on the shelves of a real store. They  hadn't changed a bit, except  for the inflated  price.

I splurged and  bought  one anyway, then  went home and  fixed
tomato soup
and  grilled  cheese sandwiches for lunch.

When  the tin was empty, I couldn't bring  myself

37

POEM

to throw it out
but began to round up buttons, snipping off a second childhood for safekeeping  in a can.




THE DJINCING IN THE WIND

Ernest Hekkanen

There are days when I find it hard  to bend
Skyward. Something in the flesh fails To  hear  the dancing in the wind; Something in the heart  takes leave And  I am grounded, among  stones.

Where is the will that  trains  the beast
To  Fly. It has wandered off, a sudden fog
Wafting across the ice-bright field
To  where the crows lurch  and  squawk.




Jl  SONNET IS JIN EJISY POEM TO WRITE
Fred Cogswell

A sonnet is an easy poem to write
If you remember that  it needs to be
No more than  a quadruple harmony
In which grammar, sound, feeling, thought, unite To  make, thereby,  a new thing-one whose might Is more than  its ingredients; designed
To blend like music, eye, ear, heart, and  mind
Into its own crescendo  of delight.

Whether you close two thoughts-octave, sestet­ Or open one three  times, then  nail it shut
With  the sharp  bang of a final couplet,
In any sonnet  you have but  to put
Right words in right places at the right  times
And  just fourteen of them will do for rhymes.


DICTION IN POETRY



George Johnston






MODERN ENGLISH IS AN   IMPURE  and  undOOplined literary  language.  It  is style-less, a  writer  must  make  his  own  style  in  it.  An important element  of  a  style is its vocabulary.  This  matters  in  every  kind  of writing,  but  especially in  poetry. Words carry  their  full weight  in  a  poem  and will embarrass  it if they are out of place or under  strain. Therefore  it behoves a poet writing in English to know his words well.
In  structure and  grammatical   vocabulary  English  is a  West  Germanic  lan­ guage;  its closest relations  are  Flemish, Dutch,  Frisian,  Platt-Deutsch  and,  at  a slight  remove,  German. The  first  Germanic  settlers  of  England,   in  the  sixth, seventh and  eighth  centuries A.D., spoke pure dialects of West Germanic,  which had  a few  borrowed  Latin  words. Then  Danes  and  Norwegians  began  settling the country  too, and  the West Germanic  dialects began  borrowing  their  closely­ related  words. Somehow  the language  of the Celts had  almost  no effect  on  that of their conquerors,  and  the Romans left nothing in the language  of the country they had  occupied  except  a  few place  names. After  the  Norman  Conquest,  in the eleventh  century,  French  words came  into  the vocabularies  of  these dialects in great numbers,  and for nearly two centuries French  was the language  of Court and  Church   and  of  much  literature,   but  not  of  the  common  people.  By  the fourteenth  century  West  Germanic  had  re-established  itself as  the  language  of government  and  literature, as well as of the  people.  After  the  Reformation   it was the language  of the  Church  as well. The  predominant dialect  was that  of London,  which  was mostly Anglian,  and  the  language  was known  as  English.
It  was  by  now  already  an  impure  language,  full  of  borrowed  words,  from
French,  Scandinavian, Latin  direct  and  Latin  through  French.  It  was ready  to welcome more.  Important English scholars of the  Renaissance  made  a  point  of writing in English instead of Latin, but they brought  Latin and  Greek words into it to give it substance,  as they  thought,  and  dignity. Shakespeare  made  fun  of these hard  words but he too made considerable and  effective use of Latin  words, and Milton  used Latin  words and constructions extensively. Our  common speech and our literary language  are both full of borrowings that Shakespeare and Milton brought into English.

39

DICTION

Borrowing from Latin and Greek and, once again, from French  went on in the eighteenth  century, and meanwhile  words had been coming in from Flemish and Dutch,  from the New World, from Africa and  the  Middle  East and,  later,  from India.  With  the  advancement   of  the  natural   sciences  and  technologies  in  the nineteenth  century,  hundreds  of new words were coined from  Latin  and  Greek, and this process carried  over into politics and  the social sciences. English  is now full of newcomers, words from these specialized vocabularies  that  have  acquired popular   currency.  And  there  are  modern   regional  dialects,   claiming  literary autonomy: there is American  English, which has sub-dialects, and  there are Australian  and Canadian Englishes and  West Indian  English, and others. Besides these there are many slang vocabularies that  arise from  underworlds,  from  wars, from the  media,  from  sports and  other  sources,  which  flourish  briefly  and  are gone, leaving maybe a word or two more or less permanently in the language. Bureaucracy  has contributed  many words and  turns  of speech.
In  the  latter  half  of the  nineteenth  century  some  WTiters  became  dissatisfied with the impurity  of English. Best known among  these was William  Morris.  He made serious efforts to clear his vocabulary of borrowings,  and  went so far as to reintroduce  English  words that  had  become  obsolete,  and  he invented  modern forms for  English  words that  had  not survived  the  Middle  Ages. Paradoxically one gets an  impression of outlandishness  from  this  purified  English  vocabulary at a first reading,  but it grows on one, it has strength  and  grace,  its moods seem true. It is not hard  to feel a longing for such a language; Ernest  Hemingway  felt it. An awareness of the English in a literary vocabulary  is most helpful in  under­ standing  its over-all make-up  and  quality. The  great  virtue  of the study  of Old English is the insight it gives into the heart  and  bone structure of our  language.
The origin and family connections of a word may be learned  from its etymologi­ cal note in a good dictionary, or better, from an etymological  dictionary.  A poet also wants to know a word's history, what its meanings  have  been and  how they have changed  over the centuries. Many  words have changed  meaning  somewhat in crossing an ocean. The stages and  wanderings of a word's life, the ways it has been used, are all helpful things for a writer to know.  Dictionaries  are  different from one another  in the kind of information  they  provide;  the most comprehen­  sive  and   generous  is  the  great  Oxford   English   Dictionary,   with  its  modern supplements.
To illustrate  these preliminary  remarks on the subject  of diction  I shall quote four Canadian poems. The first is "A Shadow," by Raymond  Souster:
A shadow should be
a comfort, a companion especially on cold winter nights.

Mine's neither,
being more of a nuisance,

DICTION


either playing at stepping on my heels, or making like terror,  fond of showing blackness so close behind
darker  than anything I've seen
even deepest in myself.1

Souster  writes  as  down-to-earth and  consistent  an  English  as  one  is likely  to find  in  any  writer. The   words   I have  italicized   are  borrowings,  mostly  from French but  they  have  been in English  use for so long that  they hardly colour  the plain  Englishness of the  poem.  Their   meanings have  changed little,  though the early  meaning of "comfort" is "a  strengthening" and  of "companion" is "sharer of  bread," helpful   things  to  know.  The   poem's  English   words  have  had   their current sense for over a thousand years, as far  back as can  be known.  The phrase "making like  terror" sounds  very  modem, but  there  are  early  intransitive  uses of  "make." "Fond"  is  a   borrowing,  but   from   another  Germanic  language, Swedish or Icelandic. Its meaning has changed, though  its earliest sense, "foolish," is still in it, and  gives it its flavour.  "Nuisance" was a stronger word  to begin  with, and  meant  something harmful. It  was  derived  from  a  verb,  and  still  feels like one.  The   English   words  have  acquired shades  of  meaning and   dropped them again  on  the  way  through the  centuries; some  fill many  columns in  the  Oxford Dictionary; the  verb  "play" fills ten and  the verb "step" seven.
Souster  might  scorn  the  bringing to bear  of this kind of learning on  his poem.
I would  not suggest  that  he had  composed  in a learned  way. But  I do  know  that he is a careful and  well-informed poet, and  it is clear that  he knows his vocabulary. Few  poets are  as consistent; every word  he writes  has the  ring  of the  same  voice, and  the same  passion  and  conviction  of truth.
Here  is a sonnet, now,  from  Robert   Finch's recent  collection,  Has  and   Is.  It shows an  almost  opposite  kind  of skill and  awareness  of diction, so that  whereas Raymond Souster's art  is to conceal  art,  Robert Finch's is to rejoice  in it.
This rose you give me cannot ever fade
Until  I fade with it and it with me,
And should you give me others they would be
Not a succession but an accolade.
The first rose is the last and all between, Its  fragrance too is theirs, its imbrications In them repeat unending celebrations
Of what is seen and what will yet be seen,
Incessantly discernible  as roses,
Though  clothed in costumes  infinitely varied,
The good intent that launches  them is carried
By the most tenuous vehicle it chooses,
Even the semblance  of a voice one knows
Can make the silence blossom like a rose.2

DICTION

It is not hard  to see the difference in vocabulary  between  this poem and  Ray­ mond  Souster's.  It  has twenty-one  different  borrowed  words,  five of  which  are Latin, and of the French borrowings many are late. Of the English words, a high proportion  are  merely grammatical: demonstratives,  prepositions,  conjunctions  and auxiliary verbs. Much of the meaning is carried  by the borrowings. This ratio of borrowed  to English words is now more  normal,  for  conversation  as well as writing, than  Souster's, though Souster's vocabulary  draws less attention  to itself. Finch's  Latin  words give an impression of wit and  pleasure,  one  can  share  the poem's  relish  in  the  exotic sounds  of   "imbrications," and   their  rhythms   and rhymes are sprightly. At the same time they convey a sentiment,  gracefully, that we respond to.




MICHAEL ONDAATJE's   POEM,  "Henri Rousseau and Friends" is as form-conscious as Robert  Finch's, but its rhythms  and  its irregular verse pattern  are very different. It shows the same candid  delight in Latin, how­ ever, and  a brightness of style in using it, along  with  a counterpoise  of  ferocity and gentleness of sentiment  that  is characteristic  of Ondaatje's  writing.  Here  is the  third  stanza,  which  speaks  of  the  creatures   in  the  douanier   Rousseau's painting:

They are the ideals of dreams.
Among the exactness,
the symmetrical  petals,
the efficiently flying angels,
there is complete  liberation. The parrot is interchangeable; tomorrow in its place
a waltzing  man and a tiger,
brash legs of a bird.3

Again, the borrowed words are italicized. "Dreams" and and "legs" are from Old Norse and "waltzing" is from modern German, so they are borrowed from within the Germanic  family. There  was an  English word "dream," but  it meant  "joy" and  was displaced  by that  French  word.  "Brash," in  this sense, seems to  have been a sixteenth-century  coinage; here it must mean "brittle" and  in this context it is an unusual and effective word.
Ondaatje's stanza is quite as Latinate  as Finch's sonnet, but its tone is different;
the  Latin  words  are  used familiarly,  they  are  not  flourished.  "Brash," whose origins are  probably  English, is the  most  attention-getting word  in  the  stanza.
The  second section of Margaret  Atwood's  poem "He  Reappears" exemplifies another  sort of diction altogether,  cunningly  employed,  as one would expect.

42

DICTION

You take my hand and
I'm suddenly in a bad movie,
it goes on and on and why am I fascinated

We waltz in slow motion
through  an air stale with aphorisms we meet behind endless potted palms you climb through  the wrong windows

Other  people are leaving
but I always stay till the end
I paid my money, I
want to see what happens.

In chance bathtubs  I have to peel you off me
in the form of smoke and melted
celluloid

Have to face it I'm finally an addict,
the smell of popcorn and worn plush lingers for weeks.•

This  poem is as English  in its vocabulary as Souster's; its setting  might  also be his though he would  not  be likely to use it in so sustained and  interlocked a way, almost  as an allegory,  nor in so sharp  a voice. The  key words,  "bad movie,"  stand out,  as they should. They  are  a pairing of English -bad-and  a modern  coin­ age from  an  old  Anglo-French word-movie -and  their  combined  sense  is so narrowly modern as  to  be  already  slightly  archaic. Many of  the  poem's  words draw  their  meanings from  a common  but  period-limited activity,  that  of watch­ ing a moving  picture in a post-war  cinema  (as it is now  more frequently called). The particular sense  of "bad movie"  may  have  been  current  in  the  193o's  but hardly before,  and  the single  word  "movie" already  feels dated. The  words "slow motion," "popcorn," and   "plush" belong  to  the  movie  language; so  does  the third  stanza, though its  words,  taken  separately, have  no  special  connotations. "Air   stale   with   aphorisms," "potted  palms," the  adjective "worn" in "worn  plush," and  the image of climbing through wrong windows  belong  to the  allegory but  not to the special  language, they are  the poet's own  words.
The poem's diction, as I have said, is mainly  English, and  the borrowings are old and  well-established; only  "fascinated," "aphorisms," "celluloid," and  "addict" seem at all exotic,  and  "fascinated" and  "addict" are  often  found in slangy  com­ pany.  Virtually every  word  in the  poem,  however,  must  be  understood in  some­ thing  like a cult sense. The poet is aware  of all this, and  works with dazzling  skill.

43

DICTION

It is a very modern poem. One  day, however,  in the  not too distant future, it will provide  delightful drudgery for a student of Canadian Literature, footnoting the overtones of "bad movie."
All four  poems  have  been  consistent  in  vocabulary. Their words  keep  to  the
mood of the  poem they are in and  do not vary  from  its voice. Margaret Atwood's poem  makes  use of a specialized  vocabulary, and  does so with  a sure  touch; no word  takes  us out  of the bad  movie, though "aphorisms" was a risk. Consistency is not  easy;  Modern  English  is full  of  distracting sub-languages:  those  of  the sciences,  pseudo-sciences  and  technologies,  of  bureaucracy, of sports,  of  dialects, of jazz, business  and  so on. And  especially since  the  eighteenth century, with  the growth  of huge  cities, writers  have  been  tempted by  the  seductive ephemera of slang.  Few  of  the  scientific,  technical   or  bureaucratic  vocabularies have  depth, and  a poet who knows the sound  of his or her  voice is unlikely  to use them.  Their meanings  tend  to be expressed in phrases rather than  words. But the slang vocabu­ laries,  though  their   elements  too  tend   to  be  phrases rather  than  words,   have atmosphere, mood  and  often  feeling.  They   are  ephemera,  however,  as  I have  said, and  may  date  the  poem  they are in, or cause  it to be forgotten.
A poem's  vocabulary need  not  sound  natural. "Naturalness," using  the  word
in a current, imprecise but  intelligible  sense, is one  of poetry's less valuable  attri­ butes. A poem should  read  out confidently,  however, without confusion, and in a consistently  recognizable voice.  It  is proper  to  think  of  the  voice  as  the  poem's rather than  as the  poet's.  Some  poets do  have  a vocabulary of their  own,  but  it is a limitation, even in a strong  poet;  it limits  the  kind  of things  that  can  be said.  Limitation, however, is preferable to inconsistency. Inconsistency intrudes a false note. A poem  should  be true  in its stuff,  in  the  way  that  anything  well made  is.
Poetry  is as various  as life, and  its conventions will  be  tested  and  altered  con­ stantly. But  it  must  always  work  with  words.  They   are  wilful  and  treacherous, they  will say  what  they  are  going  to say  regardless  of  the  poet's  intentions. The  poet can simply  know  everything  knowable  about them  and  remember that  they are living creatures. It is in their  wilfulness that  the  poem  will live or die.

NOTES

1 Raymond  Souster,  "A  Shadow,"  Collected  Poems,  Vol.  III   (Ottawa:  Oberon, I 982) , p. I 98; rpt. by permission of Oberon  Press.
2 Robert  Finch,  "This  Rose You Gave  Me,"  Has  and  Is  (Erin:  Porcupine's Quill, I981), p. 75; rpt. by permission of the author.
3 Michael  Ondaatje, "Henri  Rousseau and  Friends,"  There's a Trick  With a Knife I'm  Learning To  Do  (Toronto: McClelland  & Stewart,  I979), p. 10; rpt.  by  per­ mission of the author.
4  Margaret Atwood, "He  Reappears," Power Politics (Toronto: Anansi,  I97I), p. 3;
rpt. by permission of House of Anansi Press.

44

IDIOM BIRDS

Erin Moure


The cars in the shut lot are burning their  doors. Sandwiches unravel  their  tongues,
sucking  the mouth.
All the idioms have been written out. Modernity is a hard  beak, to cherish. Unwrite idiom.
Tip over idiom, tailless hannted bird, stable  currency,
that  which  speaks,
that  which  wanders, cloud  with trousers, yo-yo,
brink, my sad revolver, my door.

Open up or be stolen, passing sentence in the getaway car,
gunning its verbs like a motor.
Unseal.
Unrip & sew, bluster, speak, who listens, who hears or writes
unless I'm  smirking,  pulling  phrase out  of the cupboards, idiom  birds Come  on, birds
trying  to dance  their  bone skulls
on the window
hard syllables named  Apollinaire, their guns thrown in the gas-tank,
trapped birds,
my idiom, soft idiom,  tastes like hay












45

TWO POEMS

Florence McNeil

KIRSTY KjiTE

Old  Kirsty  (said my mother) drinks  too much they'll find her dead  someday
but my father said nothing could  kill her and  it seemed nothing could
She was a hero to us
and  a joke
bumping into swollen trees    slipping on the finny blades of wet grass
sliding along  polished floors
with scatter  rugs flapping as she fell she stayed triumphantly in one piece Until that  night     a gathering
with our living room a tangle  of shoes abandoned for the intricate quick manoeuvres of quadrilles
and  the sounds of bagpipes still glowing like coals in the air
Old  Kirsty staggered to the front  porch inhaled seaweed while the rain
sprinkled  its blessings on her
and  raised her voice like a heron in pain When  the Roses Bloom Again    she sang and slipped  head over heels
down steps wet as a salmon's back
And when they rushed 	half laughing	half frightened to prop her up    adjust the crepe  dress
now tangled  indecently around her
like sodden fish scales
she raised her head and  whispered	fart  on the roses and  closed her eyes
her face suddenly  old and  leathered
like the skins of kippers  blanched in supermarkets the bones of her face outlined in the rain
and  the party  as empty  now as a parched stream.

]ILL]IN STEW]IRT


Allan  Stewart sits at his window
in his green  eyeshade    with his book with  the words that  fade like
spots on a bleached  out sheet looking over the treetops
that  slant  downwards like
a green ski slope
to the ocean  with its fishboats splashed  by a green  sun
and  the mountains blown sky high tinted  snapshots   in the clear day His world is split into two halves
the preface	a summer when  his eyes were whole his body perfect as the
ads for muscle tone he cut from magazines
And ever afterward
after  the green  fingers of gas rushed  his lungs
And  the magazine ad was trampled in the slime of the trench

And still wars later
he wakes    his hands  impaled in a wet pillow
his eyes liquid  blurs even now
when  his war has been rationalized into a hundred leather volumes
with  their  spines split
mould  eating the golden  names even now
when  they have all become myths he sees only through a split screen on one side
the perfect clarity of form  and  line
on the other   before his eyes
the words  that  rush and  tumble
that  fuse into small repetitive explosions that  even the greenest  flare of light cannot control.

47

PRATT'S TREATMENT OF HISTORY JN IITOWARDS THE LAST SPJKE"

Catherine McKinnon Pfaff



IN A LECTURE DELIVERED IN   tg6g, "The Documentary Poem' A Canadian Genre,"1 Dorothy  Livesay argued that  it was the documentary poem, and  not  the  lyric  or  historical  epic,  that  formed   the  most  enduring tradition in
Canadian poetry.  From  Lampman on  the  path   was  clear.   Poetic  development was "not into straight narrative but  into the  use of facts  as the  basis for  an inter­ pretation of a theme."2  Livesay's examples  were drawn from  the  poetry  of  Craw­ ford,  Lampman, D. C. Scott,  Pratt, and  Birney,  as well  as from  her  own  work. The  Roosevelt  and  t'he Antinoe  (I 930)  was  the  Pratt poem  that  she  chose  to discuss  but  the  later  work, Towards  the  Last  Spike  ( I952),  would  have  served her  purposes  equally  well. It has  all the  features she  requires of a  documentary poem.  Thematic interest  takes  precedence over  a simple  chronological narrative, there  is  no  single  protagonist, the  natural  landscape  plays  an  important  part,  there is conflict  between  men and between  men and nature, and  there  is a concern  with  the  oral  qualities of the work.  Perhaps most  important is the  statement that  a successful  documentary poem  needs  to  be  based  on  solid  factual  knowledge.
With  this  point  E. J. Pratt  would  have  agreed  wholeheartedly.
Since  his  experience with  "The  Cachalot" in  I 926,  the   composition  of  all Pratt's longer  poems  had  been  preceded  by extensive  research.3 The facts,  or  at least all the important ones, had  to be correct. The  poet  constantly sought  advice from  others  and  would  revise on  their  recommendations. With   Brebeuf and  His Brethren  ( I940)   Pratt immersed   himself  in  the  Jesuit   Relations  and   seems  to have  emerged  convinced   that   the  documents often   spoke   best  for  themselves. When  he  decided  to  write  a  poem  about  the  building of  the  Canadian  Pacific Railway he chose to tell another central  story  of Canadian history.  The  tale  had already been  chronicled  by the  historians  and  the  biographers. Their books were readily  available to Pratt  and  he made  extensive  use of them. His  remarks about Towards  the  Last Spike  in a speech  given  shortly  before  the  publication of  the poem in  I952 contain no surprising news about his methods of research:

I am fully aware  that the historians know much  more about  that  span of I 5 years than  I do, and that  the geologists are more familiar  with the Canadian strata  than I am, and  that  the  Railroad  engineers know  [more]   about  tunneling  and  curves

PRATT

and gradients  than  I ever hope to learn, but in accordance  with my usual methods of writing,  I have gone to these specialists for needed information  besides what  I have learned  in spending four summers in the Rockies and on the Coast.•

The  pages of notes on  history  and  geology that  he took  attest  to the  poet's  effort in mastering the technical side of the subject. Pratt, however,  was not a historian, but  a poet. The desire  to bring  his material to life and  to shape  it in accordance with  his own  design  made as  many  demands on  him  as  the  claims  of  factual accuracy.
When  Pratt chose to write  a poem about  the  building  of the  Canadian Pacific
Railway, he was choosing  to retell a story from  Canadian history  that  had  already been extensively  documented. For sixty-five years biographers and  historians  had produced a  bulk  of  material, a good  deal  of it  of mediocre quality, which  was meted  out  annually to Canadian students. Most  adults  retained little  more  than a vague  outline of the story  and  some of the  names.  Pratt seems to  have  known little  about  the subject before  he  began  work  on  the  poem.  A  marginal note  in one of the earliest  notebooks  shows him in a familiar  Canadian dilemma: "Look up  the  difference between  CN  &P" he scrawled. 5   In  the  early  fifties when  Pratt was  writing  Towards the  Last Spike  the story  of the  railroad was  in  Canadian books and  not  in  Canadian minds.  Over  the  next  twenty-five years  the situation would   change somewhat. Donald  Creighton produced  the  first  volume  of  his biography of Sir John A. Macdonald in 1952 and  the second in 1955· The  interest in  Confederation  which   the  1967  Centennial  generated was  bound, sooner  or later, to focus on Confederation's inevitable partner-the railroad. By the  197o's the  country would  see Pierre Berton  riding  a steam  engine  and  the  phrases  "The National Dream" and  "The Last  Spike"  would  stare  from  Canadian  bookstalls and   television  screens.  All  this  development, however,  was  yet  to  come  when Towards  the  Last Spike  was in the  process of composition.
The  careful  documentary approach Pratt  favoured is evident   right  from  the beginning of  the  poem.  The  sub-title   which  appears in  the  original   edition   of
1952  sets out  the  historical  framework of Towards  the  Last Spike.  It  announces
boldly that  the poem  that  follows is

A Verse-Panorama of the  Struggle  to Build the first Canadian Transcontinental from the Time  of the Proposed Terms of Union  with British Columbia  ( 1870)  to the Hammering of the Last Spike in the Eagle Pass ( 1885).

Such  an  approach may  have  helped  many  readers  who,  unfamiliar with  the out­ line  of  the  events,  might   have  been  puzzled  by  a freer  or  more  revolutionary treatment  of  the  material. But  Pratt was  not  writing  another  textbook   account and  he refused  to spoonfeed his readers.  Some,  but  not  all, of  the  chronological narrative is there.  No time  is lost in explaining who Onderdonk  is. Pratt assumes that  what  the  reader does not  know  he will look up.  He  had  learned from  The

49

PRATT

Titanic, from Brebeuf and His Brethren, and from  Dunkirk  that  the way to treat large-scale adventures  was to concentrate  upon  the dramatic incidents and  prin­ cipal  characters  and  to eliminate  all that  was  not  essential  to  his  view  of  the events and  people involved.6   The eliminated  material  throws into relief  the  parts he chose to retain and both tell a good deal about  his thematic concerns. T awards the Last Spike  is a remarkable  poem for the  way it both  casually  assumes some of its story (much more casually than Brebeuf and His Brethren for instance)  and meticulously records the rest.




AN EXAMINATION OF  THE  Pratt  Papers,  preserved in  Vic­ toria University Library, Toronto, is the natural  starting  place for an examination  of  Pratt's  source  material.  There  in  Box 6  are  two  thick  exercise  books  with manuscript  drafts  and  extensive notes  (Numbers  43 and  44); a  file  with  loose pages torn from an exercise book and  covered with  more draft  passages (45); a third  notebook  written,  for  the  most  part,  in  ink  ( 46) ;  a  corrected  typescript bearing  a  close relation  to  the  published  text  ( 47) ;  an  incomplete  typescript (carbon  copy)  which seems to have served as Pratt's  copy  for  public  readings
( 48) ; and,  lastly, a file containing  several talks or speeches he gave  about  the poem  ( 49). Notebooks 43  and  44 and  loose pages  45  are  early  drafts  closely written  with a dull  pencil. They  are extraordinarily difficult to  read;  in  places, illegible/  Notebook 46, largely in ink, is much  easier to make out. All the  note­ books, however, contain tantalizing information. They  are covered with marginal  notes which reveal the poet's constant concern with accuracy. "Watch chronology"  he put beside an early version of Macdonald's catalogue  of Arctic explorers  ( 44) and against the passage that has Sir John summarizing two centuries of Canadian history (Towards the  Last Spike  [hereafter  TLS], Collected  Poems, p. 362), he wrote:  "look up the date of [Union]  Jack"  (46). The  poet also sought to provide solid factual  bases for his own imaginative  passages. A preliminary  draft  of the section entitled  "The Gathering," in which  Pratt  discussed the  miraculous  con­ tribution  of oatmeal  to the  building of  the  railway,  did  not satisfy him  and  he added  the  note, "put  in  a  little  more  physiology"  ( 44). He  adopted   his  own advice and  the published version had  the liver, the duodenum, the amino  acids. Often,  but  not  always, in  these  early  notebooks  he  wrote  on  the  rectos  and reserved the versos for notes and  for reworking  difficult  passages. On  one  verso he  can  be found  experimenting  with  the  cards  for  the  more  elaborate   poker game of the early drafts  ( 43). The  ideas and  notes he  jotted  down  were often not incorporated into the poem. "What names did  Indians give the  mountains" (43)  and  "George  Brown  was a Scot"  (43)   were matters  he deliberately  chose to neglect.

so

PRATT


The  notes  in  these scribblers also indicate many  of  Pratt's sources.  "Sandford Fleming 113T"  (43)  is a  typical  entry,  and  notebooks  43  and   44  are  full  of references to T., to G. or  M.G., to Bruce  H.,  to  McNaught., and  to  MacBeth. Checking the  manuscript references  has  made  it clear  that   Pratt read  and  took notes from the following  books:
T.    Thompson, Norman  and  J. H. Edgar. Canadian  Railway  Development   from the Earliest Times. Toronto: Macmillan,  1933·
G. or M.G.    Gibbon, John  Murray.  Steel of Empire, the Romantic History of the Canadian  Pacific, the  North  West  Passage of Today. Indianapolis & New York: Bobbs-Merrill, 1935.
Bruce H.    Hutchison, Bruce. The  Fraser. Toronto: Clarke, Irwin, 1950. McNaught.	Macnaughton, John.   Lord  Strathcona.  Makers  of  Canada   Series,
Anniversary  Edition.  London  & Toronto: Oxford,  1926.
MacBeth     MacBeth,  R.  G.  The   Romance   of the  Canadian   Pacific  Railway.
Toronto: Ryerson, 1924.

There are other  books that  Pratt must  have  used though the  references  to them in  the  notebooks  are  less direct. His  portrait of Van  Horne (TLS, pp.  364-65) contains childhood biographical details reported  only in Walter Vaughan's Sir William  Van  Horne. This  book,  originally  published  in  1g2o,  was  re-issued  by the  Oxford  University Press  in  1g26  as  part  of the  popular Makers  of  Canada Series and  was bound  together with  Macnaughton's Lord Strathcona. Like  most of  these  books,  the  Vaughan was  in  the  Victoria  College  Library and   perhaps even among  Pratt's own books.
Howard  Angus   Kennedy's  pamphlets  for   the   Ryerson    Canadian   History Readers Series,  Origin  of the  Canadian  Pacific Railway  and   Lo·rd Strathcona (both Toronto, 1gog)   are  also likely sources.  These  slender   pamphlets rely  for their  information on other  books and  fill out  the facts with  national pieties. They were  miserable  histories,  but  there   was  something   in  the  first  of  them   which appears to  have  interested Pratt.  Praising the  leaders  of  the  C.P.R. enterprise, Kennedy writes:
Every one of them was a genius in his own way. Stephen  and  Smith,  full of the faith  that  "removes  mountains," had  to raise the money when  that  was nearly as hard as squeezing blood out of a stone.8

Opposite the  poetic  description of Smith   (TLS, pp.  362-63), Pratt wrote  in  an early  notebook:  "blood  from  stone  why  not?  the  myth?"  ( 43). "Blood   from stone" does not  appear in the  poem,  but  the  image  of "water from  rock"   (as  a sign of Smith's miraculous powers)  does, and  the two phrases  are sufficiently  close to suggest a connection. "The faith  that  removes mountains" as well as the  possi­ bility for a  pun  may  have  acted  obliquely  on  Pratt  to produce the  Atlas  analogy  for Stephen (TLS, p. 363).

PRATT

It is also likely  that  Pratt   read  general   histories  like  Dominion  of  the  North
( I944)  by  Donald Creighton, his colleague  at  the  University of  Toronto. The first volume  of Creighton's biography of Sir John A. Macdonald, The  Young Politician (I 952), appeared too late to have  influenced Pratt in his characteriza­ tion of the Prime  Minister though  it is possible that  he heard  oral  progress  reports  from  the author. Sandra Djwa  in her fine study,  E. ]. Pratt-The Evolutionary Vision,  suggests  that  Towards  the  Last  Spike  reflects  the  influences   of  Harold Innis's  writing.9  She  may be right  in saying  that  Innis's  communications theories
-especially in Empire and Communications ( I9SO)  and  Bias of Communication ( I 95 I) -shaped  Pratt's thinking, but  there  is nothing in the  manuscripts or in the  finished  poem  to suggest  that   the  poet  regarded  the  arid,   highly  statistical A History of The  Canadian Pacific Railway  (I 924)   as a valuable source  for  the story he was telling.  The  books of Gibbon  and  MacBeth were  more  congenial to him than  was the Innis  history. They,  as their  very titles indicate, emphasized the romantic adventure  of  the  undertaking and   not   the   details   of  economic  de­ velopment.
If one examines  Pratt's use of the material that  he culled  from  these secondary sources  some  interesting points  are  revealed.   Descriptions of  the  landscape are sometimes  unexpectedly close to the  history  text.  In  the  part  of the  poem  about railway  construction on the  prairies  these lines occur:
The grass that fed the buffalo was turned over, The black alluvial mould laid bare, the bed Levelled and scraped.
(TLS, p. 368)

In  Sir William  Van  Horne Vaughan had  written:

Following upon  the heels of the locating  parties  came  the  ploughs  and  scrapers, tearing  into the old buffalo land, moulding it and  branding  it to the new bondage of progress.10
Following Vaughan, as he so often did, R. G. MacBeth provided this description: The  ploughs and scrapers of this great  constructive  army  were making  their  way
through  the buffalo wallows and casting up a high grade  where the Red River cart had worn deep ruts in the rich dark mould.11

Quite deliberately, then,  in this picture  of the  prairies  Pratt is reporting what  he read.  Of  course,  his natural  descriptions are  not  always  like  this:   some  of  the finest  passages  in  Towards  the  Last  Spike  are   those   which   portray  the   Pre­ Cambrian Shield  as a great  lizard,  and  for these  the sources  provide  no  parallels.  Such  writing is the  result  of  Pratt's imaginative grasp   of  Canadian  geological history.  The  image  of the  reptile  is successful  partly  because  it is  flexible  enough  to  survive   extensive   development. The   poet  devotes   the   whole  of  the  section entitled  "Number Two" to the lizard,  returns to her  in  "Dynamite  on the  North

52

PRATT


Shore," and  has  her  sound  the  closing notes of the  poem.  The  initial  description is sufficiently  broad in  its outlines   (the  lizard  is ageless, sprawling, strong)  that Pratt's emphasis can  fall on different  aspects as it suits  his needs and  the  personi­ fication  is never  forced. Thus, in one place,  he can suggest  that  she is something
of a curiosity,  an  anachronistic dinosaur "Top-heavy with  accumulated power  I
And  overgrown survival without  function" ( T LS, p. 370)   and  in another  place insist  on  all  her  primeval terror-"She'd claim  their   bones  as  her  possessive
right  I And  wrap   them  cold  in  her  pre-Cambrian folds"   ( T LS,  p.  37 g) . The
description of the  dynamiting of the  North  Shore  of Lake  Superior begins  in  an almost  playful   way  as  the  poet  adopts  the  point  of  view  of  the  lizard.  She  is puzzled  and   irritated by  the  "horde of  bipeds" crawling over   her  with   their unfamiliar accessories :
They tickled her with shovels, dug pickaxes
Into  her scales and got under her skin,
And potted holes in her with drills and filled
Them  up with what looked like fine grains of sand, Black sand.
(TLS, p. 370)

A prolonged passage  like this runs the risk of diminishing the  reptile's  stature and so the  poet moved  away  from  the actual  events of the  narrative to emphasize  the creature's noble  past  and  her  endurance of natural forces  from  the  Ice  Age  on.
It wasn't noise that bothered her,
For thunder she was used to from her cradle­ The  head-push  and nose-blowing of the ice, The height and pressure of its body: these
Like winds native to clime and habitat
Had served only to lull her drowsing coils.

(TLS, p. 370)

It is the lizard's strength and  immense  geological age that  make  her so formidable an  enemy  in  the  poem's  conflict  between  small  man  and  intractable nature.
A second  reason  for the success of the image  of the lizard  is as important as the first and  leads  us back to the documentary qualities of the  poem.  It is just because the  other   natural  descriptions of  Towards  the  Last  Spike  are  largely   realistic and  familiar that   the  reptilian landscape is able  to  command such  a  dominant position  in  the  natural imagery   of  the  poem.  Every   Canadian  recognizes  the prairies   of  Towards the  Last  Spike.  The   mountains of  the  section   "Number Three" with  their  "terror and  beauty" are equally  familiar. True, the  controlling metaphor for  this  passage  is  a  powerful   and   resonant   phrase   of  Sir  Edward Blake's  ("That sea  of  mountains"), but  even  a  Canadian whose  experience of the  Rocky  Mountains is limited   to  a  winter   landscape on  a  kitchen   calendar should  find nothing strange in such a description. Nothing, not even the increased

53

PRATT

personification  of "Internecine Strife," rivals  the  scale  of the  lizard  image.  Pratt quite  wisely saw that  the importance of the latter would  be lost if combined with an elaborate array  of other  monsters  and so he always framed his fearsome  reptile within  a recognizable and  well-documented Canadian landscape.
Pratt must  have  been  delighted   when  he  discovered   historical facts  that   also rang  true  imaginatively. Both  Vaughan and  MacBeth reported that  Van  Horne arrived   in  Winnipeg on  December 3I,I 88I when   the   temperature  was  forty degrees  below  zero.  Pratt   records  these  circumstances of  time  and  temperature in  the stage  instructions that  head  Van  Horne's soliloquy  in  Towards  the  Last Spike  (pp.  364-66)  and  then  goes on  to  develop  their  imaginative  possibilities. MacBeth   had  commented  on  the  sense of  exhilaration  that   such  temperatures can  produce and  there  is  just such  a  feeling  in  the  Pratt passage.  When   Van Horne   scrapes  the  deep  frost  off  the  window   and   surveys  the   winter   sky,  he experiences   the  same   challenge   of  the  West   as  Macdonald  did  in  a  parallel section  (TLS, pp.  349-50)  but  with  none  of the  Prime Minister's premonitions of disaster.  Van  Horne sees nature at  her  most  unbending but  is confident in his ability to command the future passage of events.  He is a man  charged with  energy, caught  for one moment on the eve of a new year, on the eve of a great  adventure.
Many  of the stories of Towards the Last Spike are  recounted by every historian
of the  C.P.R. All of them  explain  the  origin  of the  name "Craigellachie" which Pratt footnotes  on  p.  348;   all  produce   the  famous   Opposition  phrase   that   the railway  would  not  pay for  its own  axle grease  (TLS, p. 356); and  all  describe the scene of the hammering of the last spike  (TLS, pp. 386-87). Pratt could  have got from  almost  any  of them  Van  Horne's order  that  the  last  spike  be  iron  and his one sentence speech at the ceremony  in the  mountains in which  he is supposed to have said,  "All  I can say is that  the  work  has  been  well  done  in  every  way." Pratt's version of this appears in the finished  poem  as

It ended  when Van Horne  spat  out some phlegm
To  ratify the tumult with "Well  Done" Tied  in a knot of monosyllables.
(TLS, p. 388)


IN ALL  THESE CASES the  poem  adheres closely to documented events,  but  sometimes  the  treatment of history  could  be  a  good  deal  freer.  The section  entitled  "Suspense in  the  Montreal Board  Room" is a  good  example of
this. In a talk about the poem, Pratt explained that  the  passage  had  originated in a passing reference  of Van  Horne's "to  their  school  boy  antics  in  flinging  chairs around," a reference  which  he had  elaborated in  the  poem.12  Besides a draft  of this section  in  notebook  46  Pratt wrote  "ecstasy" and   "Taken from   MacBeth, Change a  little." MacBeth   does  record   the  episode   and   so  do  Vaughan and

54

PRAIT


Gibbon. All  speak  of  the  relief  experienced  by  Angus  and  Van   Horne   on  the receipt  of Stephen's London cable  and  of their  subsequent high  spirits  but  two of their  descriptions do  not  extend  beyond  a  picture  of flying  books and  chairs. Gibbon  is the  only one to mention  the  clerks who waited  outside  the  board  room to collect the sketches  Van  Horne  doodled  during meetings.  It is Thompson and Edgar's  account  on   page   16o  of  Canadian   Railway   Development    from  the Earliest Times that   provides  the  closest  parallel  to  Pratt's passage  though  they place  the  event  in  a different context.  According to  them,  the  railway  sponsors were  in  Ottawa  awaiting a  government  decision  and   when   the  guarantee  of money  came  through their  exuberance overflowed:

At last the message came!  "I think  we waited  until  the  Minister  left  the  room," said Van  Horne,  "I believe we had  that  much sanity left us and  then  we began. We tossed up chairs to the ceiling; we trampled  on desks; I believe we danced  on tables. I do not fancy  any of us knows now what occurred,  and  no one who  was there can ever remember anything except loud yells of joy and  the sound of things breaking."

Van  Horne's comments found  their  way into the  poem  in

Two chairs flew to the ceiling -one retired, The other roosted on the chandelier.


and  in
 

He leaped and turned a cartwheel on the table, Driving heel sparables into the oak,
Came down to teach his partner  a Dutch dance;

(TLS, p. 385)


It is obvious  that  Pratt's picture of  the  scene  in  the  Montreal board   room  is a composite  one.  He  cites  MacBeth in  a  draft, he  adapts Gibbon's amazed and waiting  clerks into  an  "immobilized messenger," and  he draws  on  all of the sug­ gestions of the account in Thompson and  Edgar's book. As he said,  he did elabor­ ate  the story  and  there  is a good  deal  that  is pure high-spirited  Pratt-the  vivid descriptions of the  waiting  Van  Horne and  Angus,  the  maps, blotting paper  and  inkstand thrown through the  window,  and  then  Van  Horne  turning cartwheels and  stuffing  a Grand Trunk folder  down  his colleague's trousers.  The facts of the record  are  there  in  Pratt's passage  but  his exaggeration  of them  makes  the  story loom  larger  in  the  poem  than  it does in the  histories. "Suspense in the  Montreal Board  Room" becomes  another way of  characterizing  Van  Horne -of demon­ strating his tremendous natural vitality -and  it  provides  a  dramatic climax  for one  important side  of  the  Railway  story,  the  achievement of  financial security.
Pratt relied  more  heavily  on some of his sources than  on others.  Gibbon's Steel
of Empire  seems to have  been  one of his favourites probably because  it contains a good  deal of information that  does not appear elsewhere  and  because  it  incor-

55

PRATT

porates  many  first-hand  accounts.   Many  of  the  details   of  the  Western   surveys could  have  come  from  Gibbon. The  picture   of Rogers  certainly did.13   Steel  of Empire is the  only source  which  tells that  Smith  bent  the  first spike  of the  cere­ mony  which  marked   the  completion of the  railroad-a  fact  which  Pratt  con­ siders  important enough  to include  in  his own  poem.  Where statistics  differ  he often  adopts Gibbon's estimate, as  with  the  number of  tracks   and  locomotives  sunk in the muskeg.14  Perhaps the most interesting evidence  for  his use of Gibbon  is the vivid description of the mule  which  is closely based  on a  detailed  first-hand account of the  construction. Steel of  Empire  quotes  from  a  man  called  Stephen Pardoe:

The  horses knew as well as the foreman  when  'unhook' should  be called,  while each  mule was a foreman  unto itself in that  respect. A minute  or  two before  the expiration  of each five-hour of work one wise old mule would bray, and from  that time  until  'unhook'   the  air  was  hideous  with  fearful   sounds.  Stolidly  patient, incredibly strong, endu<;ed with infinite and  devilish vice, no mule would move one second before 'hook up' sounded or one second after  the correct  time for 'unhook' to be called had passed.15

In Towards the Last Spike the idea of mule unionization is Pratt's, as is the happy thought of the animals unhinging their  joints and  unhitching their  tendons, but  all else is documented history  which  the  poet is content to  retell.
Pratt's research  for Towards the Last Spike also led him  into  the study  of some
primary documents. The  Debates of  the  House  of Commons were  available at the library  and  his scribblers  reveal  that  he consulted   them. In  exercise  book  43 he  made  some  notes  on  Blake's  April  15th,  16th,  188o  speech  and  in  44  there are  several   pages  of  notes  on  Blake's  Pacific  Scandal speech   in  the  House   of Commons, November 3rd and  4th,  1873. The  latter he may  have  known  through a small  pamphlet entitled  Three Speeches by t'he Hon. Edward  Blake, Q.C., M.P. on the  Pacific Scandal.1:6 It  contains  the  speeches  in  Bowmanville  (August   26,
1873)  and  London  (August  28,  1873)   to  which  Pratt's notes  also  make  refer­ ence. Although he read  the  historical  record  carefully, Pratt chose  to  handle the texts  of the speeches  freely in  his poem.  In  Towards  the  Last  Spike  he  is more concerned with  the  problems  of rhetoric  that  the  speeches  raise  than  he  is with their  actual  statements. His  typical   approach  is  to  describe   the  effect  of  the speech  on  its audience, as in  the  lines  describing the  members of  the  House  of Commons listening  to Sir Edward Blake:

The minds went first; the bodies sagged; the necks
Curved on the benches and the legs sprawled out.

(TLS, p. 361)

as well as to insist on the  power  of some of the  most  well-known phrases.  Out  of the  parliamentary record  he picks words  like Sir  John's "I throw  myself on  this

s6

PRATT


House;   I  throw  myself  on  this  country;   I  throw  myself  on   posterity	" (November  3, I 873), and  his "from sea to sea" or Blake's "to  build a road over that sea of mountains" and "lost in the gorges of the Fraser"  (April  IS-I6,  I88o), and  has  them  carry  the  force  of  the  whole  speech.  There   is  nothing  about stripping  the  Knights  of Malta   (TLS, p. 354)  in  Blake's  I873  address  to the House. This  phrase  enters  the  poem because  Pratt  read  the  politician's  speech, grasped  the  progression of the thought,  and  then imagined  its movement  again in different  terms. The  "Knights" are also a remnant  of an extended  passage in an early draft  which will be examined  later.
Pratt  found  his source  material  all around  him.  He  was fond  of  consulting people he knew when he ran up against a technical problem. He tells of asking nutritionists  and  physiologists about  the exact effect of oatmeal  on  the digestive system (for the lines in the poem on pages 347-48)  and asking Scots and  doctors about  the effect of alcohol on a melancholy man  (for  the treatment of Sir John A. Macdonald, pages 383-84). A "physical instructor  and  coach"  provided  him with the proper terms for the tug-of-war in Sir John's  nightmare  (TLS, p. 349). George  Douglas,  Professor  of  Geology at  Dalhousie  University,  furnished  him with some of the geological information  he needed, as did an engineer who worked on the Connaught Tunnel in the 192o's.17  In  general, his geological sources are harder to trace than his historical ones. He may have read full-length first-hand accounts of the early surveying  parties, such as George Monro  Grant's  Ocean  to Ocean  (I 872), though  the scribblers  provide no direct  evidence for  this.  Note­ book 44 includes  the  only full geological notes which  sort out  some  names  and classification of rocks and  record the heights of mountain  ranges. The  muskeg is treated  in some detail and a quotation  from the Winnipeg Tribune  appears  to be the source for the  treacherously  inviting  grass of the  muskeg  and  especially for the lines

And herds of cariboo had left their hoof-marks, Betraying visual solidity.
(TLS, p. 379)1s




SINCE PRATT SAW  MUCH  OF  THE  STORY of the  building  of the railroad in terms of five individuals, the reading of biographies was an impor­ tant  area of his research. Once  this was accomplished, as a poet, he had  to take documented  historical figures and  make  them  into living men.  This  was  partly accomplished  by  using  "soliloquies"  for  Van  Home   and   Macdonald  and   by dramatically  recreating  the  parliamentary speeches of the  Han.  Edward  Blake. Since the poem is a narrative and not a dramatic  one, however, Pratt  was always in and out of the minds of his principal  human subjects rather  than  simply pro-


57

PRATT

jecting  their  voices.  Neither  story  nor  personality was  the  end  of  his  tale:   he needed  to present  both  in terms of the shaping themes  of his poem. To  do this, he apparently decided   to  treat  his  biographical research   on  William Van   Horne, Donald Smith, George  Stephen, Edward Blake, and  John A. Macdonald in quite different ways.
Some of the  portraits of Towards the Last Spike, like that  of Van  Horne, and,
to a lesser extent, that  of Smith, are  careful  reconstructions. The lives of the  two men were well-documented and  Pratt had  read  the  full-length biographies which appeared inI 926  in  the  Makers of Canada series  (Macnaughton, Lord Strath­ cona; Vaughan, Sir William Van  Horne)  as  well  as  the  character sketches  in the  general  histories.  In  the  treatment of both  men  Pratt adhered closely to  his sources.  Not  only  did  he  incorporate many   of  the  facts  that  the  biographies reported, he also followed  them  in  their  interpretation of  the  character. In  the case of Van  Horne, all the early material on childhood (TLS, pp.  364-65)  came from  Vaughan. So too did  the facts  that  the  railway  manager flourished  on  only a  few  hours  of sleep  (Vaughan, pp.  83-84; TLS, p.  364)   and   was  fearless  of physical  danger. Vaughan reported that   he  would   cross  unsteady trestles  from which  men  had  fallen  to their deaths  a few days  before  (Vaughan, p.  I I I; TLS, p. 372). MacBeth wrote  that  Van  Horne  hated  incompetence and  that  he was a practical joker  (MacBeth, p. 78). All the  sources  agreed  that  the  manager was a dynamo (MacBeth, p. 78), a whirlwind of activity   (Vaughan, pp.  83-84), an adventurous pioneer,  and  something of a  visionary   (MacBeth, p. 77) . He  even had  a reputation among  railway  workers  and  in  government circles  as a  kind  of superman (Vaughan, p. 115). Pratt's Van  Horne incorporates all these  qualities though  the  poet, of course, could  work with  broader strokes  than the  biographer. He  could  condense   a  long  anecdote into  two  lines-the  boss  who  fired  Van Home when  he received  a shock from  the  boy's  buried  ground wire  (Vaughan, pp.  I6-I7; TLS, p. 364)  -rearrange the  chronology of  youth,   embroider the schoolboy  caricatures (TLS, pp.  364-65), and  dramatize his subject's thoughts. He could also insist on doing something that  good biographers do only cautiously: juxtapose past and  future for the purpose  of interpretation:

He would come home, his pockets stuffed with fossils­ Crinoids and fish-teeth-and his tongue jabbering
Of the earth's crust before the birth of life, Prophetic of the days when he would dig Into Laurentian rock.
(TLS, p. 364)

Pratt was able  to  portray Van  Horne very  much  as his sources  had  because  the outstanding aspects  of the man  which  they had  noted   (the  miraculous quality of his achievements, his almost supernatural powers  in confounding time  and  space) were  the  very qualities that  appealed to the  poet.  Van  Horne's place  in  a  poem

PRATT


about  the superiority  of vision and dream to logic and  argument  was an  obvious one.
Like Van  Horne,  Donald  Smith  is introduced  into  the  poem  in  a  detailed
biographical  passage. The facts, from the Highland  ancestry to the melon-growing in Labrador, come from  Macnaughton. Howard  Angus  Kennedy's  Lord  Strath­ cona added  a few more  touches.19   In  the Smith  portrait,  however, Pratt's  selec­ tivity is more obvious. His Smith has the heroic character  of a man  who "fought  the climate like a weathered  yak /And conquered it"  (TLS, p. 363). There  are no weaknesses in  him,  and  Pratt  says nothing  about  the  early  suffering  from snowblindness which caused Smith trouble with Hudson's Bay officials and almost led to his resignation  (Kennedy,  p. 6). Moreover, the  poet makes no mention  of the well-documented  coolness between Smith and  Macdonald, a result of Smith's  action during  the Pacific Scandal  when he spoke  against  the government  (Mac­  naughton, pp.  185-86).  Macdonald's grudge  was  long-held  and  it  even  pre­ vented Smith's  direct  participation in the early  meetings  between  the Canadian government  and  the  businessman  sponsors  of the  railway  scheme. Pratt's  poem conveys rather  the opposite -Smith is the first man  to whom  Macdonald turns when the Londoners  desert  him  (TLS, p. 362).  Towards  the Last Spike, then, rounds off the edges of Smith and simplifies his character. The  poet does give two vivid pictures of the man -one in his early days in Labrador  and  the other  on the  famous  occasion  of the  hammering  of the  last spike -but  he  is as much interested  in Smith's  mythic  qualities  as he is in the  facts  of life. Smith  as "a miracle  on legs" is a  line of thought  that  may  have  been  suggested  by  Pratt's  sources. We have already  noted the connection  between Kennedy's  "blood  from stone"  and  Pratt's  "water   from  rock,"  and  Gibbon  too  referred  to  Smith  as Moses.20    The  development   of this  idea,  though,  along  with  the  extraordinary alchemical  powers given to Smith,  are all Pratt's  own creation.
The  treatment of George Stephen  is even freer than  that  of Smith.  This  was perhaps  because there  was not such a wealth of biographical   material  available on Stephen   (Volume  I of Heather  Gilbert's  Awakening Continent-The  Life of  Lord Mount  Stephen,  published  by the  Aberdeen  University  Press, did  not appear  until  1965)  and  perhaps  because the life of the stalwart  banker  did  not lend itself to such  vivid treatment as that  of his quicksilver cousin. At any  rate, Pratt's  portrait  is a sketchy one which reveals the biographical  facts incidentally as they relate  to the  theme  and  story of the  poem. Stephen's  Banffshire origins and his early days as a draper's  apprentice  emerge in Macdonald's fear of a man "Tongue-trained on Aberdonian  bargain-counters." The  "Banffshire-cradled r," which distinguishes Stephen's speech, is as irritating  to the Prime  Minister as the businessman's skill in close, logical argument  (TLS, p. 377). Like Pratt's  Smith, his Stephen  is a heroic figure, a "banking  metallurgist"  with  mythic dimensions. His wizardry with stocks and bonds turns them into minerals and mountains  and,

59

PRATT

with a neat  reference to the  peak in the  Rockies named  after  Mount  Stephen, Pratt claims of the man:
He grew so Atlas-strong that he could carry
A mountain like a namesake on his shoulders.
(TLS, p. g6g)

Pratt  does not disturb  the simple outlines of his figure by incorporating Stephen's initial reluctance to become involved, his constant  caution,  and his frequent depressions when business troubles would cause him  to dissolve into  tears.21   For the same reason he eliminated from the railway story the tangle of rival syndicates and  the financial  details of the various contracts.  He  had  to tell a coherent  tale and one that  concentrated  on the most dramatic points. All his efforts in  psycho­ logical understanding went into Macdonald  and  Van  Horne  and  the supporting  characters  had to be crisp and clear in, their outlines.
With Edward  Blake and John A. Macdonald, only a few of the recorded biographical facts were of interest to the poet. Blake, in any case, had been largely neglected  by  the  historians  and  there  was little  material   available  apart   from thumbnail  sketches in general  texts and  biographical   dictionaries.  Some  of the few notes Pratt  took on Blake ("prodigious  memory,"  notebook  44)  suggest that
he may have looked at J. C. Dent's  The  Canadian  Portrait  Gallery  (Toronto:
John  B. Magurn, 188o). Other  notes he  jotted  down  were facts  widely known about  Blake.  "Put   in  Blake's  respect  for  sequence"    (notebook   43)   probably originates in the frequent observation that the politician dealt with matters in exhaustive detail. This also seems to have put the idea of Euclid into Pratt's mind, for an early draft  describing Blake's rhetoric reads:
A fact annointed with Euclidean unction, He could deliver as a gospel truth.
(notebook 43)
Beside another  early  draft  of the  section  which  became  in  the  finished  poem
"Blake in Mood,"  Pratt  wrote "Euclidean mind" (notebook  44).
The sources available on Macdonald's life were much  more extensive. ByI 950 a good deal  had  been written  about  Canada's first Prime  Minister.  Many,  but not all, of the early books and pamphlets  were essentially appreciations,  and  this laudatory  tone was generally carried over into  productions  of the next century.22
The  treatment  was almost  uniformly  formal  with  the  occasional  chapter   that reported,  with  varying  degrees of frankness,  the  details  of  Macdonald's  private life.23  Pratt's  portrait  was quite  different. He seems to have  been under  no illu­ sions about  Macdonald's pragmatism.  In one of his notebooks he wrote down the quotation,  "He  recognized the truth  that  there was a time to oppose and  a time to accept"  (44), and,  in the  poem, dwells on  the  nickname  "Old  Tomorrow." His Macdonald, however, emerges as an intensely sympathetic figure. The  situa-

6o

PRATT

tions in  which  the  Prime  Minister  is viewed  are  almost  always  intimate   (tor­ mented by insomnia, snuggled into the sheets, sunk in depression)  but the picture that  is produced  is that  of a hero whose only rival in the  railway story  is Van Home.
Even Macdonald's most notorious weakness, his fondness for alcohol was some­
how connected  with his genius. In  his treatment of the two politicians Pratt  was not interested  in an objective  presentation  of the facts. His Blake is a caricature and much  more of a villain than the man of the history books. His Macdonald is the supreme  politician -long-sighted and  nimble on his feet. This free handling of the two leaders allowed Pratt's  themes to be developed in terms  of opposites.
Against an  early draft  of the Blake-Macdonald  debate  in  notebook  43, Pratt
wrote in the margin  "logic versus vision," and  this is the  most important of his oppositions. It is bolstered, however, by a whole series of related contrasts-close argument  vs. magic  phrases or metaphors; slow or dragging  time  vs. quickened tempo and musical command; the ascetic, the plain, the home-grown  vs. the luxurious, the romantic,  the foreign.
This last contrast  is perhaps  even more evident in the drafts of the  poem than it is in the final version. In a long passage that  survives all the way to typescript
48, there is a portrait  of Blake at the time of the Pacific Scandal  which seems to have come entirely from Pratt's imagination.24 The  politician is introduced  as he sits in  an  Ottawa  restaurant. The  poet  tells us that  Blake  dislikes eating  out because the meals served are  not plain enough  for his taste. Hors  d'oeuvres,  he feels, are  no food for an  honest man,  and  he suspects seasonings and  spices are only used to disguise poorly-prepared  meals. Alcohol holds no temptations  for him:

For him, as well the port had no seductions. His appetite was in his moral sense.

When his dinner  arrives he discovers that  it is bad and,  after  chastising the chef, he hastens back to the House of Commons with his exhibits to confront "the Management." The  dirty-green sardines in their rusty can  (Exhibit  A)  and  the greasy herrings  (Exhibit  B and  perhaps  there  because of a  marginal  phrase  in notebook  44 -"Put  in somewhere  how Blake detested  oil ... ") are  revolting specimens.

But these were not the things concerned him most
Malodorous with the whiff of barnacles
Staled by the Firth of Clyde they were but entrees
Brought over in the busy Allan holds
And being fish they could have suffered sea-change.

It is Exhibit C, an omelette smothered in parsley and mushroom sauce, that  really arouses his ire. Its greenish tinge proclaims it could not be an honest egg and when Blake lets it drop, it bounces upon the floor.

61

PRATT

This  hardness  had a cause:  it was its age.
The  orator raised his voice: 	"Some  months have  passed
Since it was cooked.    Why this delay? 	It was
The trick of Prorogation of the House Designed  to calcify the egg, depress The fumes, desensitize the public  nose;
Had  long been prearranged and  failed  its purpose
For no deodorant in art or nature
Could  offset this.' He passed the dish around: The smell was hybrid,  with a foreign  air
As from Chicago, a domestic  air
As from  the stuffy steamship offices
Of Montreal, and something that  defied
ABa s-.--WS.a -OOn.-bad aid-tfte..@ g-?   The membranes find  the hen Who owned  the hen?    Where  did it roost or nest?    that  laid  this egg Who  brought  the egg in from the barn?   Who  cooked it?
Whatever corn it had mixed with oats
The hen had  picked up from a Yankee  stable.

The  connections between the   rotten  egg  and  the   Pacific Scandal  are   clear though most  readers would  probably admit that the  conceits are  strained and  that Pratt did  well to leave  the  passage out.  Nevertheless, the  early  version  is  interest­ ing.  Its  broad humour and the  high  spirits  suggest  affinities with  the extravaganza "The Witches' Brew" and   remind us that, right from the  beginning, Pratt con­ ceived   the   railway story   with   strong comic   elements.  Furthermore,  though  he scrapped his  early  description of  Blake,  he  incorporated  some   of  its  suggestions into  the  revisions and  when  he talked about  the  poem at  public readings, he  con­ tinued to  think about it  in  terms of  his  original conception.25   "The  Ministry of Smells" and the lines -
He told the sniffing Commons that  a sense Keener  than  smell or taste must be invoked To get the odour
(TLS, p. 354)

-that we find in the finished  version  are obvious remnants of the  "bad omelette" passage. Knowing the  drafts also  restores to  the  final  lines  of  this  section  some  of their  intended force. The picture of Sir  John holding his  nose  (TLS, p. 355) is a more comprehensible one   in  its  original context  of  the   reeking parliamentary
chamber
someone opened  a window
The air was fetid for the omelette
Itself, feeling its stir of molecules
Had  changed  to sulphurated hydrogen
(Box 6, no. 46)

than it is when it follows  the  description of dragging time and sleeping members.

PRATT



EALLY, THE  DRAFT PASSAGE provides  a  detailed picture  of Blake of which  only the outlines  are retained in the final version.  In  both,  Blake's eating preferences are  taken  as signs of his personality  and  political-moral stance. His longing  for  plain  food  at  the  restaurant (which  is evident  in  notebook  46) or his opinion that  "A meal was meant by nature  for nutrition -" ( T LS, p. 354) explains  not  just his censure  of luxurious luncheons but  the  solid  factual content of his substantial speeches  and  his contempt for the expansive  free-ranging mind. Macdonald is obviously  the  man  who lets his thoughts

Roam, like a goblet up before the light To bask in natural  colour, or by whim Of its own choice to sway luxuriously In tantalizing  arcs before the nostrils.

(TLS, p. 354)

And  Blake  has  no  use  for  such  dreamers.26   Their   moving  eloquence is equally foreign  to him,  for  his speeches  are  "massive  in design"  (TLS, p. 360)   and  lose their  listeners  in excessive detail.  Sometimes,  however,  Blake stumbles on a magic phrase  and  then  Macdonald fears  the  consequences.  In  Towards the  Last Spike the  power  of the  right  words  is real.  Words  can  make  mountains into  seas  and they  can  threaten to decide  the  question  of railway  subsidies  by transporting the Commons to a dangerous mountain ledge  and  leaving  them  shivering  below  an avalanche (TLS, p. 360).
Successful  communication was, of course,  an  old  Pratt theme. The   power  of
the  female  ape  in  "The Great   Feud" sprang from  her  ability   to  command a response in her audience:

She spoke:  and every throat and every lung
Of herbivore and carnivore
In volleying symphonic roar
Rang with persuasion of her tongue.

(Collected  Poems, p. 162)

In Towards the Last Spike Pratt portrays  the building  of the  railway  as a struggle
"Against two fortresses: the mind,  the rock"  (T LS, p. 37 2 ) , and  of these two  jobs

The moulding of men's minds was harder far
Than  moulding of the steel and prior to it.

(T LS, p. 358)

The  tools for moulding men's  minds  are words, and  so the  heroes  of Pratt's poem are  not  only  visionaries  but  also individuals who  can  convince  others  that   their dreams can  be transformed into  reality.  Van  Horne  is a man  of practical affairs

63

PRATT

whose job is to fight the rock and  direct the laying of the steel, but  he is also a dreamer  and a man who "loved to work on shadows"  (TLS, p. 364). When  he surveys the sky in Winnipeg, he knows that  the task ahead  of him can  be accom­ plished; it is the sceptics, not the dreamers,  who are insane, he thinks. In  Mont­  real he presents his plans with such energy and  daring  that  the financiers forget their  doubts,  throw  in their  lot with  him,  and  approve  his  grand  scheme.  Like Van Horne, Macdonald is also a dreamer; and he has an even bigger audience  to persuade-not just a board, but a country.
The  Pratt  Papers suggest that  it was this idea  of two visionaries that  was the starting  point of Towards the Last Spike. The exact order of the poem's composi­ tion is difficult to determine,  but it appears  from  notebook  43  that  Pratt  began writing  with  a  passage about  two  men sweeping  the  sky with  telescopes. This symmetry is preserved in the published version with  the  two  "soliloquies"-Sir John  surveying the sky with a telescope and  Van  Horne  looking at  the stars­ though  there, since the passages are separated,  Pratt  seems to feel that  the  con­ nections between the two men have to be expressed  through  a direct  comparison
( T LS, p. 365). An interesting direction  the poem could have taken  is illustrated
by a page in notebook 43 headed:

[one illegible line]
Two people looking at the stars
Two farmers looking at the market train.

Draft  titles for the first section of the  poem continue  this idea.  In scribblers  43,
44  and  46  Pratt   headed  the  beginning  of  the  poem  "Star   Gazers  and  Land Surveyors" and 44 also has the suggestive alternative  title "Land  and  Mind Surveyors."  So, right  from  the  start,  Pratt   had  made  the  connection   between visions of the future and telescopes and between the comparable activities of land and  mind surveying. He had decided on his shaping  theme  and  it was in terms of that theme that he would see the principal  characters  and events of the railway story. Sometimes, as in the case of Van Horne,  Pratt's biographical  and  historical sources would suggest the same interpretation of the facts, and  the  poet carried on where  they  left off. On  other  occasions, as in  the  descriptions  of Blake and Macdonald, the  documented  material  had  to  be  more  freely  treated.  In  these sections and  in the parts of the poem about  public opinion  on the  railway issue, Pratt  developed  his picture with  broad  imaginative  strokes. It  is clear  that  the strongest influence on these "logic vs. vision" passages was not carefully researched material but the religious parallels and the Biblical echoes that sprang  naturally  to Pratt's  mind.  The  struggle  between those who  believe in  the  railway  and  those who do not is like the opposition between St. Paul and  Doubting  Thomas  (T LS, p. 346) ; laying the line across the barren  prairie  is an act of faith  in a different future  (TLS, p. 368); and  Sir  John's  "From   sea  to sea"  is a  Biblical  phrase

PRATT


confronting Blake's  pagan one  (T LS,  p. 36o) . The  Bible is full of visionaries  or dreamers as a line in an early  draft  of the beginning  of the  poem  reminds  us. Joel
11:  28 is rewritten as  Pratt describes  the  expanding country straining into   the future-"How what  the young men saw in vision what   I The  old had  dreamed"
(notebook 43) .
The idea  of  the  visionary,  or  what  Sandra Djwa,  who  explains  Towards  the Last Spike in terms ofT. C. Smut's concept  of holism, calls the idea of Personality, is  obviously  at  the  centre of  the  poem,  but   there   are   also  other   imaginative organizing principles at  work.  Perhaps the most important of these is the  musical theme  which  Professor  Djwa traces  from  the  note  hard   to  catch  to  the  swelling symphony.27   She  may  well  be  right  that   Pratt is picking   up  a  line  of  imagery already  evident in Smut's writing  but  it is interesting to note  that  Sir  John as a maestro  on a podium may  have  been derived  from so simple  a source  as a  nine­ teenth-century cartoon entitled   "The Grand Ministerial Overture" published in the  Canadian  Illustrated  News of February 13, 1879,  and  that  the  development of the musical  theme  went on from there.  Moreover, the  musical command is not just  the  successful  orchestration of  various  instruments -it  is  the  forcing   of  a faster   tempo.  Edward  Blake   and   Alexander Mackenzie are   associated    with dragging time  and  "five  years  delay"  on  the  railway.  The  slow  progress  of  the minutes during Blake's  speeches  in  the  Commons is unbearably  tedious  and  the reader's restlessness  is increased by  the  description of  the  cautious pace  of  the stolid  Mackenzie. He  is content to move  the  railway

Across the prairies  in God's own good time, His plodding, patient, planetary time.

(TLS, P· 357)

When   Macdonald  returns to  office in  1878,  he  has  to  begin  delicately   but   he manages to drown Blake's  warnings, his "beautiful but  ruinous  piece  of  music," with  the stirring martial tune  of fife and  drum. By the end  of the  poem  this music has  become  a  "continental  chorus," but  the  drumming rhythm is still  insistent and  it drives  the  country forward into  the  era  of faster  times  and  broken  records met in the lines which  introduce and  set the mood for Towards  the  Last  Spike­
"It was the same  world  then  as now- I Except  for  little  differences  of speed  I
And power" ( T LS, p. 346) .
In  Pratt's railway poem  there  are  two other  elements  that  are  closer to fantasy than  to record  though one is advanced a good deal more  seriously  than  the  other. The  personification of British  Columbia as a reluctant fiancee seems to have  been an  attempt to  render vivid  a  necessary  part  of  political  history  and  to  provide another sympathetic picture of Macdonald, this time as the  desperate suitor.  The general  idea  was not  a new one  and  it could  easily have  been  suggested  to  Pratt by  another cartoon. This  one  by  Henri Julien   was  originally   published in  the

PRATT





66




















































COLVKBL&. IN  4 'P.ET. UJfcu At..te >-l)oo.'t fro.-a eo, •1 d•r.7ou11 U.n or
M•B. CIIXMaLA :--1 W&Dl il-·   l'oo. prol:lliaed I Q.oaiJ k.n n, .ad if l tWn't, ru et mplain to lb.
 PRATT

PRATT

Canadian Illustrated News of September  g, 1876. It depicted  the Prime  Minister of the day, Alexander  Mackenzie, in the guise of Uncle Aleck attempting to con­ ciliate a sulky niece, Miss B. Columbia, who threatened  to complain to her mother (Great Britain)  unless she got her railway immediately.  When Gibbon reproduced  the cartoon  in his book (about  half its original  size) , he retained  only the  large caption  "British  Columbia  in a Pet"  and  eliminated  the short  dialogue  between uncle and  niece.28  It seems entirely possible that  Pratt's  eye was attracted by the illustration in Gibbon's book and that both the shortened caption and the drawing suggested a romantic  rather than a familial relationship to him -hence the trans­ formation   of  the  avuncular   Mackenzie  to  the  anxious  lover  Macdonald  who appears in the poem (TLS, pp. 351-52) .29 As usual all the embroidery  connected with  these  personifications  (California   as  the  sailor-lover  and  rival,  the  Lady soaping off the engagement ring)  is Pratt's own. In fact, the original  drafts of the passage on  p. 352  were much  longer  than  the  final  version,  and  contained  an elaborate  poker game along the lines of  that in The  Titanic. It survived as late as typescript  48 where the section was  entitled  "Across a Telepathic Table." Pratt  also continued  to refer to the poker  game in  later  parts  of the  poem. After  the line "It was the following burning corollary"  ( T LS, p. 360), draft  47 had the line "Springing from  that  erotic  poker  game,"  and  original  versions of "Threats of Secession" continued  to  speak  of "the  poker  debt  so many  years  unhonoured" (notebooks  44, 46). Eventually  these later  poker  references were expunged  and "The  Long-Distance Proposal" was substituted  for "Across a Telepathic Table." In  the  final  version  the  game  only  lurks  in  the  background   in  phrases  like "A game it was and the Pacific lass j Had  poker wisdom on her face," and  "She watched  for  bluff"  (TLS, p. 352). The  poker  passage is like the  omelette  one. Both seem to have no origin in documented  events,80  both  show a  high-spirited Pratt  enjoying  himself immensely, and  both  were largely  eliminated  before  the poem was finished.
The "oatmeal" passage in the section of the poem entitled  "The Gathering" is quite  different.  In one sense it seems as if a move inside a Scotsman's  stomach  is a move away from the railway story but, in fact, the passage is closely connected with two of Pratt's themes. He remarked afterwards  that he knew many nationali­ ties were involved in the construction of the railroad,  but that  he had decided  (as two of his sources, Gibbon and MacBeth, had)  that  the key men were the Scots. 31
In Dunkirk the poet had already had some fun  with Scottish  names but here the
common racial origin most evident in "the  everlasting tread of Macs" is taken seriously. Stephen's  Highland  burr  speaks to  Macdonald more  powerfully  than the speech of other  men and  he cannot  ignore its demands  ( T LS, pp. 366-67 ) . The  Prime Minister is portrayed not only as a nimble politician  but also as a clan chieftain  and  the "general  of the patronymic  march" (TLS, p. 348), as  coura­ geous as he is canny.  The  other important Scottish  touches in  the  poem  are  the

68

PRATT


insistence  on the  ancestry of Smith  and  Stephen and  the  view  of the  hammering of the  last spike  as a victory  accomplished by  a  people  who  had  suffered  bitter defeat  at  Flodden almost  four  hundred years earlier.
The  second  theme  with  which  the  "oatmeal" passage  is connected is the  com­
plex question of the  relation between  man  and  the  natural world  in  the  poem. This  was a matter of limited interest  to  the  historians  and  the  geologists,  but  it was of great  interest  to Pratt. When  he suggested  that  the  men  who built  the rail­ way grew into  rock themselves (TLS, p. 347), when he explored the resemblances between  the  human struggle against  the  land  and  the  great  battles  among   the elements   ("Internecine Strife"), and   when  he  envisioned  the  Canadian  land­ scape as a great  lizard, then  he brought some of his most revolutionary innovations to the railway  story.
When  Pratt praised  Stephen Vincent  Benet's poem on the American Civil War,
]ohn  Brown's Body  (I 928), it was not  just for its careful historical treatment, but because  he saw  in it  passion  fused  with  the  facts.32  He  brought his own  passion, perhaps even  his  own  brand of  nationalism, to  the  story  of  the  railroad. The political  oratory, the  character of the  builders,  the  land  itself,  are  all  there  but expressed  in  terms  of enduring Pratt themes -heroism, vision,  communication, and  evolutionary struggle. The  perspective  is intimate as often  as it is panoramic and, while the finished  poem is considerably more restrained than  the early drafts, it still contains strong comic  elements.  T awards  the  Last  Spike, in  fact,  presents the same  combination that  Sir John  A. Macdonald hoped  that  his speech  on the Selkirk  pioneers  would  deliver: "Romance and  realism,  double  dose."  The   poet himself put it more  modestly  when  he explained that  "It is half a record  and  half a  fantasy."33   Since  both   aspects  of  the  poem  are  so  vividly  conceived   and   so carefully  executed, Pratt's last  narrative work  is an  entirely  successful  documen­ tary poem.

NOTES

1 The  lecture  was  published  in  Contexts  of Canadian  Criticism,  ed.  Eli  Mandel
(Chicago and London: Univ. of Chicago Press, 197 r), pp. 267-8r.
2   Ibid., p. 277.
3  Carl  F. Klinck  and  Henry  W. Wells, Edwin  f. Pratt-The Man  and His Poetry (Toronto: Ryerson,  1947),  p. sr. Since  this paper  was originally  written,  Susan Beckmann has explored  the subject more fully in "Java to Geneva:   the Making  of a  Pratt  Poem,"  Canadian  Literature,  No. 87  (Winter   1980),  pp.  6-23. There  is discussion in this valuable  article of the sources of many of the narrative poems, but not of Towards the Last Spike.
4 Pratt  Papers,  Typescript, Box 6, no. 49, Victoria  University  Library   (Toronto) ;
quotations from  Pratt  Papers are used by permission.
5 Pratt  Papers, Notebook, Box 6, no. 43·
6   Klinck and Wells, p. 46.

6g

PRATT


1 Jay  Macpherson makes the same observation about her  experience with  the manu­ scripts  of "The Witches' Brew" and  notes  that  the  dull  pencil  was caused  by "the childhood economy  of cutting all  new  pencils  into  three  before  using  them." See Pratt's Romantic Mythology:  The  Witches'  Brew  (Pratt Lectures, 1972), pp. 4, 18.
8  Howard  Angus   Kennedy, Origin  of the  Canadian   Pacific  Railway    (Toronto: Ryerson,  1928), p. 21.
9  Sandra Djwa, E. ]. Pratt-the Evolutionary Vision  (Toronto: Copp  Clark,  1974), pp. 134-35·
10   Walter Vaughan, Sir William Van  Horne  (Toronto: Oxford, 1926).
11 R. G. MacBeth, The  Romance  of the Canadian  Pacific Railway  (Toronto:  Ryer­
son, 1924).
12   Pratt Papers,  Typescript, Box 6, no. 49·
13  Compare J. H. E. Secretan's description of Rogers  (from Canada's Great Highway
which  appeared in Gibbon,  p. 215)  with  Pratt's description.
Secretan: He   was  a master   of  picturesque  profanity,  who   continually  chewed tobacco and was an artist  in expectoration. He wore overalls with  pockets behind, and  had a plug of tobacco  in one  pocket  and  a sea-biscuit  in the other, which  was his idea  of a season's  provisions for  an  engineer. His scientific  equipment consisted of a compass and  an  aneroid slung  around his neck.
Pratt:	Now Rogers was traversing it on foot, Reading an aneroid  and  compass, chewing Sea-biscuit and  tobacco.
Moberly's remark  to  Macdonald which  Pratt quotes   (TLS, p.  353)   also  comes from Gibbon   (p. 159).
14  Ibid., p. 264.
15  Ibid.,  p.  239· Gibbon   is quoting from  an  article in  Engineering  Wonders  of the
World  by J. M. Gibbon  and  Stephen Pardoe.
16 It was in  the  collection  of the  Victoria University Library  (Toronto)  and  is now kept in its Canadiana section.
11 These  debts  are  acknowledged in  the  typescript of  the  York  Club  speech,   Pratt
Papers, Box 6, no. 49·
18 As recopied  by Pratt in typescript, Box 6, no. 49, the quotation from  Pallon (?)   in the Winnipeg Tribune  reads:
apparently the  tussocks  are  important as  a  warning to  keep  well  back,  as  the
tussocks may  present  a friendly  uniform  grassy surface around the edge,  so hard to  tell  where  the  meadow  ends  and  the   (concealed)  lake  begins.  Some  of  the tussocky  muskegs  look as if they  had  been  methodically pockmarked by  moose hooves.
19 For  example, the  description of Smith  as a young  Hudson's Bay Company trader (TLS, p. 363)   ultimately originates in  Macnaughton (p.  76)  but  Kennedy's  ver­ sion  is so  much   more  detailed and  vivid   (pp.  5-6)   that   it  may  well  have  been Pratt's main  source.
20   The context  is different. Gibbon   (p.  347)  is referring to Lord  Strathcona the  im­ perialist  not  Donald Smith  the  railway  builder, but  the  image  may  still  have  sug­ gested something to Pratt.
21 The point  is made in Walter Vaughan's Sir William Van  Horne,  p. 120.
22   The pamphlet on  the  Prime  Minister in Louis  J. C.  Tache's Men  of the  Day:  A

PRATT

Canadian  Portrait  Gallery is an  example  of  a  pro-Macdonald view.  Sir  Richard
Cartwright's Reminiscences   (Toronto, rgr2)  is, by contrast, highly  critical.
23 The  exceptional book is Biggar's  Anecdotal Life of Sir John A. Macdonald  (Mont­
real, r8gr).
24   There is certainly nothing in Blake's speeches  to suggest  it, and  even  a remark like Gibbon's "The odour so far acquired by the Canadian Pacific Railway  was not  that of  Araby" (p.   rgg)   is nothing in  comparison  with  Pratt's soaring   vision  of  the rotten egg in  the House  of Commons.
25   See the notes  on his reading copy in which  he summarized parts  of the  poem:
I had  to put  the charges in the form  of a menu  which  is offered  to the  House  of
Commons by the  Hon.  Edward Blake, leader  of the  Opposition. He  presents  the
dishes which  are  not very savoury,  the main  dish is an egg now an omelette which through age has become  very high.


The  same  point  can  be found  in other  speeches.
 (Typescript, Box 6, no. 48)

26   The  passage  about wine  illustrates my  point  that  in  Towards  the  Last Spike  it  is the  far-sighted dreamer  who  has  a  taste  for  alcohol.   "Hollow Echoes  from   the Treasury Vault" also demonstrates the efficacy of whiskey. Sir  John's drink  is his medicine; when  he has drained the glass he can  see clearly  the  task that  lies ahead of him. The whiskey also has  the magic  Scottish  touch  responsible  for so many  of the poem's  miracles.
27  Djwa, pp.  r 32-33·
28  Gibbon, p. 179.
29  It is even  possible  that  Pratt looked  quickly  at the  cartoon in  Gibbon's book  and assumed  he was seeing  Macdonald and  not Mackenzie.
30  Nothing in  the  material consulted suggested  that  Macdonald was a  poker  player.
In  one of the  Parliamentary debates  he uses an  image  drawn from  gambling and then  apologizes   to  the  House   for  doing  so. The   Poker   Game passage   that   was
eliminated from  the final  poem  reads as follows:
The Lady  dealt  the cards.  It was agreed
That one-eyed  Jacks were wild. With easy grace
She floated  Sir John's five across the baize. He asked for but one card  upon  the draw.
Quite unconcerned, she looked at her three queens­ The three  were on the deal -and on the draw
A one-eyed  Jack,  an ace. Could  he beat  that?
Where was the other  queen? the other  aces? Where was the other  Jack-a tricky knave
That might  have smuggled  up MacDonald's sleeve? She  took a casual  look at Sir John's face,
A mask as imperturbable as hers
Except for arrowy  flashes in his eyes, Searching for filly quivers on her lips.
The bidding started, slow and  meditative, As lacking confidence. Sir John studied
A "flush." He wanted  a "full-house," but  this
Was good. He "anted" and  the Lady  raised it. To speed  it up, she took her handkerchief
And tapped her nose. The orange-blossom fragrance
Acted  like overproof  upon  the Knight.
(Box 6, no. 47)

PRATT

He doubled, so did she; again  the Knight. Was his a straight? A flush? or a full-house? A straight flush?  Hardly on a bet of chances.
There must be bluff behind  those chipmunk eyes
Engaged in forthcoming a contract-time. There was a lull before his next advance;
So she must keep him in the game. She pursed
Her  lips ever so slightly to betray.
A doubt  to match  the flicker of a shadow
Which caught unguarded those Disraeli features.
It worked! The bidding leaped  to a fresh  pace. She looked at the wild chap  beside the queens. Four  of a kind was good enough to risk
The skyline of the Rockies as her limit-
"Begin  the Road  in two years, end  in ten"
Sir John, dropping his mask, threw  in the chips.
(Box 6, no. 46)
31  MacBeth, p. 58; Gibbon,  p. 296.
32   Klinck  and  Wells, pp. 50-51.
33   Pratt Papers,  Typescript, Box 6, no. 49·






THE CO]tST OF CHILDHOOD

R.A.D.Ford


The coast of childhood looms close, And  there is a sudden pinching
Of the muscles below the heart­ Either a premonition of  the end,  Or a spilling-over of regret.

And suddenly  I have a desperate need To  know the books which define  us, To pursue  the contours of the past,
To seize the inevitability
Of decay in our precarious age.

I want  to walk back into time
With  the clear eye of understanding, And  to search  on those distant shores For the word lost long ago, knowing It is not there and  never was.

TWO POEMS



FINDING

The pickers out visiting  the good
Spots, startled by my dogs, seem clumsy
Or  ashamed, as if caught
Relieving themselves,
Bent over, there. They  show me buttons, A whole  regalia of mushrooms
Minted by the rain.

Each  finding what  they need
Cherishes the difficult search.  For no reason
Light  threads onto a thin, dead  branch.

Between  dense firs, there's  the tallest dogwood
Too.  Her long elastic arm
Has grown  thin  with reaching for that  thread.




SUCCESSFULLY

Will all that  weight of water on the web
Break  or brighten it. Because the high meadow
Grass  is laced  beautifully with both webs and  water
 


G. MeWhirter


This  morning. So, how should  her hand  depress
The boy's ignition properly. And will he peg
The whole tent  of day again  for her. The shoulder sags, The bare body skids hotly into eiderdowns

And skies, the weightlessness of sleep. Two-ton Slumberer, at the centre of each coupling sulks A spider,  scenting infinities,  but nothing sticks
To its wet web. Too soon the snn dries out the dew.

If everything were as sly and slow and successful As the damp snail mounted on the mushroom, Devouring it on the ground beside you.

73

Jl  WOMJIN  JIT 4 JI.M.


gulps from the glass beside
her bed 	watches  the starlight chill her thumbs	pale
beam 	journeying a thousand
years to reach  her
 

Craig Powell

wrenches her lover's hair 	"Wake!
look at me! 	tell
me I am alive" 	the clock clatters



HERD OF STJIRS


The stars are a larger  herd  than  buffalo and  an excellent  opportunity
for clubby sportsmen, but we can't kill Heaven easily as passenger  pigeons, baby seals
or the celebrated last Great Auk at Fogo Island.

We could shatter the moon with  a rocket and  end our fine days blowing out  the sun. The gun clubs likely can't get many stars
from  the herd far off and careless of mankind.


GJITHERED FROM THE JIIR


Since somewhere  around December 1910
I have measured out my life in finding what  will suffice:  petals
on a wet black bough, ice
on a red hot stove, no ideas but  with real toads in
a red wheel barrow, dependable, in the hyacinth garden.

The imperfect is our  paradise although Idaho mi  fe &
my little horse must think  it queer.
 

R. G. Everson
















Mike Doyle


74

GADJI  BERI BIMBA

The Problem of Abstraction in Poetry


Stephen Scobie


I dreamed I saw Hugo Ball
the night was cold	I couldn't even call
his name   though I tried
so I hung my head and cried

I dreamed I saw Hugo Ball and he looked fine	he stood tall but he lived in a world of pain
I never saw Hugo again

bp Nichol



ZuRmH, '9'6' a city at peace m a wodd  at wru-; a city of exiles, of refugees, of revolutionaries both artistic and political_l On the Spiegel­ gasse, Alley of Mirrors,  a narrow  street climbing up from  the banks of  the river Limmat,  Lenin sits waiting  for his closed train,  for his moment  in  history. And just down the street, obliquely across the Alley of Mirrors, in an emblematic  juxta­ position which  has  delighted  writers  and  historians,2    is a  cafe  in  which  Lenin occasionally eats, and  which  also houses the Cabaret  Voltaire,  the  birthplace  of Dada.  In  Switzerland, the  linguistic  crossroads of  central  Europe,  there  came together  Jean  or Hans  Arp, sculptor  and  poet, from  Strasbourg; Tristan  Tzara, writer, from Bucharest; and  Hugo Ball, dramaturge and  religious visionary, from the Rhineland Palatinate of Germany.  At a time  when  the  nationalist  ideals of European  high culture  had  produced  the institutionalized  insanity of trench war­ fare, Dada  proclaimed  the end of that  high culture.  It  promoted  the cult of the irrational,  the  chance,   the  spontaneous:   in  the  various   possible  (and   later fiercely debated)  origins  of  its name,  "Dada" was a  child's  rocking-horse,  the affirmation  of  the  Russian  "yes,"  the  tail  of a sacred  cow, a  repetition  of  the initials of Dionysius the Areopagite,  or merely nonsense syllables. In  place of art,  Dada  promised  anti-art, and  in doing so fell into the inevitable  paradox  of pro­ ducing art  again,  such  as the lovely, chance-generated   drawings  of Arp, or  the oddly haunting and compelling poems of Hugo Ball.
On  June  23, 1916, Ball wrote in his diary, "I have  invented  a  new genre  of poems,  'Verse  ohne  Worte'   [poems  without  words]   or  'Lautgedichte'  [sound

75

ABSTRACTION


poems]." 3 Ball's claim  to have  "invented" this form  of experimentation may  well be challenged, and  the date is also in dispute,  but  the name  he used for it -sound poetry-has  (despite certain  theoretical inadequacies)  persisted  to this day.  On that evening, the diary  continues,

I gave a reading of the first one of these poems.... I had  made  myself a special costume for it. My legs were in a cylinder of shiny blue cardboard, which came up to my hips so that  I looked like an obelisk. Over  it  I wore a huge coat  collar  cut out  of cardboard, scarlet inside and  gold outside.  It was fastened  at  the  neck in such a way that  I could give the impression of winglike movement  by raising and lowering my elbows. I also wore a high, blue-and-white-striped witch doctor's  hat.
On all three sides of the stage I had set up music stands facing the audience,  and
I put my red-pencilled  manuscript  on them;  I officiated at one stand  or the other.
. . . I could not walk inside the cylinder so I was carried  onto the stage in the dark and began slowly and solemnly:

gadji beri bimba
glandridi  lauli lonni cadori gadjama him beri glassala
glandridi  glassala tuffm i zimbrabim blassa galassasa tuffm i zimbrabim....•

Ball,  who  was  later  to  retreat  from  this  kind  of  experimentation into  a  both literally  and  metaphorically Byzantine  mysticism,  never  developed a fully  articu­ lated  theory  for sound  poetry.5  His remarks  are scattered through his diary, Flight Out  Of Time, whose  entries  he often  reworked and   revised  before  publication. On  the  day  after  his  performance at  the  Cabaret  Voltaire, he  wrote, "In  these phonetic poems we totally renounce  the language that  journalism has abused  and  corrupted. We  must  return  to the innermost alchemy of the  word,  we must  even give  up  the  word  too,  to keep  for  poetry  its last  and  holiest  refuge."6   And  the following  year,  on  March 5,  rgr7, he concluded, "The next  step  is for  poetry  to discard  language as painting has discarded  the object, and  for  similar  reasons.m  Sixty  years later, in  rg78,  the  Dutch  sound  poet Greta Monach repeated the
same simple faith:

Familiarity with music from an early age led me to think in terms of abstract  art. Given  the  fact  that,  after  music,  the  visual  arts  also  emancipated  from  the figurative into the abstract, it seems a matter of course to me to follow this example
in poetry.8

It is not,  however, "a  matter of course."  I would  call  these  two statements­ so strikingly  similar, despite  the  sixty  years  of  experience and  experimentation between  them -simplistic,  even  naive,  precisely  because   they  propose,  as  easy and  obvious  assumptions, that  there  is a  direct   parallel  between  the  history  of painting and  the  possible  history  of  literature, and   that  abstract poetry  is both possible and  desirable. Not  that   these  propositions are  necessarily  invalid:  but

ABSTRACTION


they cannot be made as assumptions, they have  to be argued. It is my  purpose  in this essay to suggest some lines which  that  argument might  follow.
It should   be  clear  that, by  "abstract poetry,"   I do  not  mean   simply   poetry which is about abstract ideas, or which  uses abstract vocabulary, like, for example, Eliot's "Burnt Norton": "Time present and  time past/ Are both  perhaps present in  time  future," etc.  Rather, I mean  abstraction  at  the  deeper  levels  of  poetic structure, syntax, and semantics. But it will be useful, before  going  any further, to clarify  the  various senses in which  the  word  "abstract" is used, and  in  doing  so I am  greatly  indebted to a book by Harold Osborne entitled   Abstraction and  Arti­ fice in Twentieth-Century Art. Osborne speaks  of the  "Constant  misunderstand­
ings and  confusion [whichJ occur,  even among  artists  themselves,  owing  to failure
to grasp  the  difference between  ... two  uses of 'abstract.' "9 The  first use, which Osborne classifies as "Semantic Abstraction," derives from  the  fact  that  "Both in philosophical and  in everyday  language 'to  abstract' means  to withdraw or  sepa­ rate,  particularly to withdraw attention from something or from  some aspect  of a thing." Thus,
a work of figurative or representational art, i.e. one which ... transmits information about  some segment  of the visible world outside itself, is said  to be more  or  less abstract  according  as the information  it transmits is less or more complete.  In  this sense abstraction is equivalent  to incomplete  specification. . . . Abstraction  in  this sense is a matter  of degree and  the term  has no relevance  or application  outside the sphere of representational art.  It  is a factor  of the relation  between a work of art and  that  which the work represents.10
Under this  heading of  Semantic Abstraction, Osborne  is  able  to  discuss  such diverse schools of painting as German Expressionism, Neo-lmpressionism, Cubism, and  Futurism.
"But," Osborne continues,
"abstract" is also commonly  employed as a general  descriptive  term  denoting  all the many kinds of art production  which do not transmit,  or purport  to transmit, information about  anything  in the world apart  from themselves. Other  terms that have  been  used  are:   "non-representational," "non-figurative," "non-objective," "non-iconic." "Abstract"  is  the  term  which  has  obtained   the  widest  currency although  it is perhaps  the least appropriate of all both linguistically and because of its established  use in a  different  sense within  the  sphere  of  representational  art. There   are  many  types  of  pictures  and  sculptures  within  the  wide  spectrum   of
twentieth-century art  which are not pictures or sculptures  of anything  at all;  they
are  artefacts  made  up from  non-iconic  elements fashioned  into  non-iconic  struc­
tures. These works are not more "abstract" or less "abstract." There  is no relation between the work and something  represented  because the work represents  nothing apart  from what it is.11
Under this second  heading, "Non-Iconic Abstraction," Osborne discusses the work of such  painters as Kandinsky, Malevich, and  Mondrian, and  such  general move­ ments  as Suprematism, Constructivism, and  Abstract Expressionism.

77

ABSTRACTION

It  is obviously in  this second,  non-iconic  sense  that   Hugo   Ball  and   Greta Monach  intend the notion of "abstract  poetry," and many of the rhetorical mani­ festoes of sound poetry have postulated  this kind of "abstraction" as an  ideal. At the same  time,  there  is a large  body of experimental   work  which  fits  into  the loosely defined area for which the term "sound  poetry" is a generally accepted,  if not entirely accurate  label, but which is not "abstract" at  all, in the  non-iconic sense. It may, however, be possible to see this writing  as "abstract" in  Osborne's  first sense, especially  when we consider the  potential  of that  suggestive phrase, "incomplete  specification."  So  another  purpose  of  my  essay  is  to  attempt   an application  of Osborne's  terminology to the whole field of  sound  poetry.


EsT, HOWEVER, I HAVE TO  CONSIDER the parallel to painting suggested by both Ball and  Monach.  They  pointed  towards  painting  because  it was the clearest example  (or even the only example)   of an  art  form  which  had
actually made the transition from a representational to a non-representational discourse. The  painters,  in turn,  had  sought  their  inspiration  in music,12  whose
ideal  self-reflexive containment   had  been  described,  by  Schopenhauer  and   by Walter  Pater,  as the "condition" towards which  all art  "aspires." Kandinsky,  in On  the  Spiritual in Art, speaks of the "envy"  with  which  artists  in other  media regard  music,  "the  art  which  employs its  resources,  not  in  order  to  represent
natural appearances, but as a means of expressing the inner  life of the artist." 13
Music, of course, had always possessed this characteristic; in the space of  approxi­ mately sixty years, from  I 86o to I 920,  painting,  through  a conscious and  heroic struggle, acquired it.
In   I8go,  the  French  painter   and  critic  Maurice   Denis  wrote:   "We   must remember  that  a painting, before it is a warhorse or a nude  or any kind of  anec­ dote,  is a  flat surface  covered  by colours arranged   in  a  certain  order.m4    This statement  later came to be regarded  as one of the first slogans of  abstract  art,  and as a foundation for  the dogma  of "flatness"  which  Tom  Wolfe  burlesqued  in The  Painted Word,15  but, strictly speaking, it refers not to non-iconic abstraction  but  to semantic  abstraction,  or  to  a  balance  between  representation   and  self­ reflexiveness.16 The painting is not yet only surface and colours:  these things may come before the nude or the anecdote, but they do not displace them. The  Impres­  sionists had "abstracted" light, in Osborne's sense, by withdrawing attention  from other aspects of representation.  In doing so, they brought  the painting  forward  to that "flat surface" which Denis speaks of, thereby setting up an unresolved tension with  the  recessional "depth" of the  image,  which they  still organized  by tradi­  tional  perspective. That  tension in turn  became  the focal  point for  the semantic abstractions  of Cezanne and  the Cubists, who may push their  visual analysis and

ABSTRACTION

synthesis to the very border of the non-iconic, but who never cross it. Indeed,  the theory  of  Cubism,  as enunciated   in  its  most  dogmatic  form  by  Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler,  is violently hostile to non-iconic abstraction: "Let  us hope,"  wrote Kahnweiler  in  his definitive study  of Juan  Gris, "that all  'abstract  painting'­ which is neither  painting  nor abstract-will soon disappear.  It has done  a great deal  of harm,  for  it  has  largely  prevented  Cubism  being  understood   and  has turned more than  one painter  and collector against real painting.  It has absolutely nothing  to do  with  real  painting.m 7    However,  despite  its own  theory,  Cubism became -historically -a stepping-stone on the path towards non-iconic abstrac­ tion.  The  great  Cubist  painters-Braque, Gris,  Picasso-never  painted   any non-representational canvases;  but  other  artists,  like  Delaunay   and   Malevich, passed through  Cubism  to the purified  realms of,  respectively, colour and  form. By 1912 Delaunay  was painting  the brightly  coloured discs of what  Apollinaire christened  Orphism; other  painters, such as Kuka and  Kandinsky,  had  achieved non-iconic  abstraction   through   other,  more  idealist  routes;   and   in   1914 the Russian Kasimir  Malevich  arrived  in one giant stride at the minimal  abstraction  of form, painting  a black square  on a  white ground.
It is an understandable error -though  I think an error  nevertheless -to see the history of modern  painting  as a steady progression (or, in Monach's word, "emancipation") towards  the non-iconic, the minimal, the conceptual, zero. The imagery  of the  "avant-garde" supports  this  notion  of  an  advancing line,  and allows  the  dubious  terminology  of statements   that  Malevich   was  "ahead  of" Braque,  who had  "gone  farther  than" Cezanne. Abstraction  is not  the sole goal of painting; and if there is a "line of advance," then it has been twisting back on itself ever since that  black square.  One  major  problem of contemporary painting is that  there is no front line any more for the avant-garde to man.  Everything  is possible, from  minimal  conceptualism  through  to photo-realism,  so no  one style occupies a privileged position. The contemporary  painter  must move eclectically through  the whole range of possibilities the last century  has laid out  before  him
-or else, as a naif, bypass them altogether.
Given, then, this exemplary  progression, in painting, away from  representation towards  the many  and  various forms of abstraction,  what  possible consequences are there for poetry? There  are indeed  many significant  parallels between  litera­ ture  and the visual arts, but they are parallels of analogy  rather  than  of  identity. During  the twentieth  century,  there has been a continuous  interchange  between poets and  painters, and there  have been many attempts  to translate  the effects of one medium  into  another.  Apollinaire,  for instance,  developed  the  principles  of literary  collage, in his poem,  "Lundi, Rue  Christine,"  as a  direct  result  of  the Cubist  collages of Braque  and  Picasso;  his original  title  for  the  volume  Calli­ grammes was Moi  Aussi, ]e Suis Peintre. But he was not a painter, just as Picasso was  not  a  poet.  The   process of  translation-whether  from  one  language   to

79

ABSTRACTION

another,  or from  one code to another  within  the  same  language,  or  from  one artistic  medium  to  another-always involves  change;   whenever  it  clings  too closely to the stylistic or structural features of the original, it fails; it succeeds only when it adapts  to the conditions of the new medium.  What  Greta  Monach  calls the "emancipation from the figurative into the abstract" is a process which must be worked out, not in terms of painting, but in terms of literature: not in terms of shape, line, and colour, but in terms of language.
It is at this point, obviously, that  the analogy  between  painting  and  literature becomes problematic, and  that  Hugo  Ball's casual  assumption  that  poetry  can "discard  language" stumbles upon the intractability of the medium.  Can language in fact  be rendered  truly abstract,  in either  of Osborne's  senses? A totally  non­ iconic art  declares its own materials - sound,  harmony,  and  rhythm  in  music; shape, line, and colour in painting-to be sufficient, without any need to support  themselves by external reference, or to justify themselves in terms of their fidelity to some preconceived standard  of "the  real."  Music-excluding for the moment such mixed media as opera and song-may indeed evoke emotions, may "express this emotional substratum which exists, at times, beneath  our ideas,ms  but it does not refer directly to objects, or concepts, or fictional worlds. The  note  B-flat does not signify anything  except itself, and  its  place  in  relation  to  a  series of other notes: in this it is quite different from the word "guitar," or from the curved line, however abstracted  or formalised, which signifies "guitar" in  many  Cubist  paint­ ings. That  line, in turn, is adaptable: while it may be made to signify a guitar,  or a mountain, it may also be made to signify nothing  but itself, or its place in rela­ tion to a composition of other lines. A word, however, is always significant.  The word  "guitar" must  always direct  the  listener -provided,  of  course,  that  the listener speaks English -to  the mental  image  or concept  of a  wooden  stringed instrument; it can  never be construed  purely  as  an  arbitrary composition  of the g, t and r consonant sounds with the vowels i and a. Language is inherently  refer­ ential. As a medium,  it resists abstraction much  more strongly than  painting  did:  the difference is not simply one of degree, but of kind.19



IF, THEN, WE ARE  TO  TALK AT  ALL   about  an "abstract poetry"
-a poetry, that is, that abstracts not merely at the level of vocabulary  but at the
level of structure-we must look at techniques whereby the inherent  referentiality of language may be circumvented  or subverted. How can this be done? If the word is to be retained  as a compositional unit, then it must be placed in a context which will drastically qualify, undercut, or cancel altogether  its function  as signifier:  this will lead the writer towards what Bruce Andrews has called "an  experimentation of diminished  or obliterated  reference,"20  or, more simply, to Osborne's  "incom-

Bo

ABSTRACTION


plete  specification," semantic abstraction. If the  word   is  not  retained, the   poet moves   to   non-iconic  abstraction,  and   must   work   with   sub-vocal elements or speech:  individual  letter-sounds, phonemes, morphemes, or  the   whole   range of pre-verbal vocalization:  grunts, groans, yells, whistles, passionate gurgling, heavy breathing.
The kind   of  context  in   which   word-meaning  may   be   cancelled  is  simply
illustrated by Richard Kostelanetz in  terms  of a tongue-twister:

If a  Hottentot taught a  Hottentot tot  to  talk  'ere  the  tot  could  totter, ought the
Hottentot to  be  taught to  say ought  or  naught or  what  ought   to  be  taught 'er? Kostelanetz comments:
The  subject  of this ditty  is clearly  neither  Hottentots nor  pedagogy  but  the  related sounds  of "ot" and  "ought," and  what  holds  this  series  or  words  together is  not the thought or the  syntax  but  those two repeated sounds.21

The form cancels the  content: the  words  are  dis-contented, reduced to  patterns of sound. This principle can  be  applied in  a  multitude of  ways: through chant, through repetition, through simultaneous performance by several voices impeding the  understanding of  any  single   voice,  and   through all  the  technical devices of tape manipulation such as  multi-tracking and  phase   distortion.  Ernest  Robson describes how  a writer
may  destroy  contextual  meaning with  such  excessive  repetition that   attention  to grammar or  meaning is eliminated by exhaustion of all  its information. Once  this elimination has  occurred  the  residual   messages  are  acoustic patterns  of  speech. Then by default no other  information remains  but  sounds,  sounds,  sounds.22

The technique of  simultaneous  readings was  certainly  used   at   the   Cabaret
Voltaire. Nicholas Zurbrugg comments that

The Dada poets  manifest the  two  main  tendencies  of  all  twentieth-century  crea­ tivity-the    impulse    towards  abstraction  and   the   impulse    towards   expressive simultaneity. While  the  impulse  towards  abstraction reduced language  to elemen­ tary  sounds   (just  as  abstract art  reduced   the  subject-matter of  painting to  non­  figurative, elementary forms), the impulse  towards  simultaneity attempted to com­  municate several  sonic statements at  the same  time  (just  as  the collages and  mon­  tages  of  the  Dada artists  condensed   several  visual  statements by  juxtaposing and  superimposing images  in one  composite  message).23

Ball  himself   may   have picked up  the  notion of  this   use  of  repetition from the painter whom he  most  admired, Wassily  Kandinsky. John  Elderfield, in  his Introduction to  the  translated edition of Ball's  diary, notes  that
In  ... Concerning  the Spiritual  in Art, Kandinsky makes  only  a  brief  mention of literature, but  it  is a  very  significant   one.  Just   as  images  are   the  outward  con­ tainers  of  spiritual truths, he  writes,  so words  have  two  functions:  to  denote an object  or  notion, and   to  reflect  an  "inner sound" ("innerer  Klang"). The   mner

81

ABSTRACTION

sounds of words are dependent  upon the words' denotive  context-but the poet's task is to manipulate his material  so as to efface this outer  meaning,  or at least to permit  other  meanings  to emerge in "vibrations" that  will affect the  audience  on a spiritual  level. Repetition  of a word can "bring  out  unsuspected  spiritual proper­ ties . . . [and] deprives the word of its external  reference.  Similarly,  the  symbolic reference  of  a  designated  object  tends  to  be  forgotten   and  only  the  sound  is retained.  We hear  this pure  sound  . . .  [which]   exercises a  direct  impression  on the soul."24

The  mystical  tone  here  would  certainly  appeal to  Ball. Brian  Henderson, in  his very detailed  and  perceptive  account, "Radical Poetics," plays particular stress on the  idea  of sound  poetry  as an  attempt to recover  an  original Adamic language. "Dada's dismantling of the  word," he writes,  "was  a  process that  was to  release the hidden  energies  of it.... This  dismantling of the  word  for  the  Word  is  Her­ metic, and  would  not only be an unmasking, but  a revolutionary spiritual act."25
Theorists of non-iconic  abstraction, whether in poetry  or in the  visual  arts,  return
frequently to such  appeals  to a mystical  ground or  justification. Religious  chants have long used repetition as a means of occupying and  distracting the  foreground of consciousness  in order  to facilitate the  unconscious mind's access to  a  state  of meditation. Ball  himself  noted  that,  while  performing at  the  Cabaret Voltaire, "my  voice had  no choice  but  to take  on the  ancient cadence of priestly  lamenta­ tion, that  style of liturgical singing  that  wails in all the  Catholic churches of East and  West."26
There are,  obviously,  infinite  gradations available to  the   writer /performer/ composer,   depending on  the  degree  of  intelligibility  the   piece  allows,  between semantic and  non-iconic abstraction. The  American musician Steve  Reich   has created  a brilliant piece of what  I would  call sound   poetry   (though he  presum­ ably calls it music), whose sole acoustic  material consists of a few  words on tape.  Reich describes the process of composition:

The  voice is that  of Daniel  Hamm,  then  nineteen,  describing  a  beating  he took in the Harlem  28th precinct. The  police were about  to take  the  boys out  to be "cleaned   up"  and  were  only  taking  those  that   were  visibly bleeding.  Since Hamm  had no actual open bleeding, he proceeded  to squeeze open a bruise on his leg so that  he would be taken to the hospital-"I had  to, like, open the bruise up and let some of the bruise blood come out to show them."
The  phrase "come out  to show them" was recorded  on both channels, first in
unison and  then  with  channel  2   slowly beginning  to  move  ahead.  As the  phase begins to shift  a gradually  increasing  reverberation  is heard  which  slowly passes into a sort of canon or round. Eventually the two voices divide into four  and  then into eight.27

The   piece  thus  moves  from  a  completely   intelligible  phrase,  isolated   from   its context-in  Osborne's term,  given  "incomplete specification" -to  purely  ab­ stract  or  musical   noise, in  which  no  linguistic   element  can   any  longer   be  de-

ABSTRACTION


tected.  Apart from  its  intrinsic fascination as a  compelling and  hypnotic   work, "Come Out" thus  illustrates the  range  and  the  limits  of sound  poetry.
Repetition, however, need  not always be used as a means  of cancelling  surface meaning, but  rather of insisting  on it. bpNichol's "You  are  city  hall  my  people" uses its  emphatic  repetitions as  a  means  of  enforcing a  very  direct   statement, which  is clearly  and  syntactically about civic politics. The  work of Gertrude Stein, though it attenuates meaning to a precarious edge by its insistent  and  convoluted repetitions, never  cancels  it entirely.  I would  prefer  to argue  that  Stein's work  is "Cubist," bearing in  mind   that   Osborne includes   Cubism   in  his  category  of semantic abstraction. Again  the notion  of "incomplete specification" would  come in  very  handy, especially  in  relation  to  those  works  of  Stein  which   correspond most closely to the "synthetic" stage of Cubism, namely,  her later  "Portraits," and the "still lives" of Tender  Buttons. But that  is a whole different  paper.
Another technique for  undercutting the  meanings  of words  is to arrange them,
not in terms  of their  syntactic or semantic relations,  but  at  random, using chance techniques to  generate the  text.  Tristan Tzara, in  1924, gave  his "recipe" for  a
Dada poem:
Take a newspaper. Take a pair of scissors.
Choose in the newspaper an article which is the same length as you wish to make your poem.
Cut out the article.
Then  carefully cut out the words which make up this article, and put them in a bag.
Shake gently.
Then  take out each scrap of paper, one after the other.
Copy them out conscientiously in the order in which they came
out of the bag.
The  poem will resemble you?8

And,  indeed, it  usually  does.  One  of the  theoretical advantages of chance  struc­ tures  is that   they  are  supposed   to  be  impersonal; they  free  the  artist  from   the compulsions of self-expression, and  liberate   his imagination to  operate  in  areas  he would  otherwise never  have  access to. While  this is true  to a certain extent, an artist's personal style  is too  fundamental and  pervasive  to  be  entirely  denied  or disguised, even in chance-generated structures. Arp's  drawings, for instance, deter­ mined  by  the  positions  in  which  dropped scraps  of  paper   fell  to  the  floor,  are absolutely   identifiable as  Arp's   work.  The   same  is  true,   as  Tzara suggests,  in poetry.
Brian  Henderson argues  for a stricter  conception of chance as  producing "the
disappearance of the  self"  or  "a  kind  of  pure  detachment of  being." 29    In  doing so, he aligns  himself  with  Steve  McCaffery in the  espousal  of a  Derridean  sense of the  primacy of writing,  which  questions the  metaphysics  of  presence  and   the

ABSTRACTION

location  of value  in the authenticity of an  authorial voice. The problem  is that  a great deal of sound  poetry depends, absolutely,  on the authenticity of voice.  While I  am  intrigued by  the  Derridean focus  on  writing, and   recognize   the  kind  of autonomy that  a text  can  (or indeed  must)   take  on,  I am  still reluctant to  aban­ don  the  notion  that  the  writer,  when  faced  by  the  infinite   range  of  possibilities which  chance-generated structures open  up, still has a role to play-a role which depends  upon  the existential  authenticity of the  choices he makes  in such  a situa­ tion. "The poem will resemble  you."
More  complex  chance structures have  been  worked  out  by recent  writers,  most notably  by the American musician  and  composer, John Cage.  Refining on Tzara's elementary methods, Cage  has  created  and  performed "treated  texts"  based  on Thoreau's journals and  on James  Joyce's  Finnegans Wake. The Thoreau  text­ Empty  Words- uses the  I Ching  to determine the  chance selection  of  phrases,  words, syllables and  individual letters from the original, which  are then  performed by Cage  in counterpoint to periods  of silence  whose  frequency and  duration are also chance-determined.30   The  result  is minimal and  austere,  yet  also-thanks largely  to Cage's  compelling performance and  presence-totally  fascinating.
The  treatment of pre-existing  texts in this  way  has sometimes been  referred   to as "homolinguistic translation," and  has been  practised in  Canada by bpNichol, in Translating  Translating  Apollinaire, by Steve  McCaffery, in  Intimate  Distor­ tions, and  by Douglas  Barbour and  myself, in The  Pirates of Pen's Chance. Take, for instance, the following  poem:

the incantatory  paintings etc. proposed it art
challenges Plato

order ordinary imitations painting for bed





therefore useless because
 
Plato's
Aristotle's


counters dangerous in in advocates decorative a outside
the upon Greek
through works is which off the form even discarded reality

the conceive a the content lucidly content

definition X31

ABSTRACTION


This  work, I submit, conforms exactly  to the notion of "incomplete specification." Its text has been "abstracted from" another text-in  this case, the  opening  page of Susan  Sontag's famous  essay, "Against Interpretation"-using the  technique of reading only  the  left-hand margin, the  first word  of each  line  from  a  page  of prose, where  the line divisions have been produced  by the accidents of a particular typesetting. The   vocabulary is still,  identifiably, Sontag's;  but   the  information which   would   allow  the  reader   to  specify  the  message-i.e., the  surrounding words  and  syntax-is  incomplete. The   result  is a  poem  which   hovers  on  the edges of meaning, without ever totally  abandoning or embracing it.32
w.HAVE   BEEN  DEALING  SO  FAR  with   poems  which   use complete and  identifiable words,  albeit  in contexts which  severely limit or obscure
their  intelligibility; all such  works fall, I would  argue,  into  the  category of  seman­ tic  abstraction. Non-iconic abstraction is possible only  when  the  word  is aban­ doned   altogether, and  the  performer moves  into  the  area   of   non-verbal vocal sound. Here  the  problem of  the  inherent  referentiality of  words  is by-passed  by resorting  to fragments of vocal  sound  at  a  pre- or  sub-verbal level. Although the elements  of language are still present,  they have been abstracted from  any seman­ tic  context, in  the  same  way  as  non-iconic  painting abstracts line,  colour  and shape from  their  representative functions. Vocal sound  becomes self-sufficient  and self-reflexive,  as the  total  material and subject-matter of the  composition.
Hugo   Ball's  attempts in  this  direction may  now  appear, in  retrospect, quite
tentative. Although his poems use invented "words," in no recognizable language, many  of these words  are in fact  quite  clearly onomatopoeic, and  he gave most  of his  poem  titles-"Clouds," "Elephant Caravan" - whose  specifications of  a referential subject-matter must  inevitably  affect and  condition the  response  of the listener.33
Ball's fellow  Dadaist, Raoul Hausmann, asked the  obvious  question:

Why bother  with  words? ... It is in this sense that  I differ from  Ball. His poems created   new  words  . . .  mine  were  based  on  letters,  on  something   without   the slightest possibility of offering meaningful  language.34

From  as early asI 9I 8, Hausmann wrote  poems at this level of non-iconic abstrac­ tion,  which  was taken  to its highest  pitch  of sophistication by Kurt  Schwitters in his great  Ur-Sonate, begun  in  I923,  and  the subsequent history  of  sound  poetry affords  many  further  examples. Among  recent  works,  I would  cite  particularly Tom  Johnson's "Secret Songs,"35  which  use rigidly limited  series of letter-sounds to produce vocal  patterns of astonishing energy  and  grace.
It is not the purpose  of this essay to trace  a complete  history  of sound  poetry,  or to enter  into  the  many  quarrels about  who discovered  what  first,  but  it is worth

Bs

ABSTRACTION

noting  that  the  principles of non-iconic  abstraction in  poetry  had  in  fact  been fully stated  and  put  into practice,  at least three  years before  Hugo  Ball's  much better-mythologized  performance  at the  Cabaret  Voltaire,  by the  zaum  poets of Russian  Futurism.36  Zaum  (two syllables)  is a contraction of "zaumnyj  jazyk," which  may  best  be  translated  as "transrational speech" -though  later  Soviet critics  have  tended  to  use it  simply  to  mean  nonsensical  gibberish.  The   three leading  poets associated with zaum are Velimir Khlebnikov,  Alexei Kruchenykh, and Ilya Zdanevich, known as Iliazde. The first of these poets to achieve recogni­ tion in the West was lliazde,  whose zaum  play, Ledentu  as a Beacon, was pub­ lished in Paris in 1923.
Kruchenykh was the most extreme of the three  (so much so that  it became far too easy for later critics to dismiss and forget him altogether) ; he had  a genuine dislike for all previous literature,  and  Pushkin  was his favourite  target.  He  once declared that a randomly chosen laundry  bill had better sound  values than  any of Pushkin's  poetry;  and  he also claimed that  the following  zaum  poem of his was "more  Russian than all of Pushkin's poetry": 37

dyr bul shchyl ubeshshchur skum
vy 	so 	bu
r	I	ez

This poem was first published in January 1913; later that  year Kruchenykh published his manifesto Declaration of the Word  as Such.  He declared  the bank­ ruptcy of normal  language, which keeps the word chained  in subordination to its meaning.  Vladimir  Markov summarizes  his argument:  "Whereas artists  of  the past went  through  the idea to the word, futurists  go  through  the word  to direct knowledge. . . . The   word  is  broader   than   its  meaning    (this  statement   later became Kruchenykh's favourite slogan) ."38
Velimir Khlebnikov held a more restrained  view of zaum, believing it could be used to create a "universal language of pure concepts clearly expressed by speech sounds." He developed an esoteric linguistic theory based on the beliefs that  "the sound of a word is deeply related to its meaning" and  that  "the  first consonant  of a word root expresses a definite idea."  For instance,  he believed that  the letter  L expressed the idea of "a vertical movement that finally spreads across a surface."39
By discovering these original meanings he hoped  to create  a new, universal, and
(in  contrast  to Kruchenykh)  meaningful  zaum, which  he idealistically  believed would put an end to all misunderstanding, strife, and  war  between  people.
(

86

ABSTRACTION

poetry "became  ineffectual  as soon as the  poem was reduced  to  a succession of sounds."41
These reservations must, of course, be taken seriously. Just  as many respectable critics, such  as  Kahnweiler   (not  only  conservative  cranks), have  argued  that abstract  painting  betrays the very function of art, to provide an imaginative repre­ sentation  of material  reality, so many listeners to non-iconic abstract  poetry have concluded  that  it betrays the essence of language, and  that  it  pedorms, less effec­ tively, the  functions  of music.  Response to this argument  would  have  to stress those aspects of sound poetry which, even in its most abstract manifestations,  con­ tinue to link it to poetry. It is an art which is based  on the voice:   not the singing voice, but the speaking voice, the primary medium  in which language  exists. It is also an art  which, in almost  all of its forms, uses, or plays with,  the notion  of a text.




l:E MOST SERIOUS ALTERNATIVE to the name "sound poetry" is the description  "text-sound," which obviously places a strong emphasis on the presence of a text. That text may be a highly elaborate  system of notation,  or it may be a few squiggles on a scrap of paper;  in the inventive work of the English poet Paula  Claire,  the notion  of "text" has been expanded  to allow the  poet to "read" anything  from the bark of a tree to the wall of a room.  Most commonly, the text is simply the basis for improvisation. But the presence of a text, whatever its form,  continues  to  imply  a  relationship  to  meaning.  Even  individual   letter sounds-b, k, u-convey, if not meaning, at least an awareness of their poten­ tiality to combine into meaning.
I suspect that  it is this  potentiality  which  ultimately  distinguishes  text-sound from music. Richard  Kostelanetz, in what is certainly the most thoughtful  attempt so far to define text-sound,42  attempts  to make that  distinction  by excluding from his definition any works which use specific pitch -but this definition, it seems to me, runs  into  trouble  with  various forms of chanting,  such  as Jerome  Rothen­ berg's "Horse  Songs," or the works of Bill Bissett. Text-sound, I  would  submit, always deals  not  with  sound   per se  (music),   but  with  sound  as  an  aspect  of language:  and  even  when  that  aspect  is isolated  (abstracted)   from  all  other aspects, isolated even from meaning, its ground  is still in language, and its practi­ tioners are called, properly,  poets.
Sound poetry is a manifestation  of one of the most important general tendencies of twentieth  century  art  and  culture:  self-reflexiveness, the urge in all the arts to examine their own means of expression, to find their subject-matter in the explora­ tion  of their  own  ontology  and  structure.  The  question  becomes  not  so much "what  is language  about?" as "what  is language?"43   Sound  poetry is  analytical,

ABSTRACTION

and  often  highly  theoretical, in  its approach to  language:  but  it  combines this intellectualism with  a delight in the  physicality  of language, and  the  performance pieces which  derive  from  the  theory  are often  very  entertaining, at  an  immediate level, even for audiences who know nothing of the  theory.
One  major  division  within sound  poetry  is between those  poets who  use a wide array  of tape  technology-multi-tracking,  editing, splicing  together sound   col­ lages-and those  who  don't, who  rely exclusively  on  the  sounds  which  can  be produced  by  the  unaided human voice.  This   division  shows  up  clearly  in  the theoretical  justifications which  the  two  groups  offer  for  their  work.  Tape artists talk of the  need  to make  aesthetic  use of the  latest  developments in  technology: not  to  use what  is available, they  say,  is as  stupid as  attempting to  ignore   the typewriter or  the  printing press. Steve  McCaffery summarizes the  ideology  as
the transcendence  of the limits of the human  body. The  tape  machine,  considered as an extension of human vocality allowed the poet to move beyond his own expres­ sivity. The  body is no longer the ultimate  parameter, and  voice becomes a point of departure rather  than  the point of arrivaL44

In  contrast,  the   non-technological  sound   poets   tend   to   justify  their   work   in deliberately primitivistic terms,  speaking  of it  as  a  return  to  earlier, more  basic poetic forms, such as the chant. The  Swedish  poet Sten  Hanson writes:
The sound poem appears to me as a homecoming  for poetry, a return  to its source close to the spoken word, the rhythm  and atmosphere of language  and body, their rites and sorcery, everything that centuries of written  verse have replaced with metaphors  and  advanced  constructions.45

And  Jerome Rothenberg:

what  is involved  here is the  search  for  a  primal  ground: a  desire  to  bypass  a civilization that has become problematic & to return, briefly, often by proxy, to the origins of our humanity.46

Perhaps the  most  extravagant of all the  manifesto-writers-he has  a  flair  for these things-is Steve  McCaffery. His 1970 statement, "For a poetry  of blood," describes  sound   as  "the   poetry  of  direct  emotional confrontation" and   as  "the extension  of human biology into  a context  of  challenge."47   He  believes  that   the energy  released  in sound  performance
marks an  important stage in establishing  the  agencies  for a general  libidinal  de­ repression. Sound  poetry is much more than  simply returning language  to its own matter; it is an agency for desire production,  for releasing energy flow, for securing the passage of libido in a multiplicity of flows out of the Logos.48

McCaffery argues against  tape  technology  on  the  interesting grounds that   tape
is not  performance but  writing :

For  if we understand writing  as what  it  is:  the  inscription  of  units  of  meaning within  a framed  space of retrievability  and  repeatability, then  tape  is none other

88

ABSTRACTION


than  writing.  To  transcend  writing, and  the critical  vocabulary  built  up  around the  logocentricity   of  writing,  and  to  achieve  a  totally  phonocentric   art,   must involve a renunciation of  these two central  canons  of  the  written:  repeatability and  retrievability,  a claiming  of the  transient,  transitional,  ephemeral,  the  inten­ sity of the orgasm,  the flow of energy through  fissures, escape, the  total  burn,  the finite  calorie,  loss, displacement,   excess:  the  total  range  of  the  nomadic   con­ sciousness.49

In  speaking for myself, both  as a critic  attempting to define  the  theory  of sound poetry  and  as a poet  attempting to perform  it in practice, I would  find  much  to agree  with  in McCaffery's comments, even if I would  hesitate  to phrase  my ideas in  such  an  ecstatic  fashion. It is clear  that  the  energy  of  live  performance is a major  component of the  attraction of sound  poetry,  both  for  its  performers and for  its  audience. Further,  as  McCaffery says,  the   flow  of  this  energy   comes "through  fissures":  through  the   tensions   between   sense  and   sound,   between language as content and  language as dis-contented, between  semantic and  non­ iconic  abstraction, and  through the  displacements between  the  decorum  of  the printed  page  and  the  unpredictability of live performance.
At  the same  time,  I must  acknowledge some  uneasiness  with  the  romanticism implicit   in   phrases   like  Hanson's  "rites   and   sorcery," Rothenberg's "primal ground," and  McCaffery's "nomadic consciousness."50 Sound  poetry  may  indeed reach  into  this  area  of our  experience, but  it is not  confined  to it: sound  poetry may also be used in very controlled, intelligent, witty,  classical  ways.
To investigate the various  forms of abstraction implicit  in language may indeed lead  one towards a mystical  sense of Kandinsky's "inner sound," Ball's  "alchemy of  the  word," or  Henderson's "Adamic language";  but  it  may   also  induce   a sense of the  precariousness of language, the sheerly  arbitrary nature of those  con­ figurations of sound   on  which  the  whole  of  our  human  intercourse depends. I would  like  to  close this  essay  by  describing  an  experiment of  my  own: like  so much  of the  work  I have  been  discussing, it  was undertaken in  a spirit  as much whimsical  as serious,  and  has produced, I think,  a result  as beautiful as it is arbi­ trary,  as profound as it  is meaningless. Prompted  by my  usual  spirit  of  cheerful iconoclasm, I  took  one  of  the  greatest   speeches  in  Shakespearean  tragedy - Macbeth's response  to the  news of his wife's death-and subjected it to a simple linguistic  shift.  I moved  every consonant one forward in the  alphabet: c  became d, t became v. Generously, I left the  vowels alone.  The  result  is what  I suppose Derrida might call a trace, or a deferral, of the  Shakespearean original:

Tje tjoukf  jawe fief jeseagves;
Vjese xoumf jawe ceep a vine gos tudj a xosf.
Vonossox, apf vonossox, apf vonossox, Dseeqt ip vjit qevvy quade gson fay vo fay Vo vje matv tymmacme og sedosfef vine,
Apf amm ous zetvesfayt jawe mihjvef goomt

Sg

ABSTRACTION

Vje xay vo futvy feavj. Ouv,  ouv,  csieg dapfme! Mige't cuv a xamliph tjafox,  a qoos qmayes,
Vjav  tvsuvt apf gsevt jit jous uqop  vje tvahe, Apf vjep it jeasf po nose; iv it a vame
Vomf  cy ap ifiov, gumm  og toupf  apf gusy, Tihpigyiph povjiph.

These  final  words -"Tihpigyiph  povjiph" -do  indeed  form  a  sequence  of abstract sounds "signifying nothing."  Or, do they?


NOTES

1 This  essay is a re-working of "Realism and  Its Discontents," a lecture presented to the NeWest  Institute's conference on that  topic,  held  in August  1980 at Strawberry Creek,  Alberta. A slightly  revised  version  was  then  published in  Aural  Literature Criticism,  ed.  Richard  Kostelanetz  (New  York:  Precisely,   1981),  pp.  39-48.  A more  substantially revised  version  was delivered  as an  Inaugural Professorial  Lec­ ture  at  the University of Victoria in March 1982.
2  See  George   Rickey,   Constructivism:  Origins  and   Evolution    (London:  Studio
Vista,  1967), p. 42, and  also, of course,  Tom  Stoppard's play,  Travesties.
3  Hugo  Ball, Flight Out  of Time: A Dada Diary, ed.  John Elderfield (New  York: Viking,  1974), p. 70.
4  Flight Out  of Time, p. 70. This  is the  text  as  given  in  Ball's  diary.   The   version published   in  his Gesammelte  Gedichte  ( 1963)   is longer,  and  has  many  variants. For  a  detailed discussion  of  the  poem,  see  Brian   Henderson, "Radical  Poetics" (Ph.D. Dissertation, York  University, 1982), pp.  125-31.
5  See  Henderson, p.  II 9: "The  recognition of  the  futility of  actually achieving a natural language with  a  fallen  tongue  pushed   Ball  first,  in  the  direction of  the sound  poem,  and  then  straight on  through and  out  the  other side.  For  the  sound poem,  though it strove for the divine,  was only a striving human image  for it, with which  the  poet  became  dissatisfied."
6  Flight Out of Time, p. 71.
1 This  quote,  which  is not  included in  Elderfield's edition of  the  diary,  is given  by Hans Richter, in Dada: Art and Anti-Art   (London: Thames and  Hudson, 1965), p. 4I.
8  Greta Monach, "Statements: dated the  16th  of  July  1978," in  Sound  Poetry:  A Catalogue,  ed.  Steve  McCaffery and  bpNichol (Toronto:  Underwhich Editions,
1978), p. 23.
9  Harold Osborne, Abstraction  and  Artifice  in  Twentieth-Century  Art   (Oxford: Clarendon, 1979), p.  25. My own  earlier  versions  of this  essay suffer  from  such  a confusion, and   several  of  their   arguments  have   been   recast   within   the  frame­ work of Osborne's terminology.
10  Osborne, pp. 25-26.
11 Osborne, p. 26.
12 See Peter  Vergo,  "Music and  Abstract Painting:  Kandinsky, Goethe and  Schoen­ berg,"  in Towards  a New  Art:  essays on the  background  to  abstract art   1910-20, ed. Michael Compton (London: Tate Gallery,  198o), pp. 41-63.
13 Quoted in Verga,  p. 41.

go

ABSTRACTION


14  Maurice  Denis,  "Definition  du   Neo-Traditionnisme,"  first  published  in   Art  et critique,  August   1980;  available in  Maurice Denis,  Theories   (Paris:  Hermann,
1964).
15 Tom Wolfe, "The Painted Word," Harper's (April  1975).
16  See Joseph Masheck, "The  Carpet Paradigm: Critical Prolegomena to  a  Theory of Flatness," Arts Magazine,  51, No. 1 (September 1976), 93:  "We  should remem­ ber that  what  Denis  actually said was that  a picture  is a plane  with  colour patches  arranged in order before it is something else. That is far  from  saying that  it could not  also  be something else;  in  fact,  it  implies  that  the  picture  will be something else."
17  Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler, Juan Gris: His  Life  and  Work   (New  York:  Abrams, n.d.), p. 170.
18 Teodor de Wyzewa  ( 1885), quoted  in Vergo,  p. 47·
19  It is of course  possible  to argue,  at  a  more  complex  philosophical level,  that   the referentiality of language is an illusion. Jacques Derrida, for instance, questions the metaphysics of inherent "presence," and  sees the linguistic sign as a "trace." Such ideas are  explored in Steve  McCaffery's "The Death  of the Subject," Open  Letter, Third Series,  No. 7  (Summer 1977), 61-67,  and  in  Chapter IV  of Brian  Hender­ son's  dissertation, "The  Horsemen:  Adamic Language and   the   Politics  of  the Referent." However, even  if we grant these  arguments on  a  theoretical level,  we still  have  to  deal,  on  a  pragmatic level, with  the  concept of  language as  having  referential value,  and  we still have  to act  as if that  were  not an illusion.
20   Bruce  Andrews, "Writing  Social  Work  & Political   Practice," in  Aural  Literature
Criticism, p. 92.
21  Richard  Kostelanetz, "Text-Sound Art:  a  Survey," in  Text-Sound Texts,  ed. Richard Kostelanetz (New  York: William  Morrow, 1980), p. 14.
22   Ernest  Robson,  "The Concept of Phonetic Music," in  Aural  Literature  Criticism,
p.  I 13.
23   Nicholas Zurbrugg, "Regarding Recorded Literature," in  Aural  Literature  Criti- cism, pp. 62-63.
24   Flight Out  of Time, pp. xxvi-xxvii.
25  Henderson, p. 103. See also pp. 11-12, and  Chapter IV,  passim.
26   Flight Out  of Time, p. 71.
27   Steve  Reich, liner  notes  to  "Come Out," on  New  Sounds  zn Electronic  Music,
Odyssey 32 16 o16o.
28   Tristan Tzara, Sept Manifestes  Dada (Paris,  1963), p. 64.
29   Henderson, pp. 79-80.
30  John  Cage,  Empty  Words  (Middletown: Wesleyan University Press, 1979).
31 Douglas   Barbour and   Stephen Scobie,  The   Pirates of Pen's  Chance    (Toronto: Coach House,  r 981 ) , p. 64.
32   Cf.  Steve   McCaffery, "The  Death of  the  Subject,"  pp.  63-64:   "Language   is material and  primary and   what's   experienced  is the  tension  and   relationship of letters   and   lettristic clusters,   simultaneously struggling  towards,  yet  refusing  to become, significations."
33   See also Henderson, p. 127.
34  Quoted in Zurbrugg, p. 63.
35  Tom Johnson, "Secret Songs," in Text-Sound Texts, pp.  r68-71.

91

ABSTRACTION


86 The  material in the next few paragraphs is recapitulated from  my earlier essay, "I Dreamed I Saw  Hugo  Ball:  bpNichol, Dada and  Sound   Poetry," Boundary 2, 3, no. I  (Fall1974),  213-26.
37    Quoted in Vladimir Markov, Russian  Futurism: a History   (London:  MacGibbon and  Kee,  I 969) , pp. 44, I 30.
88  Markov, p. I27·
39  Markov, pp. 302-03.
40  Quoted in Markov, p. 374·
41  Quoted in Robert Motherwell, ed., The Dada  Painters  and  Poets:  An  Anthology
(New  York: Wittenborn, 195I), p. 397·
42   See Text-Sound Texts, p. I5:  "The first exclusionary distinction then  is that  words that  have  intentional pitches,  or melodies, are  not  text-sound art  but  song."
43   See Henderson, p. 82:  "Because  of the multivalent manner in which  radical poetics perceives  the  relation of word  to world,  the  writer's function is to  maximize the precipices,  the   bridgeless  gorges,  and   the   unfordable  rivers,   all   the   mysterious topology of syntax  and  language the reader  must  confront."
44  Sound   Poetry:  a Catalogue, p.  10. In  relation to  this  and   the  next  quotation, I must  acknowledge a certain  irony in quoting McCaffery, who  does  not  do  a great deal  of tape  work, in support of tape,  and  Hanson, who  is best  known  for  his work in tape, against  it.
45 Sound  Poetry:  a Catalogue, p. 47·
46   Sound  Poetry:  a Catalogue, p. 53·
47  Steve  McCaffery, "For a  poetry  of blood," manifesto issued  m 1970,  distributed by the author.
48 Sound  Poetry:  a Catalogue, p. 72.
49   Sound  Poetry:  a Catalogue, pp. 35-36.
50   Henderson  distinguishes between   "primitivism" and   "the  truly   primitive," and concludes  that   "Our attempts at   returning to  what   we  consider primitive are doomed  to be parodies" (pp.  I I0-11).








SEVEN SPECIALIZED BOOKSHOPS UNDER ONE  ROOF AT THE NEW UBC BOOKSTORE



&
BOOKSTORE




92
 • ARTS  &  HUMANITIES

• LANGUAGE & LITERATURE

• SOCIAL &  BEHAVIOURAL SCIENCES
• PROFESSIONAL

• HEALTH SCIENCES

• GENERAL

ITHE WIND  }IND THE SNOW'

Douglas Barbour





sunchilld

moving
 
lake a white expanse


streams
 the snow

sideways below over crust
of	J	dunes  of

white 	(snow)

blowing


11
'wind  of madness' a thot  blown
chill  thru  chinks of wall

that  frozen 	outside moving inside

here 	& the furnace failing
to hold it out that  wind

Ill

snow blows
to the head 	the world bled white


strife 	rife
 threads of

with  wind  lashing  the lake ghostly

93

POEM


what  shifting
 
there below


'windblown' that  snow

lV


1 see
 
'solar wind'     or

a vision of cosmos


'galaxies like grains of sand'
 
blown out 	there


it traverses    centuries of white


wind  in my ears
 
blowing


about  &
far

theres that  distance     &
the few lights are


in the far hills
 stars

dark

ness falls on all



seeds of

or near 	inside/
outside
 
sides    for the windjblown

snow

chinks of	(white)

light    swarms







94

POEM

v

in the trees


surfsound
 
(my face

freezing slowly red ears    hurt)

green  waves (above  white     in substantiality)

windtosst


Vl

where  language & landspace meet flickering
before  the eyes 	the shift


of grains snow
 of windblown


fade
 an utter


into
what     opening out is all around us

there

that  white


vii

there


watch  it go
 
lightly


oh 	yeah

there

that  wind
that snow

95




NEW TALENTS

JOHN   METCALF,  ed.,  Third  Impressions.
Oberon,  n.p.
MERNA SUMMERS,  Calling  Home.  Oberon,  n.p.
KEATH  FRASER,  Taking Cover. Oberon,  n.p.

FoR A COUNTRY notoriously  deficient in decent   magazine outlets   for  shorter  fic­ tion,  paying  respectable  remuneration, it remains a  happy  wonder  that   the  indi­  vidual  collections and  anthologies of short stories continue to appear without abate­ ment   as  book  publishing seasons  follow upon  one another. It is equally  fortuitous that  houses  of the  calibre  of Oberon are sufficiently  underwritten by the public purse to build their  reputations from  both the  veterans and   the  promising  appren­ tices of  a  literary genre  which  not  only seems to suit  the  Canadian  temperament but  also  to  fit  the  fragmented  times  in which  we live.
Significantly,  none   of  the  stories  ap­ pearing  in   the   three-author   collection,  Third Impressions, appeared first in those few  periodicals that  pay  more  than  pea­ nuts  (Editor  Metcalf  charitably refers  to the  primarily campus  publications in  his interesting introduction, as "literary mag­ azines")  and  if it were not for the likes of Oberon  I  suspect  they  would  not  appear at all.
But  whatever  the  genesis  of   publica­ tion,  our  gratitude or  our  gripes  become realities  only  in  terms  of  our  response  to the stories  themselves. Third  Impressions, the work of three writers  who have  never appeared in  book  form  before,  is gener­  ally competent  and  occasionally  startling. That  latter  description  I  unhesitatingly apply  to  the second  of Barry  Dempster's three   contributions:  a  tale   of  a  white

g6
 
man's visit to India with a dying, elderly Indian. In the  intensity of evocation, the searing  analysis   of  human  conduct  on alien soil, this proved one of the most memorable stories it has been my pleasure to  read  in  many   years.
In  "Dangerous Fish,"  Barry  Dempster makes   playful   presentation  of  a  magic spell cast on an inhabitant of a small  town in  (presumably) Ontario. This  charming if  slight  story  is surprisingly-consider­ ing its powerful predecessor, "The Burial"
-couched  in  unremarkable  prose.  His
final  contribution, "Barry's Bay,"  is  con­ cerned   with  a  son's  youthful  perceptions of  adult  anguish in   the   person   of  his father. A soft melancholy, not to say mad­ ness, tints  these  paragraphs, and  again  I was  convinced   that   a  substantially  tal­ ented  writer is  being  presented here.
Don  Dickinson, the second  contributor, belongs   more   to   the   routine  world   of North American genre  fiction.  His stories are  not  badly  done,  indeed, at  a  certain level, they  are  quite  well done,  but some­ times  the  themes  are  hackneyed, and,  as in   the  case  of  his  "Fighting  The  Up­  stream," the   work   seems   stale  and   re­ petitive, especially  in  the  light  of  prison evocations from  more  assured  and  prac­ ticed  pens.  On  the other hand, the  tangy and    invigorating   resonances  of   small­  town  life  in  his  "Kozicki & The   Living  Dog" also convey a humour which  proves welcome  antidote from  an overdose of the sometimes unduly breathless prose of some of  our   high-profile  recorders  of  small­  town Canadian life who seem so unaware of  Sherwood Anderson, who did  it all so very well for Ohio, so very long ago.
The  final contributor to this anthology, Dave  Margoshes, is the weakest  writer  of the   trio-given    the    extant   evidence. What  faintly discernible promise  informs "Truckee  Your   Blues  Away,"   and   the rest, is ultimately drowned in a sea of formulas. This is "creative writing" at its insufferable,  self-conscious  worst,   when

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



we can actually perceive the talent  stifled from  a refusal  by the author to risk mak­ ing  a fool of himself  and  leaping  beyond the  labels  of classroom  construction.
Merna Summers' second  collection of stories comes some eight years after her impressive  The  Skating   Party  which,  as here in Calling Home, centred primarily upon  the  female  experience in  rural  and small-town Alberta. It is, in fact, a matter of  an  author loyally  clinging to  a  thor­ oughly  familiar canvas -even though  we have  moved  somewhat from remembered childhood in some of the new  tales.
·But  it  is  not   those  regional  and  tra­
ditional constituents which  provide the engaging signature of this author. It is her steady insistence  on restricting her literary canvas   to a  very special  kind  of  person: those  who  normally live  undramatic and quiet  lives; whose horizons  are  the imme­ diate facts  of  life  and   death,  work  and  play,  illness and  domestic  celebration. In her  story,  "A  Pailful   of   Patridges," she refers   to   "people  who   took   risks  and squeaked through, and people  who played it safe and  lost out." The impression one gets is that  the distance between  the  two kinds  of folk  is  not  very far.
What  in  the  hands of  a  less  careful and  consummate artist   might  end  up  as so  minuscule an  arena for  human  con­ duct  that  characters appear  doll-like and  the    reader   grow    restless    for    oxygen, emerges   here  as  powerful  female   sensi­ bility  in  total  control,  spinning eloquent images   from   the  stuff   of  the  common­ place,  which   live  on  in  the  memory   as stark   ikons  of  reality.   If the   tears  and  laughter of Summers' universe  are muted, they are  neither  less bitter  nor  joyous for all  that.
I have  stressed  the ubiquity  of feminine viewpoint  in  these  stories   but   the  very first tale, "Ronnie So Long  At The Fair," is told by a seventeen-year-old boy, in relation to  his parents and  preparing for hs
 original story, but somehow it exercises a special   power   in  that   although  we  are privy   to  Ron's   closest  feelings,   there   is always  that  sense of a mother's knowing­ ness in  the  perception of  the  author as narrator.
Because so often  Merna Summers treats
of  gentle  women  who  repudiate the  his­ trionic  and  loudly  declamatory, the  sub­ theme  of her  fictions  is frequently  along the line of the worm  finally turns: "Call­ ing  Home" and   "City  Wedding"  being cases  in  point.  But  this  is  in  no  sense  a handicap. Calling  Home  may  be a  book of  largely  domestic  whispers   and   quiet  longings,  but  the  urgency  is as  authentic and  the art  as palpable, for  all  that.
With  Keath Fraser's Taking Cover we enter  a whol!y other world  of range, sen­
sibility, and  goal,  which  makes  compari­ son with his fellow Oberon authors not so much  odious  as silly. We  do  not  pursue  the  bovine  in  estimating  horses,  nor  the equine   in   judging cattle.  Quite simply, Taking   Cover   marks   the   debut  of  an important  new   west   coast   writer   who, already in  tl1is first  volume,   suggests  a legitimate contender  for  major interna­ tional  recognition.
The  stories  are  sharply  diverse  in  sub­ ject  matter and  such  is the  energetic in­ terest in the faculty  of language persistent throughout  the  book,  that   the  very  tex­ tures  of all  eight  stories  are  refreshingly divergent, too.
As a sort of foretaste or signpost  to Fraser's fixation   with   the  loom  of   lan­ guage   we  have   his  first  story,  "Roget's Thesaurus," a  brief  reconstruction of the old English lexicographer's rumination in his   ninety-first    year.   The  very   second paragraph embarks with a sentence which remains  a  presence   throughout  the   r 38 pages  of  this  collection: "I fiddled  with sounds  and  significations."
All too easily, for one of this author's erudition  and   academic   background­ the Vancouver-born writer  did a Ph.D.  in

97

BOOKS IN REVIEW



English  at  London University  before  re­ turning to Canada to teach  for five years at   the   University  of   Calgary-the  so­ called  fiddling   could  have  resulted  in  a lacklustre  didacticism,  or  even  the  pom­  posity of  a Robertson Davies. Bt
fully not so. There are  the occas10 al
ring notes of a strained simile or misuse of metaphor in Taking Cover, but  these are merely  the  passing  affectations of literary youth  and  thus  not  to be lingered  over.
The fact  is that  Fraser  emerges  here as a  natural  writer,   deeply  caring   for   his personal   prose,   and   not  as  an   English scholar   who  has  taken   to  fiction  rather than   crossword   puzzles.  The   substantial "Le  Mal  de 1'Air" is a bitter-sweet  distil­ lation  of marital  relationship-couched in  an   impressively   assured   style.  Then there  is  so  very  little   of  the   neophyte  about  this  author who  comes  to  us fully fledged and almost in total control of both method    and   goal.   Incidentally,  Fraser here,  as  with  both  Barry  Dempster and Don  Dickinson  in his "The Part  He Sees His   Country,"  reminds   us  afresh   that "The  Great  Canadian Traveller" as  a literary  idiom   has   not   been   exhausted with  the  likes of  Audrey  Thomas, Dave Godfrey, and  Margaret Laurence.
The  laconic  economy  and  quick  nudg­ ing  of  specifically  Canadian  events  and references   will  most  certainly  assure  his story, "Healing," of a perpetual anthology life.  And  apart  from  those  obvious  ele­ ments  of  Canadiana, it is also worthy  of wide  dissemination for  its  acrid   fidelity to   late   twentieth-century  circumstance and  the  vivid  evocations  of Western  Ca­ nadian living,  if for  nothing else.
There are  stories  in  this  collection - the   title  story  is  one  of  them-which project a  viewpoint of  arguable dimen­ sions. But even here  the writer  rather than the   polemicist    wins   through,  and   the reader   is  seduced   into   an   appreciative acceptance. And   that   is  artistic  power indeed.
 WINGING IT

ALICE   MUNRO,   The   Moons   of  Jupiter. Mac- millan,  n.p.

A FEW YEARS AGO   I came  across  Munro's "Dulse'' somewhat by  chance in  a  copy of The  New Yorker. As I recall,  it was a puzzling  experience, and  I began  to won­ der  what   new  shape  her  work  might   be taking.    I   was   somewhat   apprehensive. There was no question that the story bore the imprint of Munro's style, particularly the  unprepared shifts  of   point  of  view, the interweaving of  several  lives, the gen­ eral  sense  of   abandonment, all  skilfully captured  by choosing  a setting in a guest house  on  an  island  in  the  Bay of Fundy. It had  of course, its little odd sides, in this instane
Cather's past.  But  where,  I asked  myself, was  the  word  that  would  edge  the  story, willy nilly, toward  the kind of quirky epiphany so clearly  manifest in her earlier fiction   the  word   that  would  suggest,  as the na ator
"there was in everything something to be discovered"?  Perhaps  there   was   none; and  I was apprehensive as one  would  be for any writer who has unquestionably reached the  mastery  of her  craft. Would the next step run such risks that  one could not  predict the outcome? The question  is apposite, for  there   was  no  doubt   in  my mind  that   Munro was  capable either of remaining a  mere   success  or  of  finding some way deeper into  the mystery she has chosen  to explore. She has chosen  neither to abandon what  she does so well  nor  to continue in quite  the same  vein;  and  her new  collection,  The   Moons   of Jupiter, is an  achievement that  surpasses  her pre­ vious  work,  and  for  one  reason:  for  the former  clarity,  didactic in  its  purity,  she has   substituted  a  will   to   surrender  to whatever  the  story  might  suggest  in  its own  demands  to  discover  itself.  Such  a change implies  a  change  with  regard   to

DAVID  WATMOUGH
 Munro's  understanding of  her  art; and


g8

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



while   new   narrators  no  longer   radiate with the sarnr. wit, it now appears as if the wit  belongs  wholly  to  the  design  of  the stories, a design  to which  both  author and reader   must  yield.
Because Munro has chosen  to explore  a mystery, she faces more than  the usual problems   of  craft   that   writers of  short stories face:  the figure  through which  the several   levels  of  her   fictions   connect   is at  once  the  vehicle  and   the  obstacle.   It was  the  vehtcle  so  long  as  the  narrator was permitted to appear in control of the narration and   to  be  the   object   toward which   discovery  aims.  When, as  in  her recent  collection, the story itself is the discovery,  then   the  vehicle   becomes  ob­ trusive  in a competitive way. What  hap­  pens  is that  the  figure,  particularly some revelatory metaphor, is dropped. To drop  what   is often   perceived  as  the  mark  of the  short  story  requires  incredible assur­ ance,  for  it  means  that one  must  surren­ der    to   something   beyond    skill.   That Munro has been aware of the risk -that something must  follow  upon   skill -has been  apparent at  least  since  the conclud­ ing story  of  Something I've   Been  Mean­ ing to Tell You, in which  the  narrator, a relatively clear  autobiographical persona,  observes   of  her   mother  that    "she   has stuck  to  me  as close as ever  and  refused to fall  away,  and  I could  go on,  and  on, applying what   skills  I  have,  using  what tricks I know, and it would always be the same." It  is  that   act   of  surrender that gives  her  new  stories  their   power:  they adhere not  so much  because  of  the  nar­ rator's telling,  but  because  of the author's
persistent  yielding   to  what   the  story  is telling her. So far as I am aware, Munro's method  is  not  one  that   "works   a  story up,"  but  rather one  that   pares  away  to what  can  minimally remain and  still sur­ vive the pressures of its implications. This  means   that   the  burden  of  the  stories  is borne  by the  material gaps  on  the  page as  well  as  by  the  concession   to  multiple
 focus,  while  staying  within   the  limits  of the  traditional bounds   of  the  form.
Thus,  if  one  must  speak  of  a  special
kind  of  loss, the  loss of a  somewhat  ob­ trusive  narrator impelled to  identify,  to display,  often   with   dazzling  grace,   her awareness   how   all   action   conduces   to metaphor, what  can  one  say  of what  re­ mains?  Now  that  the  narrator finds her­  self  on  a  par   with  other  characters in the  story,  suddenly  characters that   for­ merly appeared  peripheral, those marvel­ lous  gestures   that   could   be   tossed  off because  they  were  needed   for  discovery, what  were once hardly more than  rhetori­ cal figures are now indispensable in them­ selves. Such  are  David   and  Kimberly in "Labor Day  Dinner," Albert's   wife  and sister-in-law  in  "The  Visitors," the  won­ derful    infiltration  that    Kay   makes   in "Bardon Bus."  A whole  story, "Pure," is dedicated  to  such   a  figure.  Readers of Munro will  not  be  surprised  by  figures like  these;  but  what  is new  is  their  gain in  definition   that   follows  upon  the  nar­  rator's  self-effacement.  Where  they  were once  drawn   with  whim,  sympathy, and even  a slight condescension, subsumed  as they  were  by  the  narrator's more  privi­ leged  position,  they  now  appear with  an overwhelming gust  of  compassion.  Con­ sider  the wonderful, epiphanic conclusion  of   Lives   of   Girls   and    Women, when Bobby Sheriff  did  "the only special  thing  he ever  did  for  me"  and  danced   "like  a plump   ballerina."  The  narrator's com­ ment  on the  dance, no matter how  ado­  lescent  and  how  appropriate to  the  nar­  rative, implies  the sense of the old style in high  relief:   "People's  wishes,  and   their other  offerings,   were  what   I  took  then naturally, a  bit  distractedly,  as  if  they were never anything more  than  my due." That this  is a  tendency, focusing  either the  narrator in  first  person  or some  cen­ tral   protagonist,  would   be   difficult  to deny;  and  it  inheres in  Munro's under­ standing that   figures  of   fiction   are   not

99

BOOKS IN REVIEW



symbols but  metaphors of identity  whose enactment  is in  the  telling,  in  how  the story sets forth to find Del or Rose or whatever other masks  "I" would  choose.
I have  said  that  this  new  collection  is characterized by Munro's willingness to yield  to  the  demands of the  story, and  I am  aware how  close  this  borders   upon cant.  I want, however,  to emphasize   the apparent lack  of focus  in The Moons  of Jupiter, for it is this lack, the frequent absence   of  protagonist  or  guiding   nar­ rator,    that   allows   her   text   to   emerge  polyphonically; and   the  absence  of  that  particular  pressure    allows   one   to   slip from  the  object  of discovery  to  the  pro­ cess of discovery  itself. This shift of per­ ception  is one that  enhances the author at the narrator's expense, and we are almost allowed  to see how the author goes about the  assembling of  sequences,  almost  per­ mitted   to  know  when   a  character  will enter  and  for what reason. I say "almost," for  part   of   the  delicacy  of  Munro's art is  the  pressure   it  puts   upon   the   tradi­ tional short  story without becoming  over­ whelmed  by post-structural play. Munro never seems to .refine her art  without first earning  title   to  the   refinement:  to  be merely   new  would   not  seem  sufficient. But  the  effect  of her  gradual move away from   emphasizing  ends   and   endings   is such  as to make  of her  fiction  a medita­ tion   both   upon   her   craft   and   the   life within  which  it  dwells, a life  whose lan­  guage is honed  and  loved well. One thinks of  the   late   essays  of   Montaigne  when whoever  "I" signifies is  drawn  inevitably into its text, its shape bent to fit whatever shape  its fiction  assumes. I want  to men­ tion   "Dulse"  again   as  a  story  of  such capability,   and   "Bardon  Bus"  and   the exquisitely wrought "Labor Day Dinner," its voices  continually drifting into  minds and  through the air of windows. And how do  the   ephemeral sequences   of  "Hard­ Luck  Stories" cohere? Simply  because  of apparently shared   themes,  or  because  of

100
 their  quality of being  so accurate-I  al­ most  said  "classic" -that  their ending is only arbitrary? And  they do not  end,  for their  telling  is only an occasion for further meditation, further   unknowing.  As  the narrator observes  of  one  of  the  listeners, "Something   unresolved   could    become permanent. I  could   be  always   bent   on knowing,   and  always  in  the  dark,  about  what   was  important  to  him,  and   what  was  not."
It has become a commonplace in the criticism of Alice  Munro to speak  of her as always suspended between  the conven­ tions    of   fiction    and    confession.    The change that  these stories witness, I would suggest,  no bnger permits such  a distinc­ tion  and   for  what  may  appear a  para­ doxical reason.  The mark  of a documen­ tary  (or  confession)  is its  reliance upon artifice  to suggest the real. Fiction, by contrast, requires but  art  to produce the real.  Munro, by  abandoning her  will  to order through identity, her  desire  to urge pattern into metaphor, by shifting the weight of perception from  narrator or protagonist to the endless surprise  of plot, has  chosen   to  make   us  believe  that   the real yields only to art and  not to some unresolved collusion  between  fiction and quasi-autobiography. What, then,  are  we to  make  of  the  word  "connection" that, one  way  or  another, is used in several  of these stories,  and  as a sub-title to the first half   of  the   initial  story?   The  narrator herself  of  the  title-story furnishes an  an­ swer,  and   it  is an  answer   that  could  be used  as  a  commentary on  the  technique of the  whole  collection: "I ask  my mind  a   question. The  answer's   there,  but   I can't see  all  the  connections  my  mind's making to get it." That willingness,  how­ ever,  to distinguish "I"  so from  "mind," to  let  "I"  articulate while   "mind"  in­ visibly  and  independently connects, is at once  magnanimous and   decisive,   for  it has  released  Munro from  the  tyranny of "meaning." To  choose  to explore  myster-

BOOKS IN REVIE\V



ies one  must  be prepared for certain  sac­ rificial  acts,  and  also  incalculable  discov­ eries,  where   one   must   be  prepared, as Munro remarks in  "the  Turkey Season," to "Never mind  facts. Never  mind  theor­  ies, either." It is to enter a country where contradictions,   lacunae,  even    the   un­ wanted come  with  the  territory. It is the art  of the meditation: to lay bare  as part  of the routine exercises  of the spirit.

E. D. BLODGETT


BLEAK HOUSE

NORA  KEELING,   The   Driver.  Oberon, $17.95;
pa. $8.95.
DON  BAILEY,   Making Up.  Oberon, $15.95·
GEORGE Me WHIRTER,   God's Eye. Oberon,
$15.95;  pa.  $7·95·

THE   SOPHISTICATED  STORY,  these  days, has  little  regard for  narrative, very little use  for  plot.  Sometimes one  misses  this old-fashioned element. Implication, innu­ endo,  and   the  endless  ironies  of  human relations  can   pall.   If  these   collections fail   to  fully  satisfy,  it   may   be  for   this reason.
Nora    Keeling's  work   is  strong    and acrid.  She  writes  with  a Swiftian distaste for  life-in-the-flesh. Whether  the  charac­ ters are engaged in eating, washing,  elim­ ination, or  sex,  our  attention is  relent­ lessly  directed  to   the   grossness   of   the bodily   functions.   Have  you    forgotten what   flesh   entails,   Keeling  coldly   en­ quires?  Let  me  remind you.  And  she  is accurate:  painfully, unerringly accurate.
The  title story is told  by a pregnant woman  who  miscarries at  seven  months.
The baby is born  dead.  The  narrator's distaste  for  her  husband and  his family, with whom  they are living, is palpable. Returning from  hospital, she  must  suffer through family   meals,  and   washing  rit­ uals.  Her   husband is circumspect:   "one  would  hear  only discreet swishes of  water
 and  a single apologetic rush of it.... Hu­ bert  was  much   different,  urinating  and  defecating loudly, splashing wildly in  his tub,  slamming the  toilet  seat and  singing  happily  off-key  all  the  while."
Her  husband's kiss forces  her  to  focus on  his  nose,  "beaky, with  flared  nostrils out  of which  curled   several  black  hairs, like  parasitical insects...." The  story closes  with   the   narrator's secretive  de­ parture from  tl1e house and  people whom she finds so distasteful.
In  "The Bird-Winged Truck Driver," a iliirteen-year-old marriage crumples slowly, "deflated, sunk  in  like a  jack-in­ the-box." The driver /mechanic who, over these  years, has  repaired so  many  house­ hold   problems  is  now   called   upon   to service  ilie lonely woman: "It was good, so good,  she  has  yet  to  come  down,  his blunt   fingers,  always  knowing   where   to put  themselves,  in  what   manner, which one, how, the  red  throb,  the tip,  the eat's breast sound,  the honey scent, wild, the square   bed ... and   then  she,  the  driver now herself ... the girl could  walk on his damp grass,  each   blade  erect  and   of  a hue."
"Armand's Rabbit" is a bitter  little  tale of broken marriages, lust, and  boredom. Again,  ilie  time  spans  more  than  a  dec­ ade. On  a holiday  in  Paris  with  her  hus­ band,  Catharine discovers  her lover  from her  student days. At  the  end,  it  remains unclear whether or  not  the  husband will tolerate   the  affair:  "She  supposed   that  she  would  go  back  with  them  all  when­  ever they were  ready  to go." Cailiarine is strangely  passive  with  regard to husband and  children; lust seems  the  only  reality.  Keeling   writes  well,   but   the   aftertaste from  these stories is unpleasant.
Making Up, Don  Bailey's second  book in two years, is a series of semi-connected stories in which  some of the basic charac­ ters  recur.   The  first  narrator,   a   single
parent with  a three-year-old son, calls himself  a very  ordinary man.  The  prose,

IOI

BOOKS IN REVIEW



deceptively  simple, is clear and  finely balanced:  "Apparently even  as a lover  I was aimless.  I  didn't seem  to care  about making  a career. She said I was a nickel­ and-dimer. I preferred to think of  myself as a dreamer. Apparently it  boiled  down to the same  thing."
Bailey's characters are loners, suspicious of love, wary of commitments after  harsh experiences. But  they  are  also scrappers, ready  to  fight  for  another chance,  "be­ ginning  to make  up  a new  dream." The  title  image  catches the  muted   optimism of Bailey's  typical  protagonist and  of the collection  as a  whole.  The  pun  is a  nice one. "Making  out" is adolescent; "mak­ ing up" suggests  the activity  of the artist,  the lover,  the  dreamer.
George  MeWhirter has  made  a  name as a poet with  collections such as Catalan Poems, Queen of the Sea, and The  Island Man. God's  Eye  is a  poet's  prose, evoca­ tive  and  sensuous.  Set  in  Mexico, these stories  expertly conjure  up  that  country of sun:

God  had  transferred his face  to Mexico. He let   it  shine    in   Morelos  in   the   hallowed months of  December to  February. The tall grass  turned to burnished straw, as if forged directly from  the  sunlight and  dropped down from  heaven as beautifully and  unmistakably as  rain.... He  had watched the  cattle and
-birds being  drawn to  lagoons  to  drink; the birds  spinning in  the  webbed sky, dangling diamond   black    and  angel    white   in   the sticky    threads.   Released,  they    retreated, lifted  elastically into the  sky again.

McWhirter's people  find themselves in tenuous   relationships  and   ironic   situa­ tions. "Nobody's Notebook" blends a lov­ er's   triangle of  three   males  with  a  spy intrigue.   An    italicized    refrain    pulses through the notebook  jottings: "He loves me,  he  loves  me  not;  we  never love  at all." Secure  in  the knowledge  that  such a murder is of little interest  to either  police or  press,  the  Mexican observer  murders his  American  rival :  "The readers   could fill in  the  details.  They  would  like that."

102
 In  "The Cicada and  the  Cockroach," the  friendship of a  young  American girl and  a Mexican goatherd makes an amus­ ing  if  sardonic  tale.  But  "Something to Grin   At"  is  black,  black  humour, illus­ trating  a  maxim   from  an earlier   tale: "Mexicans ... treat  people   like  shit  and  animals like animals."
I come  back  to the sense of  disappoint­ ment   with   which   I  began.  Is  optimism out   of   fashion,  as   well   as   narrative? Bailey is the only writer, of  three,  to give a nod  in  these  directions. Does fine writ­  ing have  to be bleak?  Obviously  not.  We have  writers  such as Laurence, Wiseman, Callaghan, Hood, and  Wiebe  to reassure  us on  this score.
PATRICIA MORLEY



AlMER
ET SE CONNAITRE
JEAN-FRANCOIS   SOMCYNSKY,  Peut-atre  a
Tokyo. Naaman, n.p.
NADIA   GHALEM, L'Oiseau  de  fer. Naaman, n.p.
JEAN-ERIC PARISIEN, Nadeige.  Naaman, n.p.

TRIPTYQUE   DU  DESESPOIR,  ces  trois  OU­ vrages  se  donnent pour  but  la  quete  de l'amour et de la comprehension humains.
C'est   une  quete menee  soit  a travers   le voyage soit  a travers  l'erotisme ou le reve
hallucinatoire et dont l'aboutissement est la  deception et  la  desillusion.
Les  divers   decours  dont   se  sert  J.-F.
Somcynsky dans son recueil de vingt-six contes  lui  permettent d'explorer l'amour dans une  optique erotique. Ses recits respirent la sensualite et la volupte. Tous lessens sont  assaillis:  on sent la fragrance musquee des femmes,  on  voit  leurs  corps sensuels,   on   entend  leurs   voix   langou­
reuses.  La  musique "mysterieuse et  char­
neUe" se lie aussi  a cette  volupte des sens.
Cependant, cet  erotisme nous  presente
une  image  negative et parfois  violente  de

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



]'amour;  liaisons   furtives,  hommes   ra­ paces,    viols    reguliers;   bref,    toute    Ia gamme, jusqu'a Ia decapitation  en  plein acte  sexuel.  La  tendresse que ]'on associe habituellement a ]'amour est absente  dans Ia  plupart  de  ces  recits.  Quoi  de  plus revelateur que  cette  phrase du conte alle­ gorique  "La   Marche    des    baobabs" : "Quand  les  baobabs   s'approchaient,  Ia tendresse  cachee  au creux  de leurs ventres  massifs,  les  autres  arbres   s'eloignaient." On  cherche Ia  richesse  que !'amour peut offrir  mais on  ne trouve  que  Ia mefiance,  le refus et meme  Ia mort:  "Je comprenais qu'a  travers cette  femme splendide, ]'aile de Ia  mort  m'avait  froM."
L'amour n'est que deception et illusion, ce qui explique !'importance accordee par
!'auteur au reve. Mais le salut  ne s'y trou­ verait  point.  Le "grand reve erotique" de Suzanne  dans   "Une  Semaine  de   prin­ temps"   ne  se  realise  pas.  L'amour, reve ephemere,  est   toujours  hors  de  portee. Aimer,  comme  voyager,  donne   un  senti­ ment  iilusoire de liberte: on  ne se libere pas  de  soi-meme.
Cependant, le tableau n'est  pas  totale­ ment    negatif.  L'auteur   semble   vouloir dire que l'essentiel  entre  les etres humains, c'est  le  dialogue-il  nous  faut  Ia  com­ munication  spirituelle  ainsi   que   corpo­  relle. Les hommes et les femmes se doivent  une egale  franchise.
En depit  d'un style parfois  trop  lyrique, Somcynsky   nous   livre   une   oeuvre   qui brille  par  sa clarte et  par  Ia force  de son expression.  Des  recits  realistes  se cotoient
a  des  recits  allegoriques, fantastiques et
parfois  cocasses  afin  de  nous  convaincre
qu'un nouvel  ordre est  possible.
Comme Somcynsky,  Nadia Ghalem se sert   du   reve,   de  !'aspect  hallucinatoire d'une  existence   dont   les  contours  sont flous.   Elle   veut   soulinger    l'etat   ephe­ mere  de  l'homme; dans  ses cinq  contes, l'homme est  aliene  a  la  societe  dans  la­ quelle  il  se  trouve. On  cherche  le  rap­  prochement, Ia certitude dans Ia vie, mais
 on  ne trouve  que  le doute,  ]'impuissance d'agir et  Ia  non-appartenance. Dans   le premier   conte,    par    exemple,   Pascal, l'homme marginal,  "se  sentait etranger comme  tous  les metis  qui  sont  chez  eux partout et   nulle   part." D'ou Ia  nature schizophrene  de   l'homme;  on   a   envie "d'etre au  coeur  du  monde  et  de  ]e fuir en  meme  temps." On   fuit  ses  emotions dans  le reve  mais  ce n'est  qu'une  echap­ patoire iilusoire-"Ia  chute  brutale de l'iilusion  perdue."
L'homme inadapte  a  son   environne­ ment  se voit  tres  bien  dans "Le  Recom­ mencement," ou  Mourad,  immigrant al­
gerien,  se sent  aliene  a son  pays  adoptif,
et dans "L'Oiseau de fer," ou Jean, jeune
gan;on  indien, se sent  dechire entre  deux cultures et sait qu'un jour il devra  choisir entre  les deux.  Ghalem propose  une solu­ tion pour l'Indien qui  ne veut  pas perdre ses anciennes coutumes mais qui sait qu'il  ne pourra jamais  y retourner. Jean saura  concilier   le  metier   de   pilote   avec   son heritage  d'Indien. Cependant, cette  con­ ciliation   ne  se  fait pas.  La  fin  nous  ap­  prend  que  Jean est  devenu   ouvrier. Son reve  ne  s'est  pas  realise.  La  conclusion pessimiste surprend  un  peu,  vu  que   les quatre premiers   contes   nous  ont  donne une impression  plutot positive. Trois sur quatre se terminent par  des points  de suspension, laissant ainsi Ia possibilite de querison,  d'un meilleur   monde.
Le  style  de  Ghalem, embelli  de  nom­ breuses   metaphores,  est   net,   concis   et souvent  elliptique. Son  entree en  matiere se  fait   de  fa-.on  immediate   et   elle   ne s'attarde pas  sur  des  details  inutiles. En contrepartie,  il  y  a   parfois   un   certain decousu   qui   alourdit  le   rythme  de   sa prose. Mais cette  reproche est mineure et ne  mitige  nullement  !'importance de  ce recueil  divertissant et instructif.
A Ia difference des  deux  premiers  re­ cueils, !'oeuvre de J.-E. Parisien est, selon lui, un recit, mais c'est  un recit qui resiste
a toute  definition. D'une part, c'est  une

BOOKS IN REVIEW



histoire   qui   decrit   les  malheurs d'une jeune fille paysanne qui surmonte son sort injuste.  Nadeige   represente  la   martyre typique  de  la classe paysanne  qui  souffre beaucoup  en   peinant  pour   des  maitres bourgeois.   Ayant   eu   un  enfant  du   fils dudit bourgeois,  elle se voit obliger  d'en­ voyer  le  petit  chez  des  parents  et,  pour
subvenir a ses besoins, elle devient prosti­
tuee.  Trois  annees   passent  avant qu'elle
ne voie son fils; periode pendant laquelle elle fait d'enormes sacrifices pour lui. Ala fin,  comme   par  miracle,  elle  gagne   une
fortune a la loterie.
Histoire  banale?  J'en   conviens,   mais intercales dans  ce recit  peu  original  sont
quelques episodes qui esquissent en paral­
li le
moureux, pere  de  !'enfant de  Nadeige. Ces  episodes  ne  sont  rien  d'autre qu'un pamphlet  sociopolitique  de   la   part   de I'auteur. II utilise  une  vielle  technique­ le debat litteraire-afin  de  vehiculer  ses sentiments et  opinions  personnels.  Mais le  probleme,  c'est   que  cette  dialectique est hors-propos;  elle  interrompt le fil de
l'histoire et,  a vrai  dire,  nous fatigue  par
la  maniere  verbeuse,   vague   et  pedante
dont elle est presentee.
En  effet,  le defaut le plus serieux  chez
Parisien  est que  son  ecriture est  penible­ ment   lourde. Que   dire  des  phrases  am­ poulees  comme   "le  crepuscule pubere," "autant de spectacles auxquels se refusent  mes   orbites   exasperees"  et   des   cliches
comme   "condamnes  a  fouiller   le  fond
des  verres  de  clairin a la  recherche de
leur  identite perdue."
iEn outre, les deux  societes qu'il  decrit
-bourgeoise  et   paysanne-sont   trap unidimensionnelles. D'une part,  il  y a la bonne  paysanne souffrante mais  tenace, remplie d'amour mais  repudiee et  finale­ ment  recompensee pour  son "bon coeur," et, d'autre part,  le requisitoire  vehement dresse   contre  la   bourgeoisie   hai:tienne, personifiee   par   Yves   Lamoureux  (sur­  nom  ironique!),  homme   arrogant,  froid

104
 et   calculateur;  homme sans   coeur   qui abuse   des  sentiments  de   Nadeige.   Ces deux  portraits sont  trop  transparents et se
reduisent a des stereotypes flagrants.
En   somme,   une  structure  plus  cohe­
rente et  un  style  plus  clair  et  plus  precis auraient fait  de Nadeige  un recit passion­ nant qui  nous  aurait  brosse  un  tableau fascinant d'une societe  troublee. Nous  ne pouvons   que  regretter  ce  qui  aurait pu etre.
M. BENSON


FANTASY FOUR

VIRGIL BURNETT,  Skiamachia. Porcupine's
Quill, $4.95.
FRANCES  DUNCAN,  Dragonhunt. Women's
Press,  $5.95.
JOHN   ROBERT coLOMBo,   Years   of  Light:  A Celebration of Leslie  A. Croutch. Hounslow,
$g.gs.
DAVID HELWIG,   The   King's  Evil.  Oberon, n.p.

ALL OF  THESE  WORKS  are  in some  way associated  with  fantasy. But very different aspects  of fantasy. And  with  very  differ­ ent  results.
One  might call Years  of Light  a hobby­ horse   book.   Colombo  has   produced  a number of volumes  on  Canadian science fiction  and  this is one  more,  on Canada's greatest sf fan. Colombo's brief history  of Canadian  fandom  is interesting but  ex­ tended quotations from  Croutch's  writing suggest   that   his  neglect   is  not   unwar­ ranted. I don't care  what  obscure  writers Colombo wishes to read,  I just don't think he  should  inflict  them  on  the  rest  of  us. This  is especially  the  case  when  some  of the excerpts are sub-Reader's Digest  jokes and  sexist  and  anti-welfare comments of the  sort   heard   in  every   neighbourhood bar.
The one  aspect  of more  general  inter­ est, which  Colombo mentions only briefly, is  the  comparison  which   can   be  made  between  the  "fanzines" (fan  magazines)

BOOKS IN REVIEW



and  the literary little  magazines. Both are produced cheaply, have  very small circu­ lations  and   are  often   decidedly  idiosyn­ cratic. Yet  most of us would have quite  a bit  of  respect   for  Louis  Dudek's  Delta and  not  much  for  Croutch's Light.  The  questionable political diatribes of the for­ mer  are eccentric, those  of the  latter are nutty.  Is  this,  as  fans  would  claim,   just another example of the  bias of the  mun­ dane?  (a word  which sf fandom uses with venom).
Burnett's book is yet another reworking of classical  myths. The prose is banal  and superficial and  completely lacking  in  the dark  undercurrents of the  illustrations which  accompany it. To  me the drawings are  a  bit  too  redolent of  the  Black  Sab­ bath    style   poster    art   we   all   suffered through  some  years  ago  but  Burnett  is obviously  a  fine  draughtsman.  A certain  taste  will find  his  pictures  attractive but he should  keep his pens away from words.
A too unrestrained imagination is the problem with  Duncan. I can  understand her interest in updating the story of St. George  and  localizing it in British Colum­ bia.  As one  might  expect  given  the  pub­  lisher, Duncan links it to a feminist  search for   identity.  After   all,   hasn't  everyone been  telling  us that  all  myth  is just such a reflection  of the search for self?
Duncan employs  a  variety of  contem­ porary  feminist issues and images in shap­  ing her  story. The central character, Ber­ nice Carswell, a reclusive  eccentric, has a series  of   dreams,  many   associated   with TV.  Among   the  subjects which  arise  in the -dreams are  ravished maidens, assault on women,  rape,  pregnancy, the anti-war movement, ecology,  weddings, an  old folk's  home  and  girl  guides.  In  the  main action  of the book, Bernice's journey  with the  septuacentenarian St.  George,   there are   a  number  of  similar elements. For example, Bernice  digs  up  clams,  that  old symbol of female  sexuality, but instead of eating them   she  gives  them   a  "gift," a
 




A.M. Klein:
Short Stories

Edited by M.W  Steinberg

A vibrant  collection of little­ known short fiction by the author of the remarkable poetic novel The Second  Scroll. Here are stories of Jewish life focusing on legends, festivals and ceremonies, well-known character types, and familiar aspects of life in the horne, in the synagogue, and on the streets. Also included are social and political  satire and parodies of literary debates and the detective story. Together they form an invaluable addition to
the canon  of Klein's works.
(Collected \t\brks of A.M. Klein)
$35.00 cloth, $14.50 paper

University  of
Toronto Press



105

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



plastic   pearl,    and   then   replaces   them. Thus  a woman  places a seed but  without destruction. At the end of the novel, when they  do   become   a  meal   there   is  little subtlety  in  the reference to clam as "holy water."
Perhaps all these ideas could have been
yoked  together into  something   coherent and  meaningful but  Duncan hasn't  done it.  It makes  me  think   of  that   old  saw, "Write about what  you know."  I think  a corollary  of  this for  writers  of fantasy  is that   they  must  make  it seem  as  though their   subject  is  as  familiar  to  them   as Alice  Munro's  small-town Ontario is to her.  They   cannot, as  Duncan  seems  to have done, assume that just creating weirdness  is enough. At  the  end  of  the novel,  she says of Bernice,  "Yet  she  can­ not destroy  George  for  to destroy  a myth destroys the mind,  while to renew a myth,  to harbour it, to imbue  it with a personal  significance, benefits  the  mind-indeed, benefits  all  minds   which  the  myth   will ever  touch." One  is left with  no question  as to what  Duncan meant to do. That she has not done  it should  not deny her some credit  for grasping at such an unreachable Grail.
I am  tempted  to  say  much   the  same about   David   Helwig's The   King's  Evil, but this is a reach  by much  a more sophisticated arm. Also, the myth  is a  bit more novel and  a bit less mythic. Helwig's hero  is  not  a  wandering peasant  every­ woman  but a plain overweight CBC radio  producer, who  has  the  personal problem  of  the  desertion and  then  death  of  his lover and  the professional  problem  of an obsession with history  at a time when  the "New  Men," hotshots  with  their  ear  to a rocking  contemporary pulse,  have  taken over.
The hero  has  taken  a leave of absence to  gain   some  clarity  in  his  life.  He   is secluded   in  a  colonial   farmhouse, built by United Empire Loyalists.  He  finds  a book  which   seems  to  have  belonged   to

106
 Charles I, who claimed the God-given ability  to cure,  by royal  touch,  the  king's evil, scrofula. Did  Charles escape  the scaffold   and   come   to  North  America? Did  an  imposter die  in  his  place?
The  hero   considers writing a  radio documentary which  tells the  tale. But  he has  recently  been  working  on  a  study  of art  forgery.  And  his graduate thesis  was Gods in Exile:  A Study  of the  I conogra­ phy of Monarchy. And  the first owner  of the  house,  a possible  descendant of King  Charles, was the faithless  lover  of  a black slave.  And  the  present owner  of  the  his­ torical   records   of  the  house  is  a  British aristocrat who is pretending to be her  de­ ceased  brother, Lord  Firebrace, because she  was  discarded  by  a later descendant who has the same name as the first owner  of the house.
And   more.   All  in   one   hundred  and thirty   pages.   I  suppose   such   a   jumble could   work  in  such  a  brief  space  but  I don't see how. It certainly hasn't in Hel­ wig's   case.   This  is  especially   irritating because    individual   elements   are   often quite  good.  The   best  I think  are  a  very frightening scene  in  which  the  hero  gets caught in the  basement of  the house and,  later, the strange wispy conversations with the  "Lord."
But   in   both   cases   Helwig   takes   the time  to develop his material. And  both episodes  are essentially  descriptive. When the  novel  turns  to philosophical dilemma or  almost   Leonard  Cohen-like  explora­ tions of a chaotic mind  it is far less satisfy­ ing.
I suspect   that   many   readers  of  this novel will just discard  it as a lot of  imagi­ nation with  no place  to go. Which is too bad.  I personally wish  I  was  seeing  it as an editor rather than  a reviewer. At dou­  ble  the  length, with   the  stream-of-con­ sciousness  elements  and  a  few  other bits deleted, it could  be a gem. The resonance of   Helwig's   ideas   on   radio,    art,    the U.E.L., history, etc., should  have  created

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



a novel on the level of The  Wars or Fifth Business. As it is, it scrapes  in  just a few steps higher  than  Dragonhunt.

TERRY GOLDIE


NO PLACE LIKE

BETTY CLARKSON, Tom, David, and the Pirates.
Borealis,  $8.95.
JANICE  COWAN,  The   Secret  of Ivy  Lea. Bore­
alis,  $r5·95; pa.  $7-95·
NELL   HANNA,   Where the   Heart   Is.  Borealis
$7-95· 	,

FINDING  A   NEW  HOME,  retaining or  re­ turning to an old one, is the focus of  these three   fine  children's  books,  set   (respec­ tively)  in seventeenth-century Newfound­ land,  contemporary southeastern Ontario, and   turn-of-the-century Russia   and   Al­ berta.
Setty Clarkson's Tom, David, and the
Pirat,es, written for  the  eight- to  twelve­
year-old  reader, is an  entertaining adven­ ture   story   about  two   boys   who   leave Plymouth with  their  fathers in  I672  on a voyage  to St. John's. There  they pass the fishing  season  and   winter,  finally  sailing home  the  next  year.  The voyage  out  and fishing  season  provide a  larger  structure for   an   episodic   plot   which   includes   a storm  at sea, escape from  pirates  by cover of fog, a near capture by Indians in New­ foundland,  and   the  boys' final  triumph: during their stint as sentries,  they spot and help  to disperse  by cannon a pirate attack on  the colony. This book admirably com­ bines  these  adventures with  a great  deal of   "educational" material-on  the  In­ dian   Skull  Dance, whaling, drying   cod, egg-gathering from  the now extinct  Great Auks-without   any   irritating  shift   of gears  from  narrative to  historical detail. The young  reader will  feel,  along  with Tom and  David, the  tug of homesickness for their  return trip  to England, balanced by  the   fascination  of   their   life  in   St. John's-epitomized in the  bustle of fish-
 ing  boats,  the  fishermen's shouts  in  dif­ ferent  languages, the smell of rotten fish, and  the scream of  the  gulls.
Janice Cowan's The  Secret of Ivy  Lea,
also written for children ages eight  to twelve, similarly  plays on  the theme of "home" with  an  intriguing plot set in the Kingston  and   Thousand  Islands    area. The home  in question is the Grahams' family  cottage, to  be either  kept  or  sold after  their  grandmother's death. As if the rumour, and  some  evidence, of  the  cot­ tage's  being  haunted (who  cut  the  grass before their arrival?) were not mysterious enough, the adventuresome children hap­ pen  upon  a few smugglers using  the  cot­ tage's  twin  islands  as  a  base.  They   also discover   Martin,  an   escaped    German prisoner-of-war who  has  been  in  hiding on  the  second  island,   with  their  grand­ mother's  blessing,  since  World  War   II. Al ough
children and   Martin contrive their  own rescue and  the cottage of Ivy Lea remains
in  the family,  with  Martin as  no-longer­ incognito custodian. The  book  excels  as adventure story,  but  adds  to  the  danger and  unexpected turns  of  its  plot  the  por­  trayal of a very close and funloving family  whose affection for one another and  fam­ ily  ties  to   Ivy   Lea   provide   emotional depth to  fast-paced adventure in  woods and  on  water.
In  Where  the Heart Is, written for  the younger  teen  reader, Nell  Hanna fiction­ alizes the  life of her  father  Nick, born  in the  Ukraine in  the  late  nineteenth cen­  tury. As a boy in  I894, Nick accompanies his family  on  their  migration to a home­ stead  in Alberta. There he eventually sets up a place of his own, marries,  and  has a family. Scenes of  the joy of young married life  alternate  with   tragedy   when   Nick's  oldest son dies of exposure, lost in a hail­  storm,  and   his  wife  is  struck   down   by influenza   after   World   War  I. The  last chapters of the book show Nick as grand­ father, finally  wondering  whether  or  not

107

BOOKS IN REVIEW



his  second  son  will  smvive   the  Second World War as a flyer. While the print  is regrettably small in this book, the author's prose is rich  in concretely descriptive vig­ nettes of rural  life;  the deep sentiment of the  book's  many   episodes,  moreover,   is never  maudlin. Indeed, the  counterpoint of joy and  sorrow  in Nick's fortunes, and those of his siblings  which frame  the nar­  rative,  plays above  the deeper ground-bass of the  family's emotional transition from their   Russian  to their   Canadian  home.  This  theme  and its  emotional resonance  bind   the  episodes   together as  Nick  and  his  loved  ones  discover   that   their   new home  is  "where the  heart   is."  For  even as Nick, numb  with  lonely  grief,  mourns  his wife  at  her  fresh  grave,  his thoughts turn  to his adopted country:

This special land of life. It had  given  him so much and  taken so much  from  him.  Why need  it  always   be  the   thing  he  needed and treasured  above all  others that  he  had   to lose?  The frozen clods  of clay  fell  loud  upon the  casket   and   he  turned to  go  away.  The glare   of   the   snow   beneath  the   afternoon sun  almost   blinded  him.  He  lifted   his  face to   the   blue    of   the   eastern  sky,  soothing blue.   From  it  and   from   somewhere out   of the  distant past  he  heard someone say  with finn conviction,
"Thou land   of  hope  ..."

MURRAY J• EVANS


TENUOUS PAST, OPEN FUTURE

The  New  Oxford   Book  of Canadian  Verse  in English,  chr>sen  and   with   an   Introduction by  Margaret  Atwood. Oxford, $19-95·

WHEN A.   J. M. SMITH compiled  the  first important (one can  equally  justly use the word  "great")  anthologies of the work of poets in our  country, the  Book  of  Cana­ dian   Poetry   and    the   Oxford   Book   of Canadian  Verse,  he   was   doing   much more than  picking  a collection  of good or even significant  poems.  He  was discover-

ro8
 ing  and  charting the  lines  of a tradition, establishing a canon, and  in the process laying  the foundations for a mature criti­ cal  approach to  Canadian  poetry,  espe­ cially Canadian poetry in English. Smith's classic collection had been out of print  for years  when   Oxford  University Press  in­ vited  Margaret Atwood  to repeat Smith's task a generation afterwards by preparing a  New  Oxford Book  of Canadian Verse for the  rg8o's. A fine poet, an acute  critic, a scholar respectful of the  past  as well as sensitive  to contemporary trends,  Atwood seemed  from  the beginning an excellent choice  for  the task, and, grudging though one  may  here  and  there  be about choices that  conflict  with  one's  own  preferences, she   has   put   together  a  collection that stands well  beside  its  predecessors, both because  of its  good  organization and  be­ cause  of the  richer resources  from  which  she has been able  to select.
Atwood's "Introduction"  is  a  modest
and sensible discussion of the problems involved in selecting  an  anthology out  of a young  tradition, most  of whose  notable practitioners are   still  alive  and  even­ many  of  them -in  the  full flow of their  creativity. It is true,  as she says, that  "All cultures are,   to  some  extent,  retrospec­ tive :   we  see  where  we  are   and   where we're  going partly because of where  we've been." But  it is also  true  that  in  the  case of a culture like ours, an  anthology to be meaningful and helpful must be "not only gathered from the past but aimed  towards  the  future."  We  do   not   have   the   vast body  of   ancient  accomplishment out   of which  an  English  anthologist like  Helen  Gardner could  construct her New  Oxford Book  of  English  Verse   and   virtually ig­ nore  what had   been  going  on  in  poetry  for   the   twenty   years  before   the   book's publication. Canadian  poetry  is a  tradi­ tion  that  still, even in the  rg8o's, is in the process  of becoming, and  so every signifi­ cant  anthology of  it  must  be greatly  dif­ ferent from  its  predecessor.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Atwood's New  Oxford  Book  is  some­ what  longer  than  Smith's, and  the differ­  ence  is actually greater  than   it  initially  seems  since,  unlike   her  predecessor, she includes  no  verse  in  French, disarmingly pleading her ignorance as well as consid­  erations of  space.   The New   Oxford  in­ cludes   I 2 I   poets  against the  7 I  English poets   whom  Smith    presented  in   Ig6o. Even here,  the difference is magnified  by the fact that no fewer  than 20 poets whom Smith  included are left out of the New Oxford, and   since  these   include   names like  Leo  Kennedy, L.  A. Mackay, A. G. Bailey, and  Roy Daniells, which  still  car­ ried  a  great   deal  of  weight   in  the  early Ig6o's, we are clearly  observing a refining of critical perception that  is due more  to a general  shift in taste, a beginning of the process  of  winnowing  by  posterity,   than  to Atwood's personal  preferences, though these  have  played  a  great   part  in  many of the  selections.
Of   course,   any   anthology  embracing a   succession    that,   however  tenuously, stretches nearly  four  centuries from Rob­ ert  Hayman  in  Newfoundland  down   to the present, is bound  to build itself around a  nucleus  of  poems  that  have  stood  the wearing of  time   ("old  chestnuts" as At­ wood calls them), and there  are plenty of these  in  the  early  pages  of  the  New  Ox­ ford-bits from The Emigrant and  The Rising    Village,  "Tantramar  Revisited" and   "Low   Tide  at   Grand  Pre,"   "The Canadian    Authors    Meet"   and    "The Lonely Land" and  "David." But  usually, when   Atwood    necessarily    represents  a well-known poet  by one  or  two  familiar pieces,  she  will also  pick  something that evokes an  unfamiliar aspect  of his work.
This process  is intensified  as time  goes on and  Atwood  deals with living and younger   poets.  Two of  the  poets  repre­ sented  in  the  anthology  remarked  to me that  they  had  been  surprised and  even  at first  disconcerted  by  the   pieces  she  put together to represent them,  but afterwards
 recognized  that  while avoiding their show­ ier  pieces  she  had   in  fact  picked  other  less obvious examples that, read  together, gave  a  new,  yet  faithful,  view  of  their poetic  personae.
:More than half the poets in the New Oxford- 70  to   be   exact-were    not present   in   Smith's  Ig6o   volume,    and
though thene include Pauline Johnson and Robert W. Service  (whom Atwood  has somewhat quirkily  rescued  from  deserved oblivion) , almost all are poets whose first significant  work was done  after  I g6o, the generation that begins with Purdy  and Nowlan,  Acorn  and  Lane,  and  includes, of  course,  Atwood   herself.  And  perhaps the  most  significant  aspect  of the  collec­ tion,  which  makes  it  so faithful  a  reflec­ tion  of  the  state  of  becoming  in  which Canadian poetry  still functions, is that  it reaches  out   to  the  younger  poets  whose promise  may  justify such  an  act  of faith, such as Roo Boorson  and Sharon Thesen and  Mary  di Michele, new names  to most of us, their  poems dated from  the  Ig8o's and  touched with freshness.  Their future is open,  unpredictable, but  so, this  book truthfully exemplifies, is that  of Canadian poetry  itself.
ANTHONY APPENZELL


AT HOME AT HOME

DAVID    sOLWAY,  Selected   Poems.   Signal   Edi­
tions,  $6.gs.
DAVID     SOLWAY,   The   Mulberry   Men.  Signal
Editions,  $4.95.
lN  ONE OF   THE  TWO  formal   apologias ("Apologia," "Apologia Pro  Vita  Sua") in his Selected  Poems, David Solway, an unnecessarily apologetic poet, writes,

I study  that  austerity the profligate assault,
And  I  must  fast  with  Emily
before  I feast  with  Walt.

This laudable if too self-deprecatory  pro­
gram   is largely   fulfilled   by  the  modest,

109

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ironic, generally  well-behaved, indeed ac­ complished poems  in  these two books. It is refreshing amid  so many windy would­  be   Whitmans  to  come   upon   work   so beautifully and   unpretentiously  circum­ scribed,   and  so  agreeably  readable.  Of course Solway's  talent, temper, and  tech­ nique are  very different from Dickinson's,  whom  he  would  presumably not  include among his "New  England Poets":

They  are  a peculiar  species, never grow extinct,
regulate  their  number,  control admission to the  race.
Though their  minds  travel  freely  like airplane executives
they  are  most  at  home  at  home.

(But  should   not  that   be  "free"?  Occa­ sional   such   grammatical   slips,  like  the confusion  about the past of "lay" in "The Reason" - admittedly  a    vernacularly vexed  and  vexatious   verb -are  surpris­ ing in so suave  and  polished  a  poet.)   If she was an ecstatic and  expert, if slapdash  mistress  of  common metre,  he  is a  wry and   competent  versifier,  worldly   where she is unworldly, the conjunction "before" in the first quatrain quoted  above  betray­ ing  a  manly   refusal   to  relinquish   alto­ gether   ambitions  to  greater  sweep  and wider   reference,  as  in  some  of  his  less successful  poems, such  as the "Requiem" for   another  Whitman.   Apart  from   a rather  Durrellesque  preoccupation  with Greece,   resulting in   some   of   his  best ("Pastoral," "The   Trees")   as   well   as some of his weakest efforts  ("Island Re­ port," "Patmos"),  Solway  is, unlike   the mentally   adventuresome   homebody  of Amherst,    himself    "most    at    home    at home":

some chess, a walk, and  the half-read  book the  joyous indefinable of speech,
the  habit  of loving, the accustomed  look, and  days lived gladly for  the sake of each.
("I Call  the  Heart")

No poet should  be judged by his subject matter, though   that   forms  the  basis for

110
 too much  critical judgment as well as perhaps inescapable approval or aversion. Solway's  subjects  are  various,  and  some­ times  ingenious, yet  thematically  unified enough   to  give  a  convincing  impression  of an  attractive  personality.  Rarely  does he  slide  into   a  silly  machismo  ( "Frag­ ment," "For Robert Graves") that  seems, in so decent and  intelligent a  poet,  more  embarrassing than offensive.
Pleasantly varied  as they are, the poems are  difficult  to describe,  perhaps because they  are  so easy  to  read.  Knowing that "Language  is  the   longest   wall   in   the world,  and  the strongest" ("On Learning Greek"), the poet has constructed a series of linguistic  windows  for  our  amusement and  occasional instruction. The  metrical conventions here seem casual and,  as fully mastered forms  should,  effortless, even natural. Solway's language, quiet  and col­ loquial, is a  medium and   not,  like  that of so many  modern masters  and disasters, a  topic  or  an  end  in  itself.  Apt  and  de­ corous,  the exact -and  I do mean  exact
-phrasing  of  these  sometimes   moving poems  is  indispensable to  our  pleasure; even  at their  most  anecdotal or  opinion­ ated, they could  not be paraphrased with­  out   great   loss.  If  David   Solway's   craft  does not  provoke the sort of physiological response   that   Emily   Dickinson,  among others,  said   poetry   should-and which to  my  knowledge no  Canadian poem  to date has done-it  affords  a comfortable enjoyment far  from  easy  to obtain  or  to produce  these   days,   iteffect  less  like Dickinson than,  say, Walter Savage Lan­ dor:

Heat  and  light  may go their  separate ways. Here,  where  I live, by the coast, the seawind Cools the mind  and  cleans the innocent  air. Light  skips like stones  off water,  richochets from  tree  to tree, so light  and  unconfined you'd  swear  that  you see angels everywhere.

This  is writing of  a  very  high  order, all the more  impressive for being so far from flashy. Those   who  would  imitate it,  and

BOOKS IN REVIEW



that   would   not  be  easy,  should   consult the  precepts so amusingly set forth  m "Lampman Among  the Moderns."
Nothing, as  anyone who  has  tried   to write  it  or  teach  others   to, will know,  is more  difficult  than  comic  or  light  verse. In   The   Mulberry  Man   David   Solway largely  succeeds  in  this  demanding, and delicate, genre,   not  so  remote   after   all from some of the less solemn  or bitter moments in  his  Selected  Poems. He  has avoided the  tweeness  that  seems to afflict most poems  written for children, through a  real  sympathy  with   childish   concerns (e.g.,  "Speculations of  a  Five  Year  Old Boy  on   his  Daily   Walk   Down   to   the Beach,"  "Poem  to  My   Sons,"   "Polter­ geists,"  "Report  to  the  Teacher:  What My  Sons  Do  in  Greece"). And  if  occa­  sional  imperfect  rhymes   (so  much  more discordant  in   "light"  than   in   "heavy" verse, of the sort so common in popular music)    offend    my   ear,    perhaps   they would  not  bother a modern child.

DARYL HINE


NEXUS & BIRNEY

Nexus,   WRC   1-2258, 59,  n.p.

EARLE BIRNEY HAS ALWAYS been an inno­ vator, experimenting with   the  forms  of poetry,   extending  language  beyond   the limits   of  typescript  into   the   shapes   of concrete poetry  and  beyond  the  limits  of the  printed  page  into performance. His recordings with  the musical group Nexus continue that experimentation.
For  all  but  one  poem  on  volume  one, the musical  accompaniment has been im­ provised,  implying that a  possible multi­ plicity  of interpretations may  be aroused by any  single  arrangement of  words,  yet in  practice Nexus  creates the  same  eerie atmosphere for  each   of   Birney's   nature poems.  Initially exciting, these improvisa­ tions  grow  tedious  as  they  become  pre-
 dictable. One  becomes grateful for the straight readings, such  as "Vancouver Lights," that  are  unaccompanied. In con­ trast  to the serious  awe  that  nature seems to inspire,  poetry  itself is accorded  much less reverence.  The opening poem  "Poet­ tree"  establishes  the  spirit of  playful  fun that characterizes this album and  Birney's work   as  a   whole.   This   sense   of   play emerges  most  successfully  in  the  clever parody  "Twenty-third  Psalm," where  the swelling church music adds  greatly  to the poem's  satiric   point.  Here   is one  of  the few   instances   where   the   sound   effects unambiguously   complement  the   poetry. They   also  work  well  in  reinforcing the homespun humour and  references to pop­  ular songs in "McSimpton's annual boat excursion  tn  Nanaimo." The  scripted "Never Blush to Dream," however,  makes Birney  sound  like  an  aged   Leonard  Co­ hen,  trying  to sing  a ballad in an off-key voice,  subordinating meaning to  an   in­ appropriate tune.  These poems work  best when  the words  remain  dominant.
This album should  work  well as a teaching tool. Its range  and  variety  are satisfying. The tone fluctuates from  the magical evocation of "Alaska Passage" through the elevated  seriousness  of  "Van­ couver  Lights" to  the  insobriety of "Mc­ Simpton's annual  boat   excursion"   (all from   the  first  side,  "Pacific Door")  to explore  the  numerous  shades  of  wonder  expressed by the lover on the second  side, "Love  and All."And as usual  with Bimey,  there   are  a  multiplicity of  voices:   Mc­  Simpton,  the Pacific  ocean,  the  bourgeois  traveller, the cynical  American, the lover, the aging poet,  the  devil himself.  My first year  students dismissed  one  of  the  most accomplished  of  these  collaborations­ "Alaska   Passage"-as  mere  sixties  nos­ talgia,  yet  fourth-year  students found   it stimulating. It succeeded in sparking their own creativitity and  helped   them  to see how   poetry   might   interact  with   other dimensions  of their  lives.


I I I

BOOKS IN REVIEW



After listening  to this album, I have mixed feelings about the value of such collaboration. The  fixed  readings the musical accompaniment assigns each poem restrict the openness of individual interpretation that the  poetry  retains  on the  page.  Yet  if they help  students begin to hear  poetry  as living art,  their  purpose will have  been served.  Taken  in the spirit of play  in which  this album  is offered, it remains a delightful testimonial to the adaptability of  poetry.

DIANA BRYDON


TOWARDS POETRY

SHAUNT BASMAJIAN, Surplus Waste  and Other
Poems.  Unfinished Monument Press,  n.p.
ROBERT  CLAYTON  CASTO,  The  Arrivals. Studio
Press,  n.p.
DON    COLES,  The   Prinzhom  Collection.  Mac­
millan,  $7·95·
GARRY  RADDYSH,    White  Noise.  Thistledown,
$16.oo; pa.  $7·95·

WHILE  POVERTY OF IMAGINATION and lan­ guage,  or private self-indulgence, charac­ terizes some of  this work,  we  can rejoice in   the   appearance  of  more   than   one writer   with  accomplished  and  accessible poetic  powers.
Surplus Waste and Other Poems by Shaunt  Basmajian is,  unfortunately, all too  aptly   titled.   Basmajian,  a  Toronto poet,  writes of urban  despair,  the derelict and  disillusioned, and  of his own memor­ ies of  unrequited love.  His  poems  have
the ring  of sincerity,  apparently rooted  in his   autobiographical  experiences   as  an unemployed part-time poet/sometime cab driver. Too often,  however,  the  realism becomes simply commonplace, the themes trite  and  the  techniques uninspiring. His diction   is  rather  impoverished and   un­ poetic  at  times,  and  his errors  in  syntax  and  metaphor seem less like poetic licence than  problems with  the language. He also

112
 has  a  habit of ending many  poems  with a  repetition of  their  first lines-refrains that  are  not  resolutions but  evasions.  His best  poems  have  a  strong, simple  direct­ ness;

when the  seasons  change and the  years  wither  away one  by one  and  old  age finds  him  like  a forgotten rpair of  slippers left  inside
a closet

But   too   many   seem   to  echo   this  com­
plaint:

the  part time  poet  seems  to  always have something  to write about
hut just  can't put  it  on  paper

The distinctive feature about   Garry Raddysh's second collection of poetry, White  Noise,  is  the   amount  of   white paper interspersed among the short  lyrics. Raddysh, a Saskatchewan native  and "prairie poet," does not on the whole por­ tray   a  particularized  prairie  landscape, for his most  common themes replay  a fa­ miliar  litany of male-female relationships: betrayal and  boredom, lies and  misunder­ standings,  self-seeking  and   mutual  de­  struction.  He   has  invented  some   novel images  and  poignant descriptions to cap­  ture   the  characters  and   their   relation­ ships:   "the killing  of  souls  / and   brief resuscitations /many rumours / of love." But  my  final  impression  of  the  book  is one  of  frustration. There are  too  many silences and ellipses, too many abstract references and  private meanings-too much white space and white noise for communication:

the  red  dawn is a  warning nothing
I have said
rtouches
the  root  of  man

The   Arrivals  is  the   second   book   of poetry  from  Robert Clayton Casto,  an American-born writer   now  living  in  To-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ronto.   In   this  collection  he  reflects  on contemporary  experience,  often   in   spe­ cifically   American  settings,   with   great versatility and  richness.  Through a range of characterizations, evoked  with wit and authenticity, he  comments on  social  in­ justice  and   particularly  on   the  middle­ class materialism that  is insensitive  to the drama and   poetry  of  life.  Casto  creates  the  tin  flute-player,  the Chinese   concu­  bines,   the   old   man   in   the   Old   Folks Home,  the political  candidate, Zamira the nautchgirl,   frustrated  Miss   Tillie,    the black man at Sauer  Beach, and  the Jewess of   Pinsk-all   with   precise   description and   powerful  imagery,  in   moods   from pathos to irony  to eroticism. He  displays versatility   in  form,   too.   Several   of  his lyrics are  unusually long;  almost  all have a  narrative  element. I-Iis  use  of  rhyme and  metre  is effective,  although the  way he  splits  words   into   syllables  can   be  a distracting   mannerism.   Although   some poems  seem  deliberately obscure   or  too cleverly  cute,  the  majority in  this  collec­ tion illuminate the  real world with imagi­ native  meaning:

I think that death is a  clotting a slow coagulation
and  the  underground fires  they  burgeon they scatter they  swallow
us  up!  They have  set  aside  death.

With  the acclaim that  has followed  the publication of Don Coles' third  book, The Prinzhorn Collection, his editors  can no longer  describe him  as "the best unknown poet  in the  country." Coles,  who  teaches at York  University, spent  twelve  years of his  youth  travelling in  Europe; many  of the  poems  in  this  collection  draw  affec­ tionately  on  those  memories. He  deliber­  ately writes poetry which  is accessible and contemplative,  rather   than   esoteric   or self-indulgent. Most   of   his  themes   deal with  the intersection of  the  personal  and historic  pasts, the passage of time and  the mutability of life.
 The  title  poem  refers  to "a  collection of letters,  journals and  drawings made  by the inmates  of a mental institution near Munich duriTJ.g  the  late  nineteenth  cen­ tury  and  preserved  by  Dr.  Hans  Prinz­  horn." The  poem,  written in  the form  of a  letter,   has  a  chummy,  personal  voice which contrasts ironically with the revela­ tions  of horror and  pathos.  Direct  quo-­ tations,    "the   uncontested   rhythms    of truth," are framed by metaphysical com­ ments  on  human evil  and  despair:

One  would   not  wish  him  that,
God  knows.  Indeed, on  humanitarian Grounds one  would not  wish  God That. Though presumably He
Already   has  it,  never  mind   what one
May  wish.

The  most common mood  in this collec­ tion  is  nostalgia for   the   past.  The   hu­ mane,  intelligent voice of the poet recap­ tures  lost  places  and  people  with  exact­  ness of imagery and  description; prosaic  events assume  epiphanic importance. These    "strange    little    intensities"   are linked  in  memoirs  of  his  childhood and youth,  as  well  as  biographical poems  on Pushkin, Tolstoy, and  Ibsen.  Drawing on these  memories   and  writers,  and  others,  he  attempts to  redeem   the  past  through art  ("I Long  For  People  Through Whom  the Past ... in its large  lines, continues to be connected with us, related  to us"). The most moving  poem  in the collection  is the final  cycle, "Landslides," the  poet's  trib­ ute  to his dying  mother. These  eloquent images  of mortality guarantee  their  own poetic  immortality:

Images it  was  sufficient to  reflect  on
Only  a  little,

The  briefest glance
Towards which may,  however, Deliver  us.

BARBARA PELL




I I 3

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



OF WOMEN, MEN, & MUSES

GUY     GERVAis,     Gravite:  Poemes   1967-1973.
L'Hexagone, $9-95·
MARIE   LABERGE,   Aux   Mouvances   du  temps: Poesie 1961-1971. Lemeac,  $I5.oo.
JULIE    STANTON,   La   Nomade.    L'Hexagone,
$6.50-

A MAN, MOTHER EARTH, and his Muse, a woman  revealed  as no longer girl and  not yet quite  human, the  Muse as avenger  of women  and   judicator of men:   these  are the  triangular  constellations of  love, life and meaning which  structure Gravite, Mouvances, and  La Nomade. And the collections  themselves  form  a scalene  tri­ angle   for   the  reviewer,   in  which  Julie  Stanton's  contemporary  verse  narrative, closer to Marie Laberge than  to Guy Ger­  vais, towers  over  her  fellow poets'  widely differing voices of the past.
By I969,  date  of his fifth book of verse (Poesie  I), Guy  Gervais   had  settled   in that   primaeval land   of  stone  and  snow and  sand  which  is his habitual  domain. There he  spent  many  years, listening  to a  voice  which  was  dictating to  him  the first  half   of  the   present   collection.   He then   rebelled    against  the   "incarnation mythologique des  facultes   d'inspiration" ("Avant-propos") he felt he had  become, and finally broke  through to the true light
of  "la   raison   brfilante ... et ...  tran­
chante."
Nowhere, alas, not even in "La  fleur dechiffree" or in "Le  verbe silence,"  does reason bum  through the mystical mist enveloping the mother-matrix of a frozen W elterfahrung. In  order   to  understand time  ("j'ouvre mes fleuves devant  toi pour connaitre le courant de mes annees de sang") ,  space   ( "quel   est ce  monde  que traduit sous  nos  yeux  le  vol  d'une  co­ lombe"), life ( "alors que reste-t-il de nous que  reste-t-il  quand tu es passee  presente  avec  ton   avenir," in   "Origine  mere"),
 and   poetry    ( "Le   pouvoir  magique  des syllables   trahira-t-il  un   jour   son   mys­ tere") ,  perhaps mind,  body  and  soul  re­ quire  more  than  the  relentlessly repetitive evocation  (in   descending  order  of  fre­ quency)  of wings, birds, sails/veils, roses, flowers, sea, sand,  dawn, rocks, and  trees. Despite

Jes glaces les magnifiques  instances  de l'azur espoir  fige d'un   transparent envoi  au-dessus
meme  du  gouffre
cette  douce  tension  des plumes  sur les yeux de  crista!,

the gravitational pull of Guy Gervais' anthropomorphism is too strong  for "l'oi­ seau   du   sombre automne"  to  resemble  Mallarme's cygne j signe.
Critics have  been  kinder to Marie La­
berge the painter (shows throughout Quebec)  than   to  the  poet   (her   I965  du Maurier poetry  prize notwithstanding). Could   time  have  so altered our  reading as to  justify  this re-edition of her  first six collections of poetry? Marie Laberge had remained silent  during the decade of  edi­ ble   women,    female    eunuchs,   feminist  flights  and   the  fear   thereof,  resurfacing only in  I979  with  the peaceful and  recon­  ciling   Chants   de  l'eperviere.  Her   early work,    perhaps    misunderstood   in    the cloud-gathering  sixties, appears today  as the ingenuous, yet often  stirring echo of a doomed epoch.
M ouvances   is  the   intimate  diary   of regretfully remembered childhood and youth,  of tender and  painful love, of wife­ hood    and    childbearing  and    being    a woman:

Etre  nee femme  etre  ne noir  en  Amerique etre  femme  ou  rien  rien  qu'un ventre.
("L'Hiver a bruler," 1968)

It is the sometimes na!ve,  sometimes des­ perate quest   for  self-understanding  and fulfillment:

Ah laissez-moi  mourir  du  temps
De  ces  bagnes  que  l'homme invente
Laissez-moi  mourir   de  vivre

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Et cracher  rna revolte
Et  laissez-moi naitre  de moi.
( "D'un cri a !'autre," 1966)

In  herself,  not  in  the  societal  games  (see her explanations in Archives des Lettres Canadiennes, IV, p.  574)   of sexual  poli­ ticians  or total  women,  the  poet finds her very own truth: the suffering which is the human condition.
Through  thousands of millenia and  a thousand  new  beginnings,  through  cen­ turie<; of ice and  fire La  Nomade follows on an apocalyptic trek the march of MAN­ made  civilizations from  Babylon to Egypt to Brasilia and  New Yorrk. Over volcanoes and    blackened   fields   are   strewn    "ses
aieules  I leur  robe  nuptiale et  leur  credo saignes  a blanc," the  earth is drenched
with  "le sang  de  ces vierges soudain  noix en  eclats   1 sous  l'enclume des  sexes  as­ sassins,"  and   everywhere  can   be  heard
"les clameurs des femmes  I couchees dans le chaos  I asservies au  profit  des dynasties
de  pacotille" and  "leur cri  etouffe  dans le  lit  du  vainqueur." In  the  face  of  so many abortive promises, cowardly betray­ als, and  false  hopes,  La Nomade, nause­ ated   by  her   own   beauty,   mutilates  her body and  fills eight days and  seven nights with  cries of eons of  abeyance. "Sans  nez
et sans yeux  I sans  chevelure I sans sexe
ni  namelles," she  is led  by La  Bete,  her
double,   echo   and   future   (comparisons with   Marian  Engel   would   be  most  in­ appropriate), and  together they set out to raze  pyramids, sphinxes  and  cities,  dese­ crate  Pharaonic  tombs, topple  the  pedes­ tals of seducers,  silence  entire  peoples  of executioners, and abolish  tyranny, oppres­  sion   and   captivity.  "Vers  quelle   deli­
vrance marche-t-ELLE  I ... I vers  quels
horizons  sans  comprornis 1 quels  eveils 1
marche-t-ELLE"? In a mythical act of sex­
ual   transubstantiation  La   Nomade   be­
comes La Bete and, "demain est une Bete qui   porte   l'eclatement  I des  gorges  de
femmes." As Goethe's "Ewig-Weibliche" or Aragon's "avenir de l'homme," WOMAN
 
will breathe the initiatory breath  and con­ tinue  to march  "sur  un monde  a finir  puis a  refaire  de  nos  noms   I au  noeud   des
certitudes et de la memoire."
This, Julie Stanton, poet, novelist, jour­ nalist and prophet, beholds and, in italics, comments  on.  Everyone may  not  be dis­ posed  to  accept   her   book  of   revelation and her exegesis, but few can escape being struck  by the power of her word, the driv­  ing  rhythms of her  chant  and   the  cruel clarity  of her  narrative design.

HANS R. RUNTE


A DANGEROUS BOOK

ROBERTSON   DAVIES,  The Rebel   Angels.  Mac- millan,  $16.95·

THE  REBEL  ANGELS   represents  the   best and  worst of Robertson Davies. All the characteristic quirks  of his  personal  style are here:  the satirical sharpness of the Salterton trilogy, the potent mixture of philosophy   and   melodrama  that  distin­ guished  the  Deptford trilogy,  the fascina­ tion with strange lore, and  the didacticism in  imparting it. These have  become  Da­  vies's trademarks and are by now almost  a formula  for   his  success  on   the  critical marketplace. Less innocent aspects  of the Davies  style   also   emerge   here,   with   a force that  makes one reconsider the entire body of his work.
Despite  his  ridicule of  self-help   books
in  A Voice  in  the  Attic, he applies  some of their principles in his own  writing. His novels  cater  to  that   universal   desire   to feel that  one is gathering  useful  informa­ tion   as  one   reads,   thus  flattering  their  readers into  thinking that they are coping with  a  world   slightly  above   their   usual level.  While  flattery  may  have  its  place,  here  it  is disguised  insult.  Davies's   tone has  always  been  magisterial; The  Rebel  Angels   patronizes   its   readers    in   more  subtle ways. It is not  a demanding  novel.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



But it is an insidiously  dangerous one, because  it  encourages complacency and snobbery,  disguising  them  as  wisdom,  at a time when the search for wisdom is genuinely endangered.
At  first The  Reb,el Angels appears de­ signed  to expose  the  sterility  of  inherited traditions and  elitist  institutions  through its  presentation of  a  fictional  university (a   very   thinly   disguised   University  of Toronto). It quickly  becomes  apparent, however,  that although Davies attacks the contemporary university for  choosing knowledge above  wisdom,  the  "wisdom" he advocates would  return us to the val­ ues of  the  middle   ages.  For  Davies,  the university's strength  lies in  its  mediaeval roots  and   its  faithfulness  to  them,   and  not  at  all  in  its  questioning  of  inherited assumptions or its search  for a better  way of being.  In  exposing  his rebel  angels  of the university as fakes  (after  setting  them up as straw men  to knock down), he con­ cludes,  illogically,  that   rebellion   itself  is therefore suspect. His heroine's fate neatly illustrates  his   argument. Supposedly a highly   intelligent,  independent  woman, she  learns  in  the  course  of Davies's  nar­ rative   that   her  true  strength lies  less in her  educated intelligence and  the expres­  sion of her own will than  in her primitive gypsy roots and  the subjection of  her  will to  that   of  the  man  she  marries. His  ex­ cellence,  in tum, is indicated by his wealth  and  good  taste.  The   reader   has  already  been  told  that  the  "Political Maenads" or  "Women's  Lib   sisterhood," like  the "Political  Gays," "make  a  public  cause of something too deep,  too important, for political,  group  action." Davies's  message is clear,   although  it  appears  to  be  the result  of  some  muddled thinking. True liberation lies within  the individual alone: it is neither a political nor an economic matter. Economic success, however,  as in the case of Arthur Cornish, does indicate individual  worth.  Women   best  achieve their  individuality through submission  to

II6
 a man  in  marriage. Maria uses the anal­ ogy of a subject swearing allegiance to a monarch-a comparison with interesting political   implications   that   does   suggest how, try as he might, Davies cannot com­ pletely depoliticize what  he would  like his readers to see as  merely  natural.
While  it  may  not  be customary critical practice to object to a work of fiction  for its underlying philosophy before consider­ ing   its   technical   accomplishment,  with The  Rebel Angels it is impossible  to sepa­  rate  the  two. It  offers itself as a  novel  of ideas,  and  only  works on  that  level. Fur­ thermore, the  aesthetic  problems in  this novel spring directly from  its assumptions about human  nature and  authority. Crit­ ics  have commented before on the con­ servative tendencies of Davies's  "Tory Mode" and  its roots  in Ontario tradition. The  Rebel Angels takes this part of our heritage directly as its subject, while con­ tinuing  to  embody   the  unexamined   as­ sumptions of that  world  view in its form  and  language.
Whatever one may  think  of the novel's celebration of the status quo,  one  cannot fail  to  notice   serious   deficiencies   in  the handling of  voice.  The antiphonal  nar­ rative  structure-the  telling  of the story alternately  by  Maria  Magdalena  Theo­ toky  and   the  Reverend  Simon  Darcourt
-seems an  excellent idea  in  theory; it fails  in  practice  because   the  two  voices are not clearly  enough distinguished. Both characters sound   too  much  like Dunstan Ramsay, or  David   Staunton, or  Samuel
Marchbanks-in  short,   like  Robertson Davies.  One  suspects  that  is because  Da­ vies is less interested in projecting himself into another being's  consciousness than  he is in getting his own  point  of  view across. This   preference  most  seriously  damages the   credibility  of   Maria,  about    whom both   the  story  and   its  argument  pivot.  How  could  anyone believe  in  a  contem­ porary young woman  who speaks of being "had"  and   "tumbled" by  the  man   she

BOOKS IN  REVIEW


thinks  she loves? The  language suggests a nineteenth-century masculine perspective, establishing a false  note in the novel's opening pages.  Maria, like Darcourt, ex­ ists  solely  to  provide Davies   with  a  fic­ tional   mouthpiece. Indeed, The   Rebel Angels    seems   uncomfortably    like    the failed  novel  of another  character, Parla­ bane:  each   puts   the  arguing of  a  case above  the need  to develop a credible nar­  rative, and  each  hints  that  its caricatures refer  to  real  people,  and  its  scandals to real events, in a somewhat offensive man­  ner.  There is  a  disturbing hint  of  pruri­ ence  in The  Rebel  Angels:   Davies  needs to condemn  Parlabane, but  he delights  in his  wickedness.
Unlike  Parlabane,  Davies   can   tell  a good story when  he cares  to, so that  there are   many   entertaining  moments in  this book. Parlabane himself is a convincing embodiment  of  evil;   and   there   is  just enough  self-parody to  suggest  that  none of  this  should  be  taken   too  seriously  (as in  Maria's reference at  McVarish's cock­ tail   party   to  one   of  Davies's  favourite quotations:   about  chastity   having  the body in  the soul's  keeping).  And  there  is just  enough  serious  amplification of ear­  lier   themes    and   references  to   Davies'  fictional  Toronto  (Hollier and  Parlabane went  to school  with  David  Staunton)  to keep  a  Davies  fan   hooked.   Despite   the problem with  voice,  then,  the  message is not  unattractively packaged. Perhaps one needs  to live outside  Toronto to see how dangerous such  nostalgia for a mediaeval past can  be, and  how false to our own ex­ perience. Davies  has  always  been  strong­ est in satirizing human pretensions. When he  starts  embodying  them,  and  choosing  heroes  like Francis Cornish to take  all his prizes,  his writing  becomes  suspect.
The novel pretends to engage  problems of deep  human significance. How  may we learn  from  the  past?  What is the  role  of the  university  and  its scholars  in our soci­ ety?  What  can  repressed  areas  of  experi-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ence teach us? How can we distinguish wisdom from  knowledge? How should  we live?  Raising  these questions  might  have been a service in itself if Davies were  not so  quick  and   pat  with  the  answers.  Be­ cause  he is, some  readers  may leave  The Rebel Angels satisfied.  Not me.

DIANA BRYDON


MOUNTAIN POETS

ROBIN  SKELTON,   ed.,  Six  Poets  of British  Co­
lumbia. Sono Nis, $7.95.
JOHN   HARRIS,  ed.,   Roothog:    Contemporary
B.C. Writing. Repository,  n.p.
ALLAN BROWN, By Green Mountain. Penumbra,
$5.95·
BRIAN   BRETT,    White  Monster. White   Rhino.
$7.00.
RONA  MURRAY, journey.  Sono Nis, $5-95·
LINDA  ROGERS,  Queens  of the  Next  Hot  Star.
Oolichan Books, n.p.
ROBIN   SKELTON,    Limits.  Porcupine's  Quill,
$6.95·
SID   MARTY, Nobody  Danced  with  Miss  Rodeo.
McClelland & Stewart, $8.95.
DALE ZIEROTH,  Mid-Riuer. Anansi, $6.95.

ALTHOUGH  THESE BOOKS  were  presum­ ably stacked  in the same pile because  they share    connections-from    intimate   to very   tenuous-with  green   oceans   and oceans   of   green,    the   two   anthologies among  them  illustrate the unlikelihood of finding  a  reviewer's  generalization. Most of  the   many   anthologies  of  writing   in British  Columbia, with  the  exception of Gary Geddes's Skookum  Wawa and  R. E. Watters's  centennial  anthology,   suggest that  the  writing  is best comprehended as a scattering of islands, defined  by region, by poetic,  or by friendship.
The title,  Six  Poets of  British  Colum­ bia, for  example, might  well be  thought to imply  six major, defining poets in Brit­ ish  Columbia. But  Robin  Skelton  seems
to  have  no  such  aspiration: in  fact,  the
anthology gives  no  indication why  these

II8
 particular six poets should  be brought together. Presumably a one-time  associa­ tion with Sono Nis, or with the University of  Victoria's  Creative   Writing   Depart­ ment    is  sufficient   justification    for   the grouping. Skelton  himself  seems  evasive about   his intention, and  the  banal  trave­  logue  and  compendium of themes  which serve  as  an  "Introduction" is surely  the most  disappointing thing  in  the  book.
Other than  its lack of coherence the selection   is  pleasant  enough,  beginning with Rona  Murray's family anecdotes and meditations   on   ghosts,    and    some   of Charles Lillard's more  straightforward wilderness  narratives. The selection  from Leona   Gom   includes   too   many   poems where  personal reminiscence is an end  in itself, and too few of the poems, such as "Stone," in  which  she  reveals  character through trying  the  voices of her  subjects. Ken  Cathers's poems are  more  regionally documentary  than   the  others,   but   they seem  to me quite  uninterested in any im­ plications  beyond   the   observed   details.  Theresa Kishkan, the  most  oracular poet of the six, is far  less likely  than  the others  to lapse into  careless or trite endings. She, and  Harold Rhenisch, the poet  here  most devoted to  describing  natural  landscapes (·through  some  skilfully  and   revealingly extended  metaphors) , are  the  best repre­ sented poets in the collection.
Roothog  is another anthology very off­ hand   about   its  raison  d'etre.  Again,   a loose past  association with  the  press-in
this  case,  Repository-seems to  be  the criterion fo.r  selection. John Harris's "Inter-duction" midway  through the vol­ ume pretty much  sends  up the whole idea of anthology. "A  bit of  description. Some memorable  phraseology. Personal revela­  tion.  Tricks  and   not  that   cheap." This  piece of tedium correctly implies  that  the book  contains a  good  deal  of  the  unde­ scriptive, and   the  unmemorable. In  the midst  of much  self-indulgence,  however, there   is  some   good   work.   Bill  Sherm-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



brucker's story,  "Aga  Dawn," is delicate in its perceptions, yet straightforward, without the obvious  yearning to be artiste that  clutters much  of Roothog. Mark Slade's story,  "The  Drop," drawn from the grotesque horror of Vietnam, has a memorable surprise  ending. Paul  de Bar­ ros, although his narrative is exceedingly,  even  intentionally, banal,  includes   some intriguing  discriminations   between   Brit­ ish  Columbia and   the  U.S.   Northwest. Among  the  poets,  I found David  Phillips particularly  readable; in  Don   MacKay's work  the  touch  of crazy  imagination also stands  out. Ken  Cathers, who  seems  so bland   in   Skelton's  anthology,  is  much better  represented  here  by poems  which always  extend   the  descriptions of  Van­  couver  Island  scenes  and  events  through some  touch  of linguistic  inventiveness.
This  desirable combination is, in fact, missing in too much  of the poetry  in these nine  books.  If the  poet  concentrates  on anecdote  or   landscape, rather  than   on pure  linguistic  play,  he is obliged,  surely, to go beyond the one dimension of his language which strict  description might demand.  Alternatively, such   a  poet  has at   least   to  give  some   exactness   to   the time  and  place  and  feeling  of an  experi­ ence   if  recording  the  experience  is  all there   is in  the  poem.  Alan   Brown's   By Green  Mountain  illustrates the  difficulty exactly. Brown bounces between  the haiku and  the breezy anecdote. Thus, his poems have  some  nice  phrases   depicting some fresh  images,  but   the  effect   is  diffused with   vague  formulas and  incongruous colloquialism. As in his "Lake Shuswap," most  of Green's poems  define  "a  kind  / of not-place" by their  lack  of  particular­ ized  sensation, or  emotion,  or  incident. Brown,  it seems, can't decide  whether  he wants  to be AI Purdy  (whose introduction to  the  book  hints  at  how  unlike  Purdy's  poetry  Brown's  is)  or Emily Dickinson.
Brian  Brett's  Monster, with  its deckle edges and  marbled cover,  the most hand-
 



We  record  with  regret the  death earlier  this year of

CHARLES MORRISS

whose commitment to the fine art of printing gave  readers  over several  decades  an  appreciation of  the  aesthetic pleasures
of design.






some  of  these  books, is  subtitled "An Autobiography." Using   the  idea  of  the self as monster, Brett's  pure  poems appear to mythologize  his life, fusing  it with  the life of the race: the  monster  he discovers is  both  man   and   god  and   animal  and thing.   But   there's  a  familiar  problem: Brett doesn't provide enough  localizing detail  to identify the peculiar individual human  experience  which   here  touches, and  is touched   by the  universal  patterns of  birth,  love,  learning, and  acquisitive­ ness. As a  result,  the  book  is  sometimes  stirring, especially  in  its  blend  of the  ab­  surd and  the ugly, but it usually moves on a fantastic, almost  ethereal plane,  where it's impossible  to empathize with  the pro­  tagonist. If the reader can  agree  that  the "mind    breaks    down    when    something comes  singing  out  of the  chaos,"  it's  too much  to  expect  him  to  be satisfied  with the  vague  shape  of  a  biography beneath the chaos, when  the confessional  tone asks for a much  more  intimate involvement.


119

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Rona  Murray's Journey, with its inter­ mittent  nautical  metaphors, also  has  an implicit  biographical structure. And Mur­  ray's  story   is  far   more   accessible   than  Brett's.    At   her   best,   in   a   poem   like "When," Murray integrates an accurately recorded   domestic   incident  -removing finished  pots  from  the  kiln  (her  husband  is a  potter) -with  images  which  carry ideas of birth,  journey,  language, and  the formation of the earth itself:  the  result is a moving  love  poem.  "The Death of the Bear"    shows   Murray's   talent    with    a slightly less immediately personal  subject. Here  the anecdote of a bear trapped, then shot  and  hauled into  the  community,  is incorporated  into   the  Haida   myth  of  a woman  copulating with a bear and  giving birth   to  cubs  which   are  half-man,  half­ god. Because Murray handles  these poems so well, it is sad  that  their effect is dimin­  ished   by  so  many   poems   that   fail   to convey   the   exact   shape   of  her   crucial  personal   experiences. In  poems  such  as "Departure,"   "Elegy,"  or   "Exorcism," where  a precise  location in  space  or time is lacking, the  result  seems men:  exercise. On other  occasions, as in "Before Spring," with   its  confused   metaphors  of  maze, worms,  crocodiles,  drowning, and  words, Murray strains  tortuously, too anxious  to be poetic.  The  best  poems -there are  a half  dozen  memorable poems in  the  col­ lection-combine, as in "My  Father," a simply  told  anecdote with  a subtle  meta­ phorical  extension  of  its  possible  mean­  ings.
By combining eloquent prose narrating
her experience, and  compact lyrics testing the limits of its meaning, Linda Rogers sustains  this  accomplishment throughout a whole book. Of the books in this pile, Qu,eens of the  Next  Hot  Star  is both  the most immediately exciting, and  the one asking to be reread and contemplated. "There are some times in real life," she writes,  "when I think   I am  in  a  dream and   I  can't walk   or  fly  or  speak   the


120
 truth." The   observation  might   describe the   method  of  the   book,  which   moves between   a  pure  recounting of  the  poet's friendship  with   an   old  Indian  woman, Maggie Jack,  and   the   poet's   dreaming the voice/the dreams of Maggie,  her  peo­ ple, and  her spirit.  Rogers  writes a power­  ful,  lyric  prose,  restrained  yet  passionate in its feeling  for  Maggie's pain  and  love. By contrast, the poems might  at first seem annoyingly obscure. And  then one  recog­ nizes   that    these   are   poems   with   "two  tongues," that  Rogers  is sometimes  speak­ ing  in her  own  voice, sometimes  in  Mag­  gie's,  sometimes in   a   communal  voice, sometimes as  totemic spirit.  Other poems create a  dialogue  between   Maggie   and  Linda. The  result  is a  rich  blend  of folk story and  native  myth,  of D'Sonoqua and Alice  in  Wonderland, of the  English  and indigenous   tongues,    of   daughter   and spirit  mother, of feminism and  humanism. Queens of the  Next  Hot  Star  is an exten­ sion  of  reverberating  shamanism-from Evans  and  Carr  to Marlatt and  Musgrave
-which animates so much  writing con­
nected   with  the  West  Coast.   It  deserves a far  lengthier discussion.
If Rogers   is the  most  exciting poet  in this group, Robin Skelton  is the most pol­ ished  (ignoring, now, his Introduction to Six  Poets). Skelton's experience shows in many   poems   which  discover   a  delicate perception in   apparently  unremarkable incidents, and add  a twist of metaphor to make   it   memorable. These   are,   on  the whole,   the  sparf'st   poems   Skelton   has written,  with  short   lines,  in  2- or  3-line stanzas,  with  simple  diction, and  limited allusiveness. Skelton   is also  able,  with  a
few   exceptions,  to   discard    the   poems which   dwindle  into   vague   imprecision. The sense of various  levels of language intersecting we might  expect  from  a poet who will so often  write poems for the love of language per se, and  whose  subject  is so often  words  themselves: nonetheless, it is  in   effortlessly   connecting  the   pithy,

BOOKS IN REVIEW



witty  discoveries  thus  made  with  the  en­ gaging  of the five senses in place and time that   he  has  his  most  characteristic  suc­
cess:  "as  if breath alone   I I were  the es­
sential  I message,  words and  words  I I no more  than   gravel   I thrown  against   the
pane" ("Something").
'The  remotest island  of  B.C.  poetry  is
found   where   mountains  meet   plains  on the  eastern  edge.  Dale  Zieroth, although he  now  lives  in  North  Vancouver and although Mid-River is largely set in the Columbia Valley  near  Invermere, still writes  in a  manner more  associated  with his native  prairie. Sid  Marty, even  more markedly, has  his obvious  ties in Alberta, and  makes  the  broadly colloquial  narra­ tive  the essence  of his poetry. Both these are  second  books  of  poetry,  impatiently awaited  after  impressive first  books  ap­  peared  in  I973· Marty's  Nobody Danced with  Miss  Rodeo is,  after  Headwaters, a disappointment. Like  so many  Canadian poets Marty takes AI Purdy  as his primary  model  and  inspiration: "'the  stories  are either  true,'  croaked  the  muse  [a mag­ pie],  'or  they  are  lies told  by the  charac­ ters.'" This  muse  inspires  some diverting and  ironic  incidents, but  Marty  seems satisfied   with   superficial  mimicry,   and finds little of the Purdy magic. The  poems are  often  factual and  boring.  The  book is openly   opinionated,  even   angry,   about man's  destruction of  nature, but  the  re­ sult,  as in "Big  Game," is bad  poetry:

When the  game comes  down to  water to drink from  the  clear, blue  Bow
in  ranges  cut by highways
They will die,  one  after another beneath the  wheels
In the  paradise of  the  middle class.

The  sincerity   of  Marty's concern  is  evi­ dent.  But  in  such  a  poem,  or  in  "Grey­ hound,"  on   the   futility  of   Indians  ob­ served   in   the   Calgary   bus   depot,   the impact  disappears in  cliche,  or  overdone imagery,    and   pathetic  endings.    Marty
 can't  sustain  a tone or a metaphor in  the larger  works. Thus, despite  the  emphasis on story and  character portrait, the  most memorable poems  are  the  shorter, more controlled lyrics, such as "For  My Sons," a nicely turned observation on poetry and family  life. Three-quarters of  the  poems in  this book  could  be compressed  to half their  length. Marty, it  seems, confuses  a sense of  colloquial sprawl,   the  rambling of  barroom  gabble,   with  empty   diction and  unthinking formula. The  poet's obli­ gation, and  here  Purdy  so often excels, is to  show  us  the   poetry  inherent  in  the repetitions and   rhythms   of   Canadian speech.  Marty  only  fulfils  the  obligation in "The Fording," the last and  best poem in  the  bunch   for  emotion, image,  devel­ opment,  meaning  and   even   narrative. Marty,    here,   as   he   showed   in   Head­ waters, can  combine straightforward nar­
rative-"With a whoop,  with  a  shout   I
they  are  riding toward  me  now" -with
energetic   verbs,  metaphoric  surprises-




Out-of-Print

CANADIANA BOOKS

and

PAMPHLETS




HURONIA-CANADIANA BOOKS
BOX 685

ALLISTON,  ONTARIO LOM lAO

Catalogues free on request



121

BOOKS IN REVIEW



"Smashing the dewy alder  shrubs  to rain­ bows  I over  a  plain  of trembling orange  flowers" -in order  to enrich  the one and
make familiar the other. Unfortunately, there   are   too  few  of  these  successes  to make  a  book.
Dale  Zieroth's Mid-River, on the other
hand, fulfils  the  expectations created  by his first  volume  Clearing. The  influence of  AI  Purdy's  colloquialism and   love  of story is, in Zieroth, seldom  an  excuse  for mere  slackness.  There is more  attention to multiplying metaphors here than  in the first collection. Also there's  a very marked new  attention to  assonance   and  allitera­
tion:   "let  us also  I see clearly  how  love
can  finally  I carve  and  quip   inside  the duel  and  dance at  last I out  through the
two  of  us." Zieroth's descriptions of  the
Columbia Valley are vivified by a nice choice  of  metaphor, especially  those  im­ plicit   in   his   verbs.   Although   Zieroth's metaphors  are   seldom   carefully   inter­ linked,   and   the   variations  on  a  single metaphor are  seldom  used  to sustain  his longer poems, a taut  narrative line always holds  things together. His ability  is newly evident  in some domestic  poems provoked  by  the  birth   and   growing   of  his  young daughter-"Birth,"  "The Eyes of the Body  and   Not   the  Eyes  of  the  Mind," "Fear of Failure"-which move  in  new directions and  are  among the  best poems Zieroth has written.
L. R. RICOU


THREE NOVELS

PERCY JANES,  Eastmall. Potlatch, $8.gs.
GILBERT CHOQUETTE,  Wednesday's Child, trans. David Lobdell. Oberon, $17.95; pa.  $8.gs. JAKE   MACDONALD,   Indian  River.  Queenston
House, $r6.gs; pa.  $8.gs.
Eastmall is the  story  of two brothers and their tragic clash of wills and ideologies. Craig Andrew Wareham is a young  man on  the  make,   the  stereotypical modern

122
 entrepreneur who  has  total  disregard for the  environment and  "the quality  of  hu­ man   life."   Morley, an   idealist,  opposes Craig's attempt  at  building  Eastmall, a business  complex in  Old  St.  John's. In addition  to  dramatizing   what   happens when  men  put  personal  principles before concern for  others,   the  novel  points   up the  timeless  theme that  "materialism  is death to the spirit."
The major weaknesses  of Eastmall  in­ volve  characterization. The   brothers  are essentially  stock  figures: villain  and  hero (although  Morley's  "martyr   complex"
leaves   him   not   quite   a   hero).  Janes's method of devoting alternate chapters to each  brother adds  to  the  wearying effect upon  the reader; and  one can  never quite dispel  the feeling  that  one is being told. Moreover, there  is never any profound questioning of self. Hence the imaginative and emotional tension  which might  have resulted   from   using  two  centres   of  con­ sciousness does not  materialize here.
The  strengths of  Eastmall  are   worth recording. Janes's strongly  lyrical passages convey an acute sense of place and  a deep love of downtown St. John's with  its sea­ sonal and even diurnal changes  of appear­ ance  and   mood.  Emily  Birkshire, Lenni Contois, Donna and  "Rabbit" Ryan­ all  secondary  characters -are  convinc­ ingly  presented. The  most  exciting and
convincing episodes  involve  these charac­
ters:  Emily's  break  with Craig; Lenni's rebuke  of  Craig; and, best  of  all,  Craig and  the "Rabbit" in business negotiations. And,   of  course,   there   is  the  significant Theme: Janes adds  Morley's "NOTES" found  after  his death as a kind  of  After­ word.  These notes  reveal  a  Prattean con­ cept  of  the  evolution of  human history, and  concern for  keeping down  the  beast within. The  "tigers" stalking in our  "for­ est" are  greed  for  money  and  power,  and "worship of  Party  and  State." The solu­ tion is in "Gandhi's, not Lenin's way...." Yet   too   much    is  finally   sacrificed   for

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Theme. The  names,   business   methods, and  personal idiosyncrasies of  Craig  and his associates  make  Eastmall a thinly dis­ guised   fictional  rendering  of   prominent personalities and   controversial  events  in St. John's over  the last two or three  years. Apparently wanting to add his shot to the battle, Janes seems  to  have  included too much  and  written too  rapidly.
Quentin Gericault, the  protagonist of
Wednesday's Child, is called  home  from a Christmas vacation in Spain  to find himself  burdened by his  father's last  re­ quests: first, that  he never sully the family name; and,  second,   that   he   marry  his cousin  Bernadette. Quentin,  it  seems,  is destined   not  to fulfil either  wish.
A believer in "the Spirit"-disembod­ ied  beauty -he  hopes  some  day  to  "be able  to love."  He secretly  "worships" the photograph of a nude  British  actress, and  this at least keeps him out of trouble. That is, until  he goes to teach  literature at  the Cegep  de  Saint-Croix in  order to escape from  "the  stultifying domain of Linguis­  tics"  at  the University. At  the  Cegep  he becomes infatuated with  Veronique Mer­ cier, "a mediocre little  student" whom  he later  admits he  "had transformed in  his imagination into  an  idol."
Quentin finds it impossible  to function as either  teacher or suitor.  Neither his psychiatrist nor his priest can help him. Events   at   the  college  seem  to  conspire against  him  until  the  Board  feels obliged to  relieve   him   of  his  duties.   He   then attempts suicide,  and  is placed  in the intensive-care unit  in a psychiatric clinic.
Later while  convalescing,  he  is  mur­ dered  by Richard Croquefer, who claims to  be  of  the  Spirit, too-the  Spirit   of Evil. However, Quentin had already been "reborn," reconciled with human nature: "the    co-existence   of    such  antithetical states  as absolute  perfection and  human deficiency  was, in fact, inevitable, the two conditions being  inseparably linked,  the indissoluble components of a single, exis-
 tential,  transcendental whole."  Through his infatuation with Veronique he had become acquainted "with the loving, painful,  human side  of  his  nature." Through his image  of  her  he  had  fallen "in  love with  the entire world."
Admirable sentiments, but  alas,  Quen­ tin Gericault is no Prince Hamlet! Quen­ tin is simply too weak a character to hold one's interest  (despite the author's parody  and  irony)   through  so many  pages.  The  title is, ultimately, the greatest irony:   not Fate,  but self, is the villain  here.
Indian   River, Jake  MacDonald's  first novel,  is not  so ambitious as Janes's nor so abstruse  as Choquette's, but  it  is more successful than  either of those. His protagonist, twenty-five-year-old Dominic Chambrun, son of a wealthy  chemical wholesaler, is trying to escape from the dangerous company he has  been  keeping in  Winnipeg. He   ends   up  as  a  fishing guide at Indian River  Lodge, owned  by unscrupulous Rusty  Arnold.
Dom   soon   becomes    infatuated  with Elena  Thunder, a beautiful young  Indian widow who  reminds him  "of  some  hero­ ine  from  a  Thomas Hardy  novel."  (Her  companion  and   co-worker  at   the  lodge warns  Dom  that  he  has  made   Elena  "a  real   fantasy    target.")    Dom    wants    to marry   Elena    and   settle   down   in   the North, but  "She's  had  it  with  the  north, and  all  its  politics,  and   its  poverty   and feeling of  doom."
Exploited and  ravaged by American entrepreneurs and   tourists,   the  North   is
now  threatened by  Acid  Red,  an  indus­ trial  pollutant. The death, earlier, of "Mr. Pike"  (Rusty's father),  the  deteriorating health  of Cracked Joe Thunder, and  the deformed  and cancerous bears  (the Thun­ ders's  family  totem)  are  all  attributable to   their   eating  fish  from   the   polluted  river. Far from  being a wilderness  Utopia, the area is a veritable "combat zone."  In fact,  Dom  is murdered by  Cracked Joe, the  man  he  is  trying  to  help.  The  final


123

BOOKS IN REVIEW



image  in the  Epilogue symbolizes the de­
cay brought about  by white man's  greed.
In  contrast with  the entrepreneurs and tourists, the workers at the Lodge are an interesting lot:  "All of them longed for something." Their  names  are  indicative of their  personalities-Cracked Joe, Nar­ cisse, Boner, W. D. Loon, and  Cowboy Copeland. The last  one  is boisterous, lonely, compassionate and informed. His life provides a rough  parallel  with  Dom's in  that  he  too  had  come  North  to  begin again; and  his life too was a symbol, a gesture of no more apparent significance than  "the old  tree  toppling  in  the  forest where   there's no  human ears  to  hear   it fall."  Yet  the  Cowboy's  life,  like  Dom's life and  death, does affirm the strength of human love and  does at least sound a warning. That  affirmation and   implicit warning are  articulated by Kenny  Blos­ som, the one worthwhile American in the novel:   "If things  become  contaminated it's  because  the man  has a contaminated heart,   not    because    there's   something wrong  with  his  [technology]."
Indian River   has  an  interesting plot: dramatic  but    not   melodramatic. The emotional  stance   is  compassionate but never   mawkish. The   characters  are  in­ teresting, and  the  theme  significant.  Hu­  mour   and   irony  accentuate  the  serious­ ness; and  the literal  is nicely balanced by the figurative. Jake MacDonald has writ­
ten  a fine first novel.

DONALD R. BARTLETT


PASTORAL  LINES

LUANNE   ARMSTRONG,  Castle  Mountain.  Pole­
star  Press, $6.gs.
JANE  MUNRO, Daughters. Fiddlehead, n.p.
SUNITI  NAMJOSHI,  The  Authentic Lie. Fiddle- head,  n.p.

AMONG HIS GENERAL, introductory propo­ sitions   about  pastoral, Renato  Poggioli suggests  that   it  is "a   private,  masculine

124
 world,  where  woman is not a person  but  a sexual  archetype" and  that  "pastoral  re­ mains  a masculine dreamworld." In spite of  this  I  kept  seeing  (I hope  not  hallu­  cinating)   lineaments  of  pastoral  in  all three of Castle Mountain, Daughters, and The  Authentic Lie-all  three   of  them written by women.  They give us no shep­ herds,  though some may not be too far off in  the  Aegean   locale  of  several  of  Jane  Munro's poems.  But  for  one  thing,  that  primary denizen  of  modern pastoral, the child,  is vital  to all  three  collections; not only the daughter-child but also the writ­  ers'  sense  of  women-as-daughters  comes across  very  strongly. For  another  thing, each  collection in  its own  way  records  a kind  of retreat, a backward/inward  move for  purposes of refreshment, beginning again, or  therapeutic  working   through; the  move  in  turns  out  to be necessarily  a move  back  and  this move  back  enables  a return with  the  words  that  are  both  the means  and  the account of self-renewal or self-definition.
In    The  Oaten Flute     (posthumous, I975)   Poggioli goes on to propose  his ver­ sions  of   pastoral,  or   subspecies  of   the bucolic  imagination. To  his  pastorals of innocence, of happiness, of  self, of child­  hood,  we may perhaps add -in admira­ tion   not   condescension -the   domestic  pastoral   to   help   describe    Armstrong's Castle  Mountain and  Munro's Daughters. In  both,  a  presiding feminine conscious­ ness  moves  in  the  charged  interstices be­ tween  people, spaces, contents, and events of a home; she reflects on her  self among various roles, moods, and stances in her complex domicile. In  "Froth,"

She stares into the morning  fog. It seeps.
Where  are  the  stiff  weathers? For once, she'd  like
some  tool of atmosphere -
a dry  fog,
fathom of coral -
on  which  she might  hang  up

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



her  weight  of skins,
foam  and  expand, easily.
And wordmaking, trying  to find voice and words  is (very  explicitly  in Castle Moun­ tain)    essential   to   homesteading.   Thus  Luanne Armstrong  in  "Draught," where draught turns  out  to be "Nine generations of sour  Scots farmers behind  me  / never a poet  / a heritage of dust":
Before  I could remember, this  place held  voices,
my  grandfather's, my  father's, now  nune....
I wait.
I want  new  voices  to come
from  the  broken hill like  water from  stone witching for  power
to  well  up  from  dust;
the  voices  of  buried gods,  barbed under fences,  and   plowed   earth.

Or   Jane  Munro in  "At   the   Mouth of
Desolation Sound":
When does  letting go bare the  soul,  and when  eat  it?
The spiral of voices  twists to a fragile edge;
she  puts  herself   to  her  ear  and  listens to  the  gulf  amplified. Without this
open-ended
shell  of  narrative she  would  feel  homeless.
In   Suniti  Namjoshi's The   Authentic Lie most domestic roles and rooms are lacking; furnishings are  carefully selected literary period  pieces,  biblical  to modern
-the degree  of self-conscious intertextu­ ality   is  pronounced. What  dwellers   we run   into   and   what   voices  we  hear   are almost   exclusively   inside   the   persona's head.   So  this  collection   is  not  at  all  a "domestic pastoral" in the sense I've  been trying  to describe; but  it is dominated by a   daughter-child   mourning   for   a   lost father-giant  ("Discourse with  the Dead") and  the note of pastoral elegy is unavoid­ ably  strong  especially  since  its  prevailing key, or  mode,  is dream. There is even  a kind  of  apotheosis, at   the  end  of  "Dis­  course with  the  Dead," that's a very nice blend    of    affirmation,  distancing,  and resignation.
 Perhaps  this attempt to catch  all three writers  in one  sort  of pastoral net  or an­ other  is just a reviewer's casting for some­ thing  elastic  but  tidy  to  say  about  three  distinct   and    otherwise   quite   different works. They  are different, of course. For example,  the male husband/lover figure: in Castle  Mountain he is a present  neces­ sity  to  the  word,  self,  and  homemaking project and  he's celebrated in several love poems;  he  is  neither so  present   nor  so necessary in  Daughters,  where  he's  cele­ brated  fewer  times and,  through  the per­ sona  of  Poppi,  the  Cretan  bride,  occa­ sionally  and   neatly   chided   for   various chauvinisms: "He  corrected  my English. I was not prepared to correct his Greek." And  in The  Authentic  Lie,  where  he  is perhaps swirled in the turbulences of hav­  ing to let the father go, he appears rarely and  only  as  a  disaster   to  whom  women are   wishfulfilling dream-objects:  "The landscape  of  hell  is  the  body  of  a  man, not  wide-awake /  and  not  quite  dead." For   example,   the   speaker's  stance   and tone:  from  the engaged, almost  entirely undistanced, firmly situated voice of  Cas­ tle Mountain, through the more detached, multiple   voices  of  Daughters  uttering a greater variety   of  situations  and  locales
-often in virtue  of the Poppi  persona - to   the   polished,    succinct    urbanities  of voice  and  stance   in  The   Authentic   Lie, from  which  I get the impression  of words like lotus petals  floating on a formal  pool that   multiplies  perspectives  and   glints with many ironies.
To  conclude, still  in  the  comparative
mode: of the three  volumes Castle Moun­ tain  is the  least  pretentious in  a  literary sense and  the most straightforward about the need to write and  about the place, the station  of  writing within  a cycle or spiral of  growth;  the "Invocation" goes

Now
to  sing  joy
in small  voices ...


125

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



teach  us now
this small  weaving
from dust

while   the  "Incantation"  (which   to  my mind  should   be  the  last,  not  second  last piece)  goes
 James would   say.  On   the  whole   I  am moved   the   most   by   Castle   Mountain, instructed  the  most   by  Daughters, and the most  engaged-as a matter of inter­ est  in  its  execution-by  The  Authentic Lie.


Out  of this silence, stories
out  of this distance, movement
and  slow change;
out  of going  forward,  power
out  of  standing still,  peace;
out  of rage,  silence

and so, presumably, back again  to stories. Daughters is  the  most  ambitious in  the way  of  seeking   fresh  images,  locutions, and  rhythms even  though, in  mode,  it is often  more  conventionally narrative than the other two. My use of "conventionally" is not  perjorative. Once   or  twice,  as  in the  case,  say,  of  "Matrix," a   poem   is incoherent. There is so to speak  a syntax of rhythm as well as of grammar and  the former  will often  carry  the  production of meaning in  an  absence   of  the  latter. I think  that, on occasion in Daughters, both species of syntax give way simultaneously; I'm  well aware, though, that  the demand for  certain kinds  of  coherence may  well be a masculine vice. Then The Authentic Lie is by a long way the most formal  and self-consciously  literary of these three vol­ umes.  I  have  already  mentioned  its  pro­ nounced intertexuality:  there  is an  elab­ orate  substructure of  literary   allusions; there   are   retellings  of   myths,   nursery rhymes,  and   fairy  stories  as  well  as  an effective continuation of an Alice in Won­ derland    conversation   that's  nearly    as zany-but-shrewd as its original. The whole opening   section,    "Discourse  with    the Dead" is a  carefully orchestrated, four­  part movement with  scrupulous attention given to the visual/spatial effects of varia­ tion  in  type  and  placement on  the  page. Ideally I  suppose  a  work  of  art  should,  either   simultaneously or  seriatim,  move us, instruct us, and engage our interest  in how it's done-in its execution, as Henry
 IAN  SOWTON


UNE CONSCIENCE

ALAIN CHEVRETTE,  Le  Premier  Homme.  Naa­
man,  n.p.
PIERRE  PAUL  KARCH,  Nuits  blanches.  Prise  de
Parole,  $8.gs.
JACQUES LAFLEUR, Decors a l'envers. Naaman,
n.p.
PASCAL SABOURIN,  Quand  il pleut SUrma  ville.
Naaman, n.p.

ENTRE  PASCAL SABOURIN, Pierre  Paul Karch, Alain   Chevrette et  Jacques  La­ fleur  on pourrait etablir un grand nombre de  points  communs. II suffira  ici  de  rap­ peler   que  ces  quatre  ecrivains  sont  des universitaires,  qu'ils   se   rattachent  aux genres  de  l'imaginaire  ( selon  divers  de­ gres,  il  est  vrai), que  la  narration chez eux  ne suit  pas les regles imposees  par  les vieilles  traditions et qu'enfin, ils sont  tous les  quatres  des  exemples   de  renaissance regionaliste  dans  le domaine litteraire­ cette  demiere appartenance  n'etant  pas toujours  explicite au   niveau   des  formes du  contenu.
Commem;ons par les deux textes franco­ ontariens et signalons au  passage que  ces demiers font  partie  d'une  litterature qui a ete  trop  longtemps  negligee.
Quand il pleut sur ma ville de Pascal Sabourin est un recit que l'on  pourrait qualifier d'existentialiste. Mais  le  narra­ teur    de   ce   roman   philosophique   n'est jamais    pousse   vers   les   extremes;  sauf, naturellement,  lorsqu'il  s'agit   de  l'idea­ lisme   abstrait.   La    femme    qui   l'aime, Cecilia, n'est  ni aussi docile  que la Marie de  L'Etranger, ni aussi sauvage  que  la Madeleine de  Poussiere sur la ville. D'au­ tre  part, la  pluie   semble  garantir  cette

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



opacite du  monde dont   tout   esprit  phi­ losophique  a   l'air   d'avoir  besoin   pour s'eriger   en   conscience  douloureuse.  On pourrait ainsi  relever  toutes  les constantes  du  roman   existentialiste dans  Quand  il pleut sur ma ville et !'exercise ne manque­ rait   pas  d'interet  pour   un   etudiant  en litterature comparee qui  serait tout  heu­  reux  de retrouver ici le couteau etincelant du  malheur,  jadis  perdu par  Meursault. Mais  il faut  etre  juste  et  reconnaitre que le  recit  de  Pascal  Sabourin  est  bien  de notre  temps et  qu'au-dela de l'existentia­ lisme  il  rejoint  la  tradition  des  genera­ tions   perdues.  Ce   texte   est,   en   effet, etrangement  pres   de   Conversazione  in Sicilia  de  Elio  Vittorini et  de  The  Sun Also  Rises  d'Ernest  Hemingway. Or,  il
y a un  pessimisme  brumeux qui  a  plane sur  nos litteratures depuis  le debut  de  ce siecle. Apres l'eclaircie des annees soixante nous  y  revenons. Il  est beau  aussi de  re­ voir   des  mots   comme   "la   Vie"   et   "la Verite" revenir  sous la  plume  de Sabou­  rin.  C'est   du  moins   la  un   premier   pas vers  un  certain  vitalisme   philosophique qui,   lui  aussi,  s'etait  eteint   depuis   Ga­ briele  D'Annunzio et  Gaston   Bachelard. Mais  cette  confluence ideologique est tres reservee: "Oui, il y a demain.... Mais il y ala pluie,  demain."
Nuits  blanches  de  Pierre   Paul   Karch est   un  recueil   de  douze   contes  fantas­ tiques. L'auteur reprend ici une tradition ou  les influences   de  Hoffmann,  d'Edgar Allan  Poe  et  d'autres  ne  manquent  pas
de  se  faire  sentir. Malgre quelques  im­ precisions    stylistiques -qui   n'auraient pas  du  passer  le bureau du  redacteur­ il faut  reconnaitre que  ces contes sont tres bien   travailles  et   offrent   la   coherence thematique qui caracterise les textes  fan­  tastiques  de  qualite.
"Fleur de  Pavot," le dernier conte  du
recueil,   constitue  un   bon   exemple   de cette   unite   thematique qui   engendre  le recit. C'est  l'histoire de la maison d'un botaniste qui,  en  nourraissant ses plantes
 des "pertes seminales" de son  jardinier et des   "menstrues"  d'Anna-Maria  sa   ser­ vante,  finit  par  creer  des  monstres  vege­ taux  qui  devorent leurs  "parents."  Mais plus que le recit,  ce qui fascine  le lecteur  c'est  la progression  des structures thema­ tiques. C'est  ainsi qu'au debut  on a !'im­ pression  que  l'animisme des plantes  n'est qu'une obsession  du  jardinier. Par  exem­ ple,  celui-la   a  d'abord  !'impression que "les  feuilles  mourantes" se  roulent  vers lui  "comme pour   lui  mordre le  talon," puis   il  trouve que  l"'inhospitali te"  des plantes  l'irrite "comme une  feuille  d'or­ tie." D'autre part, la servante est victime  de  la  meme  paranoia. Pourtant,  quand elle  tente  d'aborder le sujet  avec  le  jar­  dinier,   ce  dernier  se  moque  d'elle.   Les images  convergent  ainsi  vers  la  fin  du recit  et c'est  done  le discours  symbolique qui  prepare l'action finale  de  la  plante humaine.  Cette   progression   bien   dosee contribue  grandement  a  ce  que   depuis  Roland  Barthe on  appelle "Le  Plaisir  du Texte."
Voila done deux textes franco-ontariens dont  la  portee   reste  universelle  et  le  re­ gionalisme  implicite. 11 y a  la  une  sub­ tilite   qui  survivra  la  cause  ideologique plus que  l'on  ne pourrait le  penser.
Les  deux   autres  textes  peuvent  aussi etre geographiquement identifies: Ils nous viennent de L'Estrie.
Le Premier Homme  d'Alain  Chevrette est un roman  qui,  comme  Quand  il pleut sur ma ville, evoque  les difficultes et la solitude  de l'esprit philosophique. L'ima­ ginaire   joue   cependant  un   plus   grand
role   chez   Chevrette  et   la   pluie -qui
n'etait  qu'un  sombre   symbole  chez  Sa­
bourin-est  tout  autre chose  ici:
II  s'etait   mis  a sourire,  il sentait   que  la pluie  tombait   pour  lui;  elle  etait   pure   et
blanche,  comme  un  sapin  de  printemps.... II   avait    !'impression  que   !a   pluie   etait formee   de   milliers   de   petites    roches   se
desagregeant a la  descente....
Le   Premier   Homme    constitue  ainsi une  belle meditation et  l'on  s'attache fa-


I27

BOOKS IN REVIEW



cilement   a  ce  Thomas reveur   dont   les mots nous guident vers la grandeur du silence. Le nom de ce personnage est d'ailleurs peut-etre une clef car il evoque, ici et la, Thomas l'imposteur de Jean Cocteau et  Thomas l'obscur de  Maurice Blanchot.  On   admirera  sans   doute   la beaute  singuliere de ce roman  ou le  pro­ tagoniste  devient   au  fond  la  victime des personnages  qu'il   a  inventes.  Un   grand
bravo  done  a Chevrette qui  a  au  moins
decouvert   que    la   litterature   est   une
grande illusion -le pain  de I'esprit.
Decors  a  l'envers,  un  recueil  de  cinq
nouvelles,   de   Jacques  Lafleur    s'inscrit
egalement sous le signe de  la conscience. Dans "Mourir ..." nous penetrons I'esprit d'Antoine, un  vieillard  qui en est a l'ago­ nie. La  conscience du  personnage  est la, toujours  la,  pour  assister  a la  disparition
des perceptions sensorielles,  puis a la  de­
sintegration  de   la   memoire.  Au   fond,
meme  la mort  semble  impuissante face  a ce   tremblement   de   l'etre    au   sein   du neant:

Antoine venait de  realiser qu'il etait mort, probablement  depuis  fort   longtemps deja, mais   cela   n'avait  aucune  espece  d'impor­ tance, aucune signification....

Dans  les autres contes  c'est  toujours  la conscience  qui soutient la narration, cette derniere etant  tendue elle-meme  vers la mort,   l'amour et  !'interrogation   perma­ nente  de  la  vie. C'est  en  ce  sens  que  les personnages  de  Lafleur  sont  clairement definis;   tel   ce   Fran<;ois   a   qui   semble echapper  l'amour   absolu   de   Nathalie ("Nathalie et  Franc;ois")  :

II  aimait  profondement Ia  vie  mais,  meme s'il  parvenait toujours a  se  maitriser, il  de­ meurait   marque   depuis  son   enfance   par  l'absurdire de  !'existence et  le  spectre  de  Ia mort.

Ces livres d'aujourd'hui constituent des ensembles   de  signes  qui  nous  renvoient aux  referents culturels qui nous obsedent. Nous   les  avons   aper<;us:   quatre  textes,
 deux  regionalismes, une conscience  qui ne peut  etre  evitee....

ALEXANDRE L. AMPRIMOZ


WINDOWS ON INVENTION

THERESE  BONVOULOIR-BAYOL, Les Soeurs  d'Jo.
L'Arbre HMH, n.p.
JEAN-MARIE  POUPART,  Angoisse  Play. Lemeac,
$5·95·
NADINE  MAC KENZIE, Le Prix du Silence.  Fides, n.p.
BERTRAND B.  LEBLANC, Horace  du l'art  de  por­
ter  la redingote. Lemeac, $9·95·
JEAN-YVES soucv,  Les  Chevaliers   de  la  nuit.
Les  'editions La  Presse,  n.p.

NONE OF THESE FIVE   NOVELS   possesses the  ebullient, panoramic imagination of Michel   Tremblay's  Plateau  Mont-Royal or  Victor-Levy  Beaulieu's  endless  Beau­ chemin family  series;  however,  three,  at least,  are  windows   opening  onto  the  in­ ventive   world   of  recent  Quebec fiction. Therese   Bonvouloir-Bayol's  Les  Soeurs d' I o is yet another story of a deserted wife who, after  the inevitable descent  into soli­ tude   and   depression,  slowly   begins   to piece  together the  shards  of  her  broken life. Written in the guise of a journal, and  in   the  lyrical,   melancholy  and   slightly dazed  tone, all  too common to these kind of  novels,  the   book  spans  a  short   year during  which    the   narrator   returns   to Montreal and  begins  a feeble  rediscovery of   the   city,   her   Quebec  heritage,  the strong  pull of family and  church  (needless to say,  during a  long,  hard winter). An obligatory voyage  to  the  Gaspe-which has  lately  become  symbolic  of  the  new, regenerative frontier-is included, as are
a  few  desultory love affairs.  The journal is interspersed with  flashbacks  of  thenar­ rator's life  with  the  egocentric  Frederic, but  these  diminish as  her  state  of  mind improves. Also  dispersed  throughout the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



text are maudlin philosophical sentiments, such as the following  resolution arrived  at after  hours  of insomnia.

	. 	'

The occasional, pretty lyrical passages de­ scribing  Quebec's winter  and  scenery  are overshadowed by the  banality of the tale, the weak characterization of  the  narrator and   her  irritating  inability  to  move  be­ yond  a  life  determined  by  men  towards  that   dignity   she  claims   to   be   seeking. Somehow  the  trials of the narrator do not measure  up  to  those  of   Io,  seduced   by Zeus and  condemned by the  jealous Hera  to  flee  in  torment,  pursued  by  gadflies, until  kind  Prometheus directed her to the Nile,  where she  was, at  last,  restored   to her  original  condition by Zeus.
Angoiss.e Play, by the experimental and playful  Jean-Marie  Poupart, is  interest­ ingly enough  a revised edition of  his Ig68 novel. As the  changes  are  minor  but  dia­ chronic,  it  is  worthwhile to   remember that  the context of the novel is the turbu­ lent  Ig6o's  of the  Quiet  Revolution. The  author himself  suggests  that  the  novel be read  with  the same attitude one visits the anthropopithecal   section   of   a   Natural History   Museum,  that   is  quizzically.  In the   revised   version,  although  very  few words   are   changed  or   added,  Poupart inserts    commas,   periods,    and    capital letters,  thus diminishing the stream-of­ consciousness  and  subduing the  uninhib­ ited,  automatic writing more characteris­ tic  of  the   I g6o's.  The  result  is  a  more cryptic, distant, deliberate, cold, and enig­ matic  text.
This  novel  is also  narrated in  the  first person   in   the   form   of  a   journal, but through  a   hot   Montreal  summer, and with numbered rather than  indented paragraphs. The "angoisse" is played  out by an  unpleasant, overweight young man,
 a writer  who is completely unreliable. He may or may  not  have  a roommate called Anna; he is a misogynist,  obsessed by sex, a destructive iconclast  and  arsonist,  given to cynical and  amusing statements such as "Rien   ne  me  donne   plus  de  plaisir  que
de  faire   dire  a quelqu'un  qu'il   est  un
imbecile"  or "Dieu a toujours ete  correct
avec moi" or "celui  qui n'est pas capable d'etre superficiel   ne  sera  jamais   un  au­ teur   de  genie." Both   Poupart  and   the narrator, Blaise Augustin, mock  the con­ ventions  of  narrative and   the  accepted codes of human behaviour. And so Blaise makes  the  wonderful  observation  that  it was  a  pity   that  Camus  had   killed  off Meursault  at  the  end  of  The  Stranger  because  he  could  have  carried on  in  the style  of  Colette  with   "The  Stranger at School,"  "The  Stranger in  Paris." As a play  on  the  narrator un-writing his nar­  rative   and   hovering,  teasingly,   between fiction  and  autobiography, Angoisse  Play is clever,  but not  as  profound as Quin's Prochain Episode, which also experiments in  narration.
Nadine   MacKenzie's  Le   Prix  du   Si­ lence is a conventional thriller  where  the hero,   a   newspaperman  to   an   Eastern  European country, tries to escape to Can­ ada  after  he  has  been  exiled  an  an  "In­ tellectual  Club" for  stating  his  opinions  openly.  The   description  of   this  isolated prison   for   dissidents,    a   futuristic  and illusory  idyllic  retreat for  intellectuals is the   only   section   of   real   interest    and  horror.
Since the only form of higher education in Quebec until  Ig6o was the college classique, it is surprising that  so few nov­ els have  emerged, describing this  unique, anachronistic, priest-run  institution  that  has  so influenced the  intellectual life  of Quebec. Bertrand  Leblanc's  Horace   ou l'art de porter la redingote (the  redingote is  the  uniform  worn  by  the  boys in  the I gso's)   genially  fills this  gap.  However, except   for   its   Quebec  setting,    it  IS    a

I29

BOOKS IN REVIEW



familiar boarding-school tale, with its parade of eccentric teachers, inspiring teachers, harsh daily routine, desperate, covert  sexuality, and   predictable  misad­ ventures. The   Horace of  the  title is an irascible    and    charming   nonconformist who  manages to  learn  very little  except the  cunning  circumvention of  rules.  In­  evitably   the   novel   is  replete   with   the continuing battle against  the Catholicism that   orders   the   boys'  days  and   directs (and stifles)  their intellectual and  moral development. Although humorous and evocative of  the  1950's  and   of  the  col­ leges classiques,  Horace  is a series  of  de­ scriptions  and   anecdotes rather   than   a thoughtful study  of a sentimental  educa­ tion,  despite  Leblanc's apparent desire  to portray  the  context   behind  current  in­ tellectual  life.
The  most  absorbing of  these  novels  is
Les Chevaliers de la nuit  which  joins the ranks of the many Quebec novels with adolescent heroes. Soucy creates  the world of  a  rang   (country road)   in  Abitibi  in
1959, where the Savard family from Montreal  joins  other   dreamers,  recluses, and  misfits in abandoned homesteads, to attempt once again  the dream  of  Coloni­ zation.  At that  time,  Abitibi  received  the last feeble trickle of the wave of Coloniza­ tion  begun  in  the  nineteenth century in order  to settle  remote regions  of Quebec and  reinstate  the  agrarian ideology,  pre­ cious  to  both  church and   state.  Soucy, however, focuses his attention on the  two adolescent Savard boys-Robert, and  in particular, the  sensitive  and  imaginative
&emi-who as the  chevaliers  de la nuit
explore  the mysterious  night  kingdom among the  pines  and  creeks  of  the  sur­ rounding forests.

Aie,    chercher,   decouvrir,  posseder;    con­ naitre  les  choses   invisibles. Etre  des  chas­  seurs  de  mystere.... Faut inventer.

Their night  is not the  underground  night­
world  of  Djuna Barnes  or  Marie-Claire
 Blais,  nor  of  the  creatures  that   inhabit the wilderness. Instead, the  boys, by  per­ forming their  own  secret  rituals  for  the "Black  Goddess," Satan, or  their  courtly  ladies,  entering a  "haunted  house,"  slip­ ping   through  the  night   to  spy  on  their neighbours'  drinking   parties,  give   free rein  to their  fantasies and  begin  that  long descent  into  the self, apparently necessary to adolescent creative geniuses. Yet Soucy is more  successful  in  describing the  bur­  lesque soirees of the frustrated and  comic inhabitants of the rang and  the boys' pre­ occupation  with  sex  than   in   portraying the  artist as  a  young  boy.  As  he  resorts neither  to  irony  and   therefore  distance  nor  to  a  complex  lyrical  probing, Soucy does   not   always  succeed   in  creating  a plausible  adolescent mind.
Although the blurb on the back cover suggests  that  the  novel  might  be a  politi­ cal  allegory  I think   that  is an  exaggera­ tion  of Soucy's   theme  of  the  pernicious­
ness and  necessity  of "la  reve."  As Remi
reflects:

Tout Je monde rive ... Pourquoi les adultes abandonnent-ils  leurs   rives  a  Ia   premiere
difficultk, pourquoi  n'ont-ils pas  le  courage de   les  defendre, Ia  volonte  de   les  realiser coute que  coute?

The Savard pere,  an  ineffectual dreamer (practically a stereotype father in Quebec novels)  who fails to draw sustenance from his land; the  priest,  a  dreamer of grand schemes  and  possible  pederast; Sonia, re­ luctantly tied to family and  endless winter  nights   (a  modern Maria  Chapdelaine), who   dreams  of  poetry  and   adventure; and   Remi, himself,  a  saner,  if  less pre­  cocious  and   talented  and   Machiavellian version of the adolescent heroes and  hero­  ines  of  Marie-Claire Blais, Anne  Hebert, Rejean  Ducharme, Jacques  Poulin,   are characters frequently encountered in Quebec fiction.  Therefore, Les Chevaliers is not a political allegory, but a "condition of  Quebec"  novel   with   the   adolescent hero   representing  the  struggle to  shrug

BOOKS IN REVIEW



off an  ignoble  past,  to overcome the  be­ trayal  of  dream by adults (the  previous  generations) , and  to accede  to a dream of self.
Using a conventional narrative form, Soucy  adopts what   has  become   a  prac­ ticable   use  of  joual -for  dialogue  only (I have  no  idea  whether  he  successfully recreates  the   dialect   of   Abitibi).  Pure French  is  reserved   for  descriptions  and for  Remi's interior  reflections.  Occasion­ ally  self-consciously  written, sentimental, with   a   predictable  narrative   outcome, Soucy's  novel  is soothingly satisfying  and more   importantly,  begins   that   difficult task of drawing the reader  into  the world of his characters' lives, a world  one leaves with  reluctance, upon  closing  the book.

KATHY  MEZEI


LE REGNE
DU SCORPION

ROGER FOURNIER,  Le  Cercle   des  arenes.  Albin
Michel, n.p.
MONIQUE JEANNOTTE,  Le  Vent n'a  pas d'echo.
Editions du  Ble, $8.so.
ANDRE  VANASSE,   La   Saga   des   Lagace. Libre
Expression, n.p.

THE GRAVEST CRIME a contemporary Quebec author can  commit  in  the  eyes of his critics is, it seems, not  to be a stylist
-i.e.,  to relinquish the  challenge of  ex­ perimental language and genre and revert  (or should  one say regress?)   to traditional realism.   Roger   Fournier,  author of  nu­ merous  novels-the best  known  perhaps being Moi  mon  corps mon ame  Montreal etc.  ( 1974)  -has been consistently chas­ tized  by Quebec  reviewers  for  his repeti­ tive  combination  of  sensationalist eroti­ cism and conservative narrative. Classified by  Victor-Levy  Beaulieu  as  a "p'tit [Henry] Miller" (Le  Devoir, 16 decem­ bre 1972), Fournier suffers in a compari­ son  with  Hubert  Aquin, for  instance, in
 whose work  eroticism  is so strongly  inte­ grated  into   a   self-reflexive   text   as   to function as a figure  of writing and  read­  ing  itself.  It should   come  as  no surprise  then  that  Quebec critics  react  with  irri­  tation  to the  vogue  Fournier  has enjoyed in  France   since   the  publication  of  Les Cornes   sacrees   with   Albin    Michel,    a vogue   confirmed    by   the   Prix   France­ Canada awarded to his most recent  novel, Le  Cercle  des  arenes.  As  in  the  case  of Marie-Claire  Blais's  Une   Saison  dans  la vie   d'Emmanuel  (recipient  of  both   the Prix  France-Quebec and  the  Prix  Medi­  cis) ,  reviewers  like  Reginald  Martel  in La  Presse and  Jean Basile  in  Le  Devoir feel  that  France identifies  today's  literary scene in Quebec with  the  wrong  books; that  is, with  books  tending to perpetuate French myths  about the  presumable  in­ tellectual    state  of   its   former   colony. Whereas   Blais's   nove    was   accused   of solidfying   folkloric -if   somewhat  per­ verted-notions of the French-Canadian family,  Fournier's  Le  Cercle   des  arenes comes   under  attack   for   suggesting   to French readers  that  it represents a sensual
revolution   a la D.  H.  Lawrence without,
however,  committing itself  to  an  episte­
mological  revolt  at  the same  time.
It is easy  to  see  why   Le  Cercle   des arenes  should   have   stirred  such  annoy­ ance  among  its Quebec  reviewers. It  is a conservatively presented story  of a young man   by  the   name    of    Sebastien   who, while  in Paris,  runs  out  of  money,  cables to his father  in Canada to lend him some, and  instead  of simply receiving  a cheque, finds   "Papa"   himself   standing  on   his doorstep.  Father  and   son  then   embark  upon  an  effort  of  "rapprochement," not an  easy  task  because  Sebastien-an ille­ gitimate child-has grown  up with his mother. The plot  thickens  when  a young woman joins the couple for a car-drive through southern France;  there  is erotic tension aplenty with Sebastien suffering through  every  imaginable Freudian com-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



plex   in  his  attempt  to  monopolize   his father. The story  ends in  the  "cercle  des arenes" in Orange; watching a bull-fight, the threesome presumably resolve their psychological  problems.
Le Cercle des arenes addresses  itself to three   themes:  the  decadence of  France (us. the innocence of Quebec), the deca­
dence  of  a  womanizing father  (us. the innocence of a son), and  female sensual­ ity as both  a  catalyst  for  and  reconcilia­ tion  of  all  psychological  (and  national) conflict.  It  would   take  considerable vir­
tuosity   on  the  author's  part   to  salvage these more than outworn  themes from banality, and  Fournier does  not  succeed in convincing the reader  that  they deserve further attention. His  treatment of the father-son relationship elicited an ironical "Mon  Dieu,   est-ce   possible,  on  ne  erie plus maman. La litterature quebecoise semble avoir fait un pas" from Madeleine Ouellette-Michalska (Le Devoir, 17 avril
1982), while  Sebastien's father's drunken speech  on female  power  has not  the slightest  bearing on his behaviour toward "les femelles," as he likes to call them.
If Le  Cercle des arenes because  of its nai:vete makes  somewhat embarrassing reading,  Monique  Jeannotte's  Le  Vent
n'a  pas d'echo  leaves  one speechless;  are
we back in the days of the historical  novel and   the  roman  du  terroir? Set,  for  the most part, in a Quebec village during the
186o's  and   after, Jeannotte's novel  tells
the story of Marie-Claire whose father forbids   her  to  marry   her  love  Adhemar at the age of fifteen. She moves west with her motherless family,  writes letters  to her lover  (they  are  lost), he writes  letters  to her  (they   too are  lost),  she returns  thir­ teen years later  to find -surprise! -Ad­ hemar  married, although (as he deserves) miserably  so. The narrative  contains  nu­ merous   regionalist   terms   and   syntactic peculiarities painstakingly glossed in foot­ notes, in  the  best  tradition of the kind  of folkloric  writing  the  writers  of the Quiet
 Revolution objected so strongly  to. The book  is  out   of  time   and   out   of  place, without  being  able   to  claim   the  saving grace  of  parody.
No greater contrast could  be imagined to  the   two  novels  reviewed   above   than Andre Vanasse's La Saga des Lagace. A first   novel,   La  Saga   is  an   intelligent, amusing fantasy, very much  a  literary­ that  is, allusive-narrative  that  reminds one  of  Vanasse's  usual  occupation  as  a critic.    The  Lagace   clan,  consisting   of father Samuel,  mother Rose-Aimee, and  their   children  Alexis,  Bertrand, Cybele, and  Emile,  live in a house as eccentric in looks  as its  inhabitants are  in  behaviour. Gaston  Bachelard's spirit  seems  to hover over scenes  describing Samuel all  but  de­ stroying  his   family's  domestic   life   by throwing everything-furniture,  house­ ware, and  the baby- out of the window, the  same  Samuel building a  mushroom­ shaped tower  for  his writer-son Emile   (a latter-day Nelligan), and  green-eyed Cy­ bele  ascending her  very own  staircase to her room.
As  the  house   provides a  precariously stable  frame for  the Lagace family  to live in,  the  clan  itself  maintains a  modicum of bourgeois respectability in their  retiring mother, a  nun  manquee, and  in  Alexis, a wealthy dealer in men's  ties. Both, how­ ever, are  helpless  against the more eccen­  tric members of the  family,  like Bertrand who  melts  down   his  mother's  jewellery, almost   blows  up  the  house,  and  gets  his rich  brother to finance his  schemes.  Ber­ trand is fascinated  with  water   (another Bachelardian  phenomenon), perhaps the most   appropriate  medium for   the   La­ gaces's    amorphous   world;   among   his more  spectacular  (if  imagined)  feats  is the conversion of all water  supplied by Hydro-Quebec into   oxygen.  All  of  Ber­ trand's  projects come   to  nothing,  how­ ever;  despairing, he  drowns  himself   by jumping off  a  bridge.  Cybele,  his  sister, seems   more   successful.  Her   liquid   eyes

BOOKS IN REVIEW



open  into  an  entrance  to  a  phantasma­ goric not a scientific  world; her iris draws those who  look at  her  into  their  personal and   collective   past  and  sends   them   on journeys   through  their   body  molecules. Emile,   the  writer,  maintains a  tellingly tentative   connection   with   "reality,"  by peeping  through  the  cracks  in  his  floor and   fantasizing  wildly   about  Cybele's body. From  Emile's   perspective, La Saga des  Lagace  may  be read  as an  allegory  of a  writer's situation in Quebec, perched precariously atop  his country's changing traditions and  waiting for  the  birth  of its identity in  the  shape of  Cybele's   sexless child.
Although   Vanasse's   themes    are   not much  more  original than  Fournier's (not to mention Jeannotte's),  his presentation of  them  is sufficiently  so. Literary echoes are  treated with  sophistication and  criti­ cal   distance;  oscillating  between   meta­ phor   and   metonymy,  they   are  released from   their  status  as  cliche.  If  the  novels reviewed  above  can  be  considered at  all indicative of  fiction-writing in Quebec at the  moment,  one   may   well  ask  oneself whether the  realist  novel  has  become  an impossibility  there,  objectionable because it confirms  a split  between  form  and  con­ tent  no  longer   legitimate since  the  mo­ ment  (in the  words  with  which  Vanasse concludes his novel)  "ou  le Quebec faisait son entree  dans  le regne  du Scorpion."

EVA-MARIE KROLLER



DE LA CHALEUR A L'ENFER

LOurs  CARON,  Le  Canard   de  bois. Boreal  Ex­
press,  $12.95·
JACQUES  BENOIT,   Gisiile  et  le  serpent.  Libre
Expression, $12.50.

Le Canard  de bois est le premier volume d'un triptyque qui  a  pour  titre  "Les  Fils
 de   Ia  Liberte,"  sene   romanesque dont
!'action se situe  a  l'epoque des  Patriotes. Deja  dans   L'emmitoufle, Louis  Caron faisait   un   parallele  entre   deux  person­ nages  et  deux   epoques.  Toutefois, dans L'emmitoufle, le  narrateur se contentait de  s'identifier a   son  oncle,   sans  entrer  dans  des  details  sur  ses experiences per­ sonnelles.  Dans   Le   Canard   de  bois,  le recit  des  aventures de  Hyacinthe Belle­ rose, en  1837,  et celui  de !'initiation a la vie de  Bruno  Bellerose,  son arriere-petit­ fils, en  1935,  s'entrecoupent d'un  bout  a
!'autre de l'ouvrage. A mesure  que  Hya­
cinthe  se libere  du  passe  pour  s'engager
dans  le  present, Bruno  vainc  une  a  une ses  multiples  peurs-peur  de  la   nuit, peur   du   patron,  peur   de   compagnons brutaux, peur   de  la  femme,   peur  de  Ia mort -et  devient un  homme.  Malheu­ reusement, !'adolescent  ne  reussit  pas  a nous  emouvoir autant  que  Hyacinthe et les  personnages si  vivants  qui  gravitent autour de lui. Le monde  de Bruno et ceux qui  le  peuplent  sont  moins  interessants, moins convaincants. Caron l'a  sans doute  senti puisqu'il accorde moins de place aux aventures de  Bruno qu'a celles de  Hya­  cinthe.  Et si la structure du  roman  en est quelque peu  desequilibree, il ne faut  pas trop   s'en   plaindre,  car   c'est   toujours a regret  que !'on  quitte Hyacinthe, ses allies et   meme   ses  ennemis  pour   revenir    a
Bruno  et  a ses frayeurs d'adolescent.
Malgre   ses  inegalites,  Le  Canard   de
bois  est  un  beau,   un   tres  beau   roman, sans doute  le plus emouvant que l'on ait jamais  ecrit  sur  les evenements de  1837· Bien   qu'il   declare  avoir   depouille   des "piles  d'ouvrages" sur  l'epoque, !'auteur dit aussi qu'il  ne vise pas a faire oeuvre d'historien ni a servir de cause politique. L'etre qui !'interesse c'est

le  citoyen  obscur  qui   tient  la  fourche, la faux  ou le  baton, qui  a faim,  qui  a froid, qui n'a   pas  dormi  depuis des   jours  et  qui   n'a qu'une bien  vague notion de  l'aventure  par­ faitement illegale dans laquelle il s'est  laisse entra!ner au nom  de  Ia  justice meme.

133

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Tel est Hyacinthe Bellerose. Parti,  plein d'ardeur  pour   les  Bois  Francs   avec  sa jeune femme,  Flavie, il revient dans son village, le coeur  brise. Sur  une traine, il ramene le cadavre de  Flavie,  tuee  par  le cholera. La  terre,  sur  laquelle  il a  trime
pendant cinq  ans, a ete cedee a la British
American Land  parce  qu'il  n'a  pu  payer
les  redevances  exigees.  Tout ce  qui  lui reste est un  petit  Irlandais que sa femme et  lui  ont   adopte  pour   remplacer  leur enfant mort-ne. Hyacinthe est  mal  reiSu au village  ou l'amour de Flavie  lui a fait des ennemis.  Ils se sont  d'ailleurs maries sans le consentement de leurs  parents ou du cure en se declarant mari  et femme  au cours  d'une messe.  D'autre part,   abruti par  trop  de souffrances, Hyacinthe ne seconde  guere  son  pere  et  ses freres  qui
peinent  du  matin au  soir sans parvenir a
payer  le cens au seigneur  anglais.  Ils sont
exploites  par Smith, le marchand anglais, qui  leur   paye  un  prix  derisoire   le  bois dont  ils ont eux-memes besoins et la glace
qu'ils  decoupent peniblement a meme  le
fleuve. De  crainte de perdre leur  terre  et
d'etre chasses de  leur  rnaison,  les paysans se soumettent. Mais  Hyacinthe est d'une autre trempe. 11 refuse de courber l'echine devant les maltres anglais et leurs acolytes, dont  le notaire et le cure sont les plus devoues. 11 trouve  d'ailleurs une alliee en Marie  Moitie. La  belle  Metisse,  coura­ geuse  et genereuse, finira  par  prendre la place  de  Flavie   dans   le  coeur  de  Hya­  cinthe.   Lorsqu'il  a  fini   de   sculpter  le canard de  bois-celui dont  Bruno  meri­  tera  d'heriter,  lorsqu'il  aura  surmonte sa peur-il   est   libere   de  l'emprise  de  la
rnorte  de devient  l'amant de Marie,  a qui
il  offre   le  canard. En   meme   temps,   il
prend   la  defense  des  victimes  de  l'in jus­ tice et de !'arrogance  anglaises. Ainsi, cet homme  qui  ne se mele  pas  de  politique, qui  n'y comprend d'ailleurs goutte, pren­  dra,   malgre  lui,   une   part   active   aux evenements  de   1837,  lorsqu'il   verra   les siens depossedes  de  leur  terre  et  chasses
 de  leur  demeure. Hyacinthe Bellerose  ne se  revolte   pas   contre   un   regime;  il  se rebelle   contre  toute    forme   d'injustice, filt-elle  divine.
Plusieurs facteurs contribuent a la reus­
site de  ce roman grouillant de  vie. Louis
Caron  possede   a  fond   l'art de  canter:
aucune fausse note  dans ce style simple et
direct qui va droit  au  but. Partout, le ton est  juste,  qu'il  s'agisse  de  description ou de  dialogues. Mais  c'est  surtout dans  la peinture  des   personnages  que   l'auteur excelle.  Hyacinthe et  Marie sont  criants de  verite; ceux  qui  les entourent,  meme s'ils ne jouent  qu'un role efface, sont aussi profondement humains. D'ailleurs, il n'y a guere  de mechants dans  Le Canard  de bois.  Meme  le  seigneur Cantlie  et  son homme  d'affaires, le  notaire  Plessis,  ne sont   pas   depourvus  de  sensibilite.   Sans doute l'abbe Mailloux fait-il  beaucoup de mal,  mais  c'est  qu'il  est ignorant et  qu'il a peur.   Car   si  les  mechants sont  rares dans  le roman, en  revanche, les faibles  y sont  legion: c'est  la peur  qui  fait  que  de pauvres etres  se  soumettent, sans  se  re­ beller,   aux   pires   injustices et   souvent,
c'est aussi la peur  qui  pousse les maitres  a
commettre ces memes  injustices.
Louis Caron a voulu offrir a son lecteur
"un  bouquet d'humanite" et  il y a certes
reussi. La sympathie qu'il  ressent  pour  ses personnages est communicative: il se degage du  Canard  de bois une  profonde chaleur humaine.
Dans  Gisele et le serpent, en  revanche, il s'agit  plutot de chaleur demoniaque. Jacque Benoit  a  toujours eu  le gout  des
personnages bizarres et  des situations  in­ solites.  Des  Jos Carbone,  il  peignait  des etres  mysterieux, apparemment  sans  passe, vivant au  fond  des bois et  esclaves
d'instincts brutaux.  Mais  il  reussissait  a
rendre ces personnages etranges a la fois
convaincants et  emouvants. Dans  Gisele
et le serpent, il outrepasse les bornes. Sans doute ne  cherche-t-il pas a raconter une
histoire  vraisemblable; en fait, une atmos-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



phere  de  reve,  ou  plutot de  cauchemar
 tients qui ont !'imprudence dele consulter

re'gne  a'
 travers   tout   le  roman. Sur   la'
 subissent  d'atroces operations dont  ils se

couverture du  livre,  nous  lisons d'ailleurs que  Gisele  est  nee  d'un  reve  qu'a   fait
 reveillent  l'oreille   a la  place  du  nez   les
jambes  a  la  place  des  bras    ou  victimes

Benoit:
 d'autres   changements  de
 'cette   espece.


L'heroine en etait une  femme  et i1 lui  arrl­ vait  une  de  ces aventures comme il ne s'en voit  que  dans  les  rives.  Je  decidai  de  lui faire  quitter le  monde  d'ou  elle  etait  issue pour. Ifai.re  entrer dans  Ia  realite. Je  Ia
bapt.J.sa1   G1sele,  et   aussitot   elle  se  mit   a
vivre  .a  mes  cotes. . . . Dangereuse et  fasci­
ante
Slble, capable de  tout.  Un  vrai  serpent.

Et il est vrai  qu'au debut  du  roman   la mysterieuse Gisele  est captivante. On comprend que le docteur Rabouin soit tombe  amoureux d'elle.  Mais  elle a de si deplorables frequentations qu'on cesse bientot d'etre fascine. Car Gisele est eprise d'un   serpent  nomme    Tournoukriel­ Toutou  pour   les  intimes.  Freud   n'etant jamais  bien  loin  lorsqu'il est  question  de serpents,  Tou ou   remplace  avantageu­ sement  un man peu ardent. Apres tout, si un ours peut procurer l'extase  (d. Marian Engel),  pourquoi pas  un  serpent?  Mais
contrairement a  ses  confreres  reptiliens
Tournoukriel n'est  pas  un  simple  suppo
de  Satan; il  est  le  diable   en  personne. Grace  a lui, Gisele  acquiert le don d'ubi­
quite  et la faculte de se transformer en "rampante bete." Ainsi, elle voit tout, elle entend tout et se hate  d'envenimer-c'est le cas dele dire-tout ce qu'elle  a appris
afin  de  pourvoir  mieux   nuire  a son  en­
tourage. Engagee par  Radio Canada  elle
obtient toutes  les promotions revees  our elle et  pour  ses amants, car  Tournoukriel ne  suffit  pas  a  la  brulante Gisele.  Elle confie ses experiences a un cahier  noir mysterieusement tombe  entre  les mains de Rabouin. Apres  une serie d'aventures "diaboliques," le malheureux medecin  se voit  force  de  devenir l'assistant du  doc­ teur  Barbin, alias Tournoukriel,  le demon  n'en  etant pas a une transformation pres. Ce ne sont  pas non  plus les idees sinistres qui  lui  font  defaut;  les malheureux pa-
 Apres  les experiences les  plus  abracada­
brantes  le heros  parvient a s'extriquer de
l'emprise  des demons  et  le roman  se  ter­
mine  de fa on
tout,  d'un  ouvrage humoristique-et in­
attendue.
0ne peut  certes  reprocher a Jacques enmde  manquer d'imagination; peut­ etre,  Justement, en  a-t-il  un  peu  trop.  11 est  vrai  que  la  demonologie est  dans  le vent; mais meme  les fantaisies  demonia­ ques   devraient  avoir   des  limites.   Sans doute   e
entrepnses du  dlable  reussissent  bien  ici­
bas, c'est  qu'il  trouve  parmi  les hommes un  terrain propice.  Celui  de Radio  Can­ ada, selon !'auteur, convient tout speciale­ ment  aux  exploits   de  Tournoukriel, qui semble  aussi  se sentir  a l'aise  parmi les medecins. Mais I'auteur n'aurait certaine­ ment   pas  invente une  histoire   aussi  ab­  surde   ans
ques fleches. 11 est probable qu'il  cherche tout simplement .a s'amuser et .a amuser  le
lecteur.  Et  le  roman   contient, a  l'occas­
sion, des passages desopilants. Mais  en ge,ne,raI,  on   n'a   nulle   envie   de  rire' de
toutes ces aventures morbides  racontees avec  un  detachement voisin  du  cynisme. Que Gisele, deguisee en serpent, vienne semer  la  panique  parmi   des  gens  com­ passes, voila  qui  peut  preter a  rire,  mais la   souffrance  physique,   la   maladie   le sui ide
sad1ques.  Benoit  cherche  a etre  drole  a
tout  prix,  et  c'est  13.  un  excellent   moyen
de cesser de l'etre. La vulgarite et le mau­
vais gout  ne sont  jamais  excusables  et  il y a da s,
vulgante et  beaucoup de  mauvais gout.
Peut-etre est-il des reves qu'il  voudrait mieux  garder pour  soi.

P.COLLET

135

BOOKS IN REVIEW



WRITING ABOUT WRITING
DAVID  STAINES, ed., The  Callaghan Symposium.
Univ.  of Ottawa Press, $6.oo.
KEN   MITCHELL,   Sinclair   Ross:   A   Reader's
Guide. Coteau  Books, $7.oo.
DOUGLAS DAYMOND and LESLIE  MONKMAN   eds.
Canadian Novelists  and the  Novel. Bo;ealis:
$23.95; pa.  $r5.95.
The  Callaghan Symposium  is part  of the "Re-Appraisals: Canadian Writers" series held  at   the  University of  Ottawa  each year,  and  is the  outcome  of  the  univer­ sity's seventh  annual symposium on April
24-25, 1980. The yearly fest  has  already give.n   us   valuable  volumes   on   Grove, Klem,  Lampman, Pratt, Crawford, and
D. C. Scott; the Morley Callaghan collec­
tion  might  even  be better.
Unfortunately, it  starts  off  badly.  Al­ though   editor David   Staines's  introduc­ tion  is competent, despite  its  overestima­ tion  of Callaghan's  influence on  younger  wr ters,   the   first   essay  by  Leon   Edel, "Literature and Journalism: The  Visible Boundaries," is a chatty ramble. Edel does make   some  pointed  remarks   about  the anti-intellectualism of the press, but  does not   give   the   young   Callaghan  enough credit   for  consciously   choosing   (as  op­ posed  to  being  brainwashed  by  Heming­ way  or  indoctrinated  by  the   Star)   his fine, skeletal  style.
David  Aaron's "Morley Callaghan and
the Great Depression," Patricia Morley's "Magician  and   Illusionist,"  and   Barry Cameron's "Rhetorical Tradition and  the Ambiguity of Callaghan's Narrative Rhet­ oric,"  are  by contrast well-researched and for   the   most   part  solid  papers.   Aaron notes  Callaghan's  concern   for   the  indi­  vidual-not   "social   types" -and pro­ vides  an  interesting discussion  of Such  Is My   Beloved,   Miss   Lonelyhearts,   and Heaven's My  Destination in arguing Cal­ laghan's aversion  to easy Marxist answers. Morley  looks at Callaghan's novels of the
 seventies-an   area   where   more   work needs   to  be  done -and  offers  some shrewd  insights  into  the much  underrated A Fine and Private Place. In a very schol­ arly  fashion, Cameron  argues  that Cal­ laghan's  fictions   are   in   fact   parables, though  perhaps doing  an  injustice to the complexity of Callaghan's characters; for Cameron  they  are  simply  "principles of behavior."
The real  gems in  the collection belong to Ray  Ellenwood, Barbara Godard  and especially Larry McDonald. Ellenw'ood's unlikely  "Morley Callaghan, Jacques Ferron, and   the  Dialectic of  Good   and Evil"  is one  of  those  papers  which  is ac­ tually  interesting to read  from  beginning to end.  Taking note  of  their  obvious  dif­ ferences,  Ellenwood proceeds to point  out really  striking  similarities  between   Cal­ laghan and Ferron in both Catholic vision and   symbolism,   concluding  that   Dante might be a more productive approach to Callaghan than  Hemingway. Godard's "Across  Frontiers: Callaghan in French" (added after  the  symposium)  is a  pains­ ta ing  expose   of   Callaghan's   frequent misrepresentation-in    style,   emphasis, even tense -by translators seeking to add to or interpret the text. McDonald's "The Civilized  Ego and  its Discontents: A New Approach  to  Callaghan," destroys  many  of the hackneyed myths about Callaghan's work and  solidly locates  him  as a modern writer  who  is alive  to  the  discoveries  of Freud  and  Darwin, sensitive  to social  in­ justice,  and  perhaps more  influenced  by Mencken than  by Jacques Maritain.
The panel discussion with Glenn Clever,  Brandon Conron (whose observa­ tions  are  always  insightful),  Donald  Ste­  phens,  and  David  Helwig is enlivened by a   number  of  Helwig's  candid  remarks  about how  bad  he  thinks  Callaghan is as a  writer. The  Callaghan  Symposium  is concluded  with  David   Staines's  helpful bibliography of Callaghan's publications, although Staines might have  been  more

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



emphatic in  recommending David  Lath­ am's  excellent  "A  Callaghan  Log," pub­  lished   in   the   Spring I g8o   ]ournal   of Canadian Studies.
Ken  Mitchell's Sinclair  Ross:  A  Read­ er's Guide  is a difficult  book to make  out. Certainly the  lucidity of  its  prose  is re­ freshing, which   results  in  the  plot  sum­ maries   being  very  good  reads.  The  lack of a more  disciplined approach, however,  is also  the  book's  most glaring weakness. It is not  enough  that  Mitchell is quickly given   to  hyperbole  ("giant,"  "astonish­ ing,"  "No one  has  yet  come  so close  to divining the  truth at  the centre of prairie life"), but  his  plot  summaries are  rarely more  than  that: rehashing in abbreviated form   what   Ross  has  done   better in  the original. Particularly disturbing is Mitch­ ell's  announcement on  the  second   page of  the  introduction that   we  should  look up  Lorraine McMullen's  text  on  Ross if we want  an "excellent" scholarly  analysis. Mitchell  explains,  "This  book  is  for  a more  general  audience, one  which  may be only vaguely aware  that  the Canadian plains  have   produced in  James   Sinclair  Ross a literary artist  of international stat­ ure."   But    two   questions   immediately arise :   ( I )  who  in  a  "general audience" would   possibly  buy  a  book  on  Sinclair Ross?-it's  not   exactly   vacation  read­ ing; and  ( 2)  is Ross's work so voluminous and/or  complex that   a  Reader's  Guide is necessary?
If we  leave  these  questions aside  and look  at  the  book  on  Mitchell's terms,  we find he is not always faithful to his own purpose. With  As For Me  and  My  House Mitchell leaves his safe insights  behind  to indulge in  a  little  scholarly   speculation. He  argues   that   Mrs.  Bentley  is  a  good deal  bitchier than  even  the  conventional view  would  have  her,  and  that   Philip  is not  so much  the ineffectual dotard he so clearly  seems to  be, but  a  tragically  hen­ pecked,  frustrated artist  who deserves  the bulk  of  our  sympathy.  Mitchell is quite
 right  to draw  our  attention to  the  occa­ sional  unreliability of  the  narration, but it shouldn't take  a  feminist  to point  out the  obvious:   Mrs.  Bentley  has sacrificed her  own art  in  order   to  worry  over  and pamper   a  husband  incessantly   given   to sulking; she has  been  made to feel guilty because Philip  is too immature to accept responsibility for his own decisions and actions; and,  lastly, she loves the man enough  to adopt his own  out-of-wedlock son  with  the  incredibly naive  hope  that this plus a  change in scene  will improve their  marriage. If anything, she might  be better  advised  to get  out  of the  relation­ ship  while  she  can.  Fortunately, Sinclair Ross:  A  Reader's  Guide   concludes  with two  of  Ross's   own   stories,   "No   Other Way" and "Spike."
Douglas  Daymond and   Leslie  Monk­ man  have  put  together a  very  intriguing collection  in Canadian  Novelists and  the Novel. Bringing  to the task a wide reading in Canadian Literature, already  reflected in their two-volume anthology, Literature in Canada  (I 978), Daymond and  Monk­ man  have assembled  "a selection  of views by  major   English-Canadian  novelists  of the  last one  hundred and  fifty years con­ cerning  the  theory  and  practice of   their art." The  result  is very good. The book is divided    into    five   sections:    The   Pre­ Confederation Novel,  The  Novel  in  the New  Dominion,  The   Rise   of  Realism,  Regionalism and  Nationalism,  and  The  Contemporary   Novel.   The  last  section might   have  been  more   interestingly  di­ vided  into   the  contemporary and   post­ modernist  novel,  but  there  is a  bonus  of sorts  in  that each  section  is spiced  with an  essay  by the  leading critic   (according to the editors)  of the  period.
The  result  is a  collection   full  of  sur­ prises-how early  the  call  for  a  native  literature began,  how  good  William Ar­ thur  Deacon  and  Desmond  Pacey  really could   be -as   well   as  things   we  have come   to  expect  from   our   best  writers:

137

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



insight,  ironic  humour, and  complaints about lack  of  recognition and   royalties. Of   course,   everyone   will  quibble   over who's in and  who's  been left out-by my own count at least eight could be dropped and  a  Melville  or  Twain wouldn't have hurt   the   nineteenth  century-but   the book as a whole is large in its breadth, entertaining in  its  reading,   and   helpful for anyone  interested in an  insider's  view of the  development of Canadian  Litera­ ture.  It is  regrettable  that   the  text  has not  been  better produced -the  cover  is unimaginative, one  page  is  missing,  and  the  paper could  be  upgraded-because the content is well worthy of it.

DAVID O'ROURKE


SANEST INSANITY

HEATHER GADSBY,  Traditions. Fiddlehead, n.p.
A.     F.   MORITZ,  Black   Orchid.   Dreadnaught,
$5·95·
CHRISTOPHER   WISEMAN,   The    Upper   Hand.
Enithannon/NeWest, $10.95; pa. $5-95·
ERIN   MOURE,    The    Whisky    Vigil.  Harbour,
$3-95·
TOM  WAYMAN,   The   Nobel  Prize  Acceptance
Speech. Thistledown, $14.oo;  pa. $6.95.
HEATHER   GADSBY'S FIRST  BOOK,   Tradi­ tions, is one of technique applied to truth. She is a poet who holds with no school or fashion.   Her   perceptions are  individual, often    unexpected,   both   uncomfortable and    heartening. In   particular  poems, Gadsby  has  an  acute  ear  for  the  conver­  sational phrase  that  rings  through like a refrain. There is, as  well, a narrative in­ terest  in  Traditions. You  read  the  book somewhat   like   biography,  because   you sniff immediately that  real  life exists  be­ tween   the  covers,   transformed  yes,  but still recognizable. Blood  beats and  nerves flutter. As reader, you are invited to inter­ act and  identify.
Gadsby   lets   personal    pain    through;
though  she  can  be  full  of self-irony,  she
 doesn't  let  it  obliterate  intimate   disap­ pointment. "At  a  Party" has  the  woman  dressed    like   "boiling   understatement," playing    "a  question   machine"  because "It's my main  means," and  finally  head­ ing  "for   the  safety  of  bores."  This   poet traps the  stinging   inadequacies of  social intercourse and  pins them like Prufrock wriggling on a wall:  "I'm prepared to kill
someone I but  I might  make  a  friend."
Since   Gadsby's   needlepoint screen   is  of
the ordinary (if not plainly)   domestic  life and   since  her   technique  is  not  a  pyre­ technical one,  it  can fall flat.  The  risk is endemic. However, most  poems  pulsate  quietly, revealingly. "Stones" is a gift of a poem,  about a  daughter who saves  peb­ bles,  treasures "as  closed  as  she  is,"  ar­  ranging them  around her "like  a fortress  to keep out  fate." The sympathy between  mother and  child  is full of knowledge and  understanding -a   twinge   of   regret,  a sigh of acceptance.
Nevertheless,  Gadsby   is  not  simply  a poet of gentle gestures. Her poems often harden at  the  edge  with  anger  and  frus­ tration. The signature piece  might  well be  "Hungers":   "Dull  things  hidden  in
underbrush  I mysteries  that   nudge   and
fidget"; or  "The  Savage Tradition"  in
which   the  freezer's contents  become  "A
whole  week cold as ice."
On  quite  a different poetic  dimension, although with  the same  potential for con­ cern,  is A. F. Moritz's Black  Orchid. For Moritz, poetry  is pure:  "The  word  most nearly   approaches  its  own  reality." The nature of poetry  is not so much  informa­ tion  as sacramental," maintains the  poet.  If Gadsby's   poems   breathe   biography, Moritz's glow  prophetically. His  work  is both  personal  and  visionary.  The book's Introduction   and   Afterword  provide  a context both  necessary  and  deserved  for Moritz's "pure image" explorations. He is after   "the  perfect metaphor that    can temporarily substitute for heaven"; he succeeds   in  taking "the insufficient   rna-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



terials  of the  physical  world" to "literally remake  them  into  something numinous." According to  Moritz, the  poet  must  re­ trieve  the  phenomenal and   the  personal world  from  an  insidiously seductive tech­ nological  environment that  is moving rap­ idly from  the peripheries to the centre  of our    culture.   Because    poetry    proceeds  through   "experiencing  and   testing   ex­ perience," it can  accept no second-hand formulation."  Moritz's  poetry,    difficult and  beautiful as it is, justifies  this serious moral  and  philosophical questing through the  deadly  attractions of modern  life.
In his  uncompromising work,  there  is the  huge  tremor of Blake.  The best one can  do is to quote  a few  of his positions. From  "Fields in  the  Grass":

the  light comes  here
not  as a way  but  as  a  hand that gently presses  the  body  back in  the  grass,
slips  as  heat through the  skin....

Often, there  is the  uncanny shock of  rec­
ognition, as  in  "Modern  Love," a  phe­ nomenon "so refining  I its heat drifts  far from  the  fire."  Moritz can  be a  tortured
Romantic in  the manner of Dylan Thomas. Again  from  "Fields in  the  Air" and  its cloud  eulogies, we read: "And  the
young  gods  I would  return from  the boil­
ing  loam   as  crystal   flowers   I  the   first
warm  day, when  the fountains are  turned
on."  Yet  his sensuality can  be precise on an  icy grasp.  From  "Ulysses en  Route," we are  made to feel  the  sun  "falling  like a  drop   of  lead  into   the  brain." In  one mood    poem,    Moritz   immortalizes  the character of annual dejection: "February
was  my mentor in  misery,  I that  hollow
pamphlet  from   yellow  skies,  I basin  of
dead  sparrows."
Christopher   Wiseman's   The    Upper
Hand  is a  reticent book  which  emerges, one feels, from  a reticent sensibility.  Most
of the  poems  seem  born  of return -to a place of former life, in this case, England. No longer  green  and  scepter'd, the isle, a point  of generation, has  also  become  the
 focus of tense,  restrained resolution. In "Flamborough Head," the  mind,  though "starved and  landlocked," survives. Cem­ eteries  and   memories of  war  are  visited and  revisited  with  numbing emotion. It's  as  though, like  a  tied  cottage, the  poet cannot  detach his own life from  the great  presences  of earth and  stone  so pregnant with  personal and  global  history.  Those of us who are  British-hom will recognize the  dilemma.  We  find  ourselves  full  of feeling,  but  silenced  because  there  is too much  to say, and  we know it has all been said.
High  on  Devon  cliffs with  his mother,
the  poet  is strong, "first  born," whereas all  too  frequently,  the  quality  (though often  subtly exquisite, as in "Rivaulx Ab­ bey")   is :infected  by a quiet  melancholy, the  premature  disappointment surround­ ing  the stillborn. You  expect  more,  since fine   craft  and  genuine  perceptions abound, but   the  poems  are  too  predict­ able,  still  half   buried   and  yearning for release. In a sense, lack of  opportunity is Wiseman's theme. Where is the illumina­ tion,  the  transformation  that   should   be waiting  like  some  prize  at  the  end  of  a contest?   When  Wiseman  does  find  the  right  switch,  he  can  both  soar  and  dive. In  "The  Field,"  man   tells  boy  how  he witnessed  the  Lysander's crash  that  killed two men. When son asks where  the  hole is, the poem  answers:

I drive  on,
hunched tightly around
that scarred place  inside  me, cratered, still  smoking,
that I can   never show  him.

Wiseman's vague poetic personality springs  to  life on  the  sharp rocks of real subjects; poems  like  "The  Assassin," "Three Journeys From  Munich" have  an urgency. The poet's  character sketches,  in "The Major," for instance, are also vivid. Overall, nevertheless, this poet's  England is a  place  of  unrelieved, nostalgic  yearn­ ing.

139

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Erin   Moure's The  Whisky Vigil, while not  quite  written in  an  alcoholic  stupor, is  as  her   publisher  puts   it  "organized around that  theme." A character moves through geography; reads  a  letter  "over and  over  in  different parts  of  the  room,
as   if  I  that    could    make    you   speak
louder"·, becomes  altern. ately  Jekyll  and.
Hyde.  Although there   IS  an  astute  sensi-
tivity at work to make these poems, the experience from  which   they  derive  may be  too limited, too  pathetic for  anything but its own stubborn, untranslatable real­ ity.  There are   moments  of   unrelenting
anguish: "she  has  no  more  sentence_s, I
she puts  her  fingers,  blunt  hammers, mto the  twisted  lonely  I holes of  trees."  Yet
such lines as "The traffic spins thru  her"
or "Her whiskey rattles  in  her arms" can take  you  only  so far.  The  process  seems sad and  futile,  if not lugubrious-wrap­ ping a coffin in  Christmas paper.  One  or two  poems  become  valiant, even  vision­ ary.  "Whisky" puts   much   into  perspec­ tive: "Your head  a stone  dull  and  uncut
... The old  rope  of  I fatigue   tied  thru
you."  So  does  "Tricks," with  its  awful
emptiness: "I feel  I am in the world  and there  is no  god  in  it  with  me."  Over  a whole  book,  however, the  subject  proves too maudlin for  the art  to redeem.
Tom   Wayman's  Nobel   Prize   Accep­ tance  Speech  is a  selection  of  the  poet's best wry observations on the doings of one irresistible  Wayman, "the  lovable  every­ man ... who  is  caught  up in  the  com­ plexities  and  absurdities  of  an  ordinary world." His  poems  shower charm as gen­ erously and gently  as April, while reaping  the  full  advantage of  the  picaresque in bemusement and curiosity, coaxed slyly forward. With  coy graphics and  straight captions,  we follow Wayman through the vicissitudes of love and  work and  travel  to realize  that  a little  bit  of him  lurks  teas­ ingly  in  most  of  us, rendering a  literary  life the  sanest  insanity of them  all.

PATRICIA KEENEY SMITH


140
 JN MJNOR KEY

PAMELA   BANTING,    Running Into    the   Open.
Turnstone, n.p.
BRIAN   BARTLETT,    Cattail    Week.  Villeneuve, n.p.
ENDRE   FARKAS,   From   Heru   To   Here.   The
Muses'  Company, $4.00.
ORIN MANITT,  Adam  2000. Broken Images,  n.p.
MARY   MELFI, A Queen  is Holding  a Mummified
Cat. Guernica Editions,  n.p.
A.  F. MORITZ, Signs and Certainties. Villeneuve, n.p.
GEORGE  MORRISSETTE,   Finding   Mom  at  Eat­
on's.  Turnstone,  $4.00.
ROBYN  SARAH,  The   Space  Between  Sleep  and
Waking. Villeneuve, n.p.
KENNETH    SHERMAN,   The    Cost   of   Living.
Mosaic  Press/Valley Editions,  $5-95·
ANDREW wREGGITT,  Riding  to  Nicola Country.
Harbour, $3.95.

IN  HIS  INTRODUCTORY NOTE to Canadian Poets 1960-1973, a listing  of poetry  pub­ lished  over  a period  of slightly more than  a decade, George  Woodcock notes the ab­  sence  of "the high  craftsmanly standards of  earlier  small   presses"   and   then   ac­ knowledges the  "surprisingly  large   pr portion" of very good  verse. The present  gathering of ten volumes, _several by  oets who  have  published previous  collections, suggests a significant improvement in  the quality of  production and  design by small presses and offers a broad  rangof  poetry  which  is, for  the  most  part,  neither abys­ mally  bad  nor  startlingly good.
Kenneth Sherman's The Cost of Living is among the most interesting and promis­ ing of these collections. Althoughis con­ trol over  his material is uneven  m places, and  although several  poems seem  to lack sharp  focus   and   imaginative  intensity, Sherman's  best  work  reveals  an  effective  balance of sense and  sensibility  as well as a  disciplined   and  unpretentious use  of language.  Some of  the  most  co  pelling and  precise poems  in  this collection  off_er fresh  perspectives on  figures  and  motifs from   the   Old   Testament-"How   the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Snake  Got Shafted," "Cain," "Joseph"­ or focus attention on  the Holocaust as in "Gutenberg":
In the  beginning was  Gutenberg yet  the  words have  brought us here to this  godless  gate
where the  chimneys' tongues
lap  sense  from   the  sky.

These  lines  from  "Lot's Wife"  reveal something of the  vivid  and  direct  quality of Sherman's style:
Do  not  look  back
woman without a name.
Do  not  look  back
to  where the  souls  curl  quick
like  scorched leaves like  witch's  shoes
upon   the   jealous tongues of  flames.

Andrew  Wreggitt's Riding to Nicola Country concentrates on  the  social land­ scape  of British  Columbia's  southern In­
terior-"an  Indian woman    I with  an
unborn  child,"  mineworkers "Bandaged
like mummies in greasy work clothes," "Cowboys   easing   down   to  small   town
bars,"  "Jeanne, the  retarded girl  I alone
against the  wall  of  a  country bar,"  the
workers "Slashing trees for the power line I a knife-cut through bush," and  Whiskey Bill, "a  clever  drunk I immune to disease I the  fists  of  policemen." Despair, vio­
lence, and  physical or mental suffering are frequent  themes  here,  and  there  is  per­ haps   too   little  variation  in   tone.  The best poems  develop effortlessly  through a careful  accumulation  of   details  toward conclusions frequently   open-ended  and resonant.  Among   the  most   precise   and engaging of  these  poems  are  a  series of lyrics based  on  the violent  exploits  of the notorious    McLean    Brothers.   The    se­ quence ends  with  these  lines :
Hands  behind backs
fingers  tightening to  triggers
a  memory of soothing metal gathering thick  in  fists Hanging from a  web
of  January  sky gaunt  bellies   tight
knotted  with   dreams of  revenge.
 The poems and  prose pieces of Mary Melfi's  A  Queen Is  Holding a  Mummi­ fied Cat  are  imaginative and  surrealistic, employing   arresting images  and  striking  juxtapositions. Melfi displays an intensely private imagination and  frequently cre­ ates   a   off-from-reality   sensation.  Her  weakest poems  strain  toward  the unusual and   falter   amidst   broken   rhythms   and prosaic phrasing. Her  best poems develop  easily,  offer  satisfying  surprises,  and   re­ veal a deeply  felt sense of alienation and isolation. "On My Raft" suggests the illu­ sive, dreamlike and  unpredictable  quali­  ties of her  work:

On  my  raft
I used  the  arms  of a  mannikin
to push  myself  onwards.

But  then  my  distinction took  on  the  shape   of  a cat

It sits  in  the  bathtub and
occasionally bleeds  for  Miss  So  and  so.

The Space  Between  Sleep  and Waking by Robyn  Sarah is a slim volume  of  gen­ erally quiet and  reflective lyrics that range somewhat unevenly  from a gentle yet per­ suasive  evocation of  a  housewife's sense of   loneliness   and    lost   opportunity  m "Maintenance"-

And  it's  the
other one,  the  one  called maintenance,
I mostly  am  shouting about. I mean   the  day-to-day,
that bogs  the  mind, voice,  hands
with  things  you  couldn't call  poems.
I mean  the  thread that breaks. The dust  between
typewriter  keys

-to the  jarring, banal,  and  too personal lines of "Two Sisters":  "Her sister. Come
all  this  way  and   I will  go  again.  Soon. The expense, for  I so short  a visit." Shal­
low and  trite  lines mar  a number of these
poems,   but,   at   her   best,   Sarah  offers flashes  of  insight  with  concrete and  un­ contrived images  and  simple  detail  as in the  six  lyrics  of  "The  Cyclist  Recovers His Cadence":


If I

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Somewhere a  bicycle  wheel spins  on,  up-ended,
and   though you  know   the  trick
that's kept  it  going, its  oil-smooth tickticktick still  calibrates
the  space  between sleep  and  waking.

Many   poems  in  A.  F.  Moritz's  Signs and Certainties  reveal  an  unsettling  uni­ formity  of  tone,  but  this is largely  offset by the variety  of subject-matter,  Moritz's generally  clear  grasp  of rhythm, and  the apparent  effortlessness   with   which    he manages familiar  images  in  poems  such as "Views":

This huge  tree: 	sleeping
:against   its  truck, we  thought
the  stars  were  its  distant  berries,
the  sky its foliage, the  sun  and  moon a pair  of mating birds
who  wove  a monotonous chase of  courtship through its  limbs.

On   occasion   a   diffuseness   intrudes on these poems, and "Signs and Certainties" reveals the tendency  to dissolve into a disappointing flatness:

But  if poor  in  fruit
she  spreads herself  with  leaves
and  covers  the  ground with  shadows deeper than black  water, then   the  straw­
nothing but  chaff-will  be  pounded on  the  floor  with  no  result.

Despite  such  lapses,  there  are  interesting and  intricate poems in this collection, and Moritz    reveals   a   distinct   voice   which shows promise of further accomplishment.
Brian  Bartlett's Cattail W.eek and Pam­ ela   Banting's  Running   Into   the   Open share  a  sensitive  awareness  of  nature as well as a capacity for spare and controlled lines and a concern for visual clarity. Both collections,  however,    are   uneven,    and
many   poems  lack  a  consistent  imagina­ tive  intensity  and   rhythmic  tension.   In "Among the  Rows  at  Seven  P.M." Bart­  lett's  style  is lean  and  direct-

kneeling in  hal£-light I touch tangled roots  and  weeds, worms multiplied  by  a spade,

bones  of  forgotten  horses
 -and  "In Memory of George  Frederick Clarke" demonstrates restraint and  care in the development of tone and  image:

Birchbark canoes in  his  attic were  white dreams.
Spearheads, hatchets and  stone   bowls glimmered under  dusted glass.

Unfortunately, these  features are  not  al­ ways  sustained throughout  a  poem,  and too   often,    as   in    "Ribbons  of    Bark" ("Crimson   woodpeckers,  none   leaders,
none  led,  I knock  from  your  final  forest
nervously")  or  "Swamp to  Swamp" ("Now  in  clanging  banging darkness   I
sudden frog voices ring"), his poems lapse into  overstatement and  prosaic  flatness or suddenly jar with dull  images and  clumsy lines.
Pamela Banting's poetry  offers a pleas­ ing variety of subjects and  reveals consid­  erable  promise,  but  her writing is at  times quite   rudimentary and   needs  more  con­ sistent  and  careful tuning. The poems  in Running Into  the  Open  range  from  the moderately pleasing  to the  plainly  medi­  ocre.  These lines  from  "Old Man in  the Garden" suggest   the  flat  and   awkward syntax   that   is  one  of   her  major  weak­  nesses:

Every  three days 	he  pumps water from  the  river 		next morning he  and the  hoe
are  at it  again

A number of Banting's poems  emphasize her  engagement with  and  response  to the prairie environment, and  in her most suc­ cessful  works  such  as  "The  Awakening" and  a  sequence entitled  "The Erotics  of Space" natural imagery and  stripped syn­ tax  are  effectively  combined  to  express deeply felt emotion:

beautiful man-who-
strides -across-earth-sky­
and-mountain, dance
green on  the  earth with me.

A similar  tautness and  simplicity  appears in "Clouds," a poem  which  perhaps hints

BOOKS IN REVIEW



at  this poet's  only partly  successful strug­
gle  with  her  craft:

Clouds like  bits  of albumen thread the  sky
suspend sky  in  place
for  awhile
and   I
clumsy astronomer using  spread - eagled words  like  calipers
can get  a  fix on  it.

Endre Farkas' From  Here        to  Here is the most obviously  avant-garde and ex­ perimental of  these  collections.  This  se­ lection  ranges  from conventional lyrics to stanzas  of  prose and  works  reflecting  the influence   of  sound  and   concrete poetry. Energy  and wit are  prominent features  of Farkas's style although his effects at times seem forced  or too consciously  unconven­ tional  and  contrived. Some  poems lack adequate  discipline and  rely  too  heavily on repetition and  simplistic  contrasts, but the  strengths frequently outweigh the weaknesses,  and   this  poetry   taken   as  a whole  reveals  a refreshing range  of skills and  a  kind  of  vitality  apparent in  these lines  from  "That  Midnight Jazz":

0 listen!
hear the  kicking into that midnight  jazzing the  drive/
the  drive/
the  drive
the  life  in  rooming house  riddles glisten

like  thighs
bebopping improvising
Orin Manitt's Adam  2000 and  George Morrissette's Finding Mom  at Eaton's are the   least   satisfying   of  these   collections despite  the obvious  sincerity  of their emo­ tional  content. Manitt's twenty lyrics are accompanied by a tedious  and pretentious in traduction  (not,  incidentally  by  Man­ itt), which lavishes praise on the poet and reminds  the  reader  that   "the apparent simplicity of Manitt's poetry  obscures  the
 subtle  craftsmanship and  superior subtle intelligence  displayed  at  every  stage."  In fact, there is nothing superior about  these poems although they do reveal  a concern for  tone and  an  awareness of the impor­ tance of precision  and  economy in the use of language. Regardless of these and other  positive features including a mature sense of important themes,  there is little  that  is striking   or   memorable in   these  poems. Much   the  same  can  be  said  of  Finding Mom   at  Eaton's,  a  series  of  poems  re­ counting a  man's  search   for  his  natural parents  and,  by implication, his past and a  portion  of  his  identity. These   are  ex­ tremely personal statements, and one feels a certain intensity and  immediacy despite the  flatness   of  the   style;   however,   the distancing and   transformation  necessary to elevate  art beyond  life and  the merely personal  have  not  occurred.  Morrissette employs  a  range  of  forms  and  rhythms, and  the  narrative structure is clear,  but these  poems  do  not  reveal   an  adequate control  of emotion or  language and  sel­ dom create  a sense of depth  or resonance. Many  distinct voices  can  be  heard  in these volumes, yet none  suggests the pres­ ence of a major new  talent. Most of these poets  are  capable of   satisfying   lines  or stanzas,  and,   less  frequently, individual poems  that  are without significant  flaws; however, although several  show consider­  able  promise  and  a  potential for  further development of  their  craft, few  provide evidence  of  a capacity for  maJOr poetic achievement.  This    present   assortment nevertheless emphasizes both  the continu­ ing  energy  of  the  little  presses  as well as the variety,  range, and  potential of many
of  the  poets  they  are  committed to  pub­
lishing.
DOUGLAS DAYMOND


'm 	0

BOOKS IN REVIEW



PARNASSUS CLEARANCE

KEN   NORRIS,   To   Sleep, To   Love.  Guernica
Editions, n.p.
PETER  STEVENS,  Coming   Back. Sesame,   n.p.
GLEN  DEER,  Excuses   for Archery.  Longspoon,
$7.00.
EUGENE   MACNAMARA,  Forcing  the  Field.  Ses­
ame,  n.p.
DON     KERR,   A   New   Improved    Sky.   Coteau
Books,  $5.00.
DON     DOMANSKI,   War   in   an  Empty    House.
Anansi, $6.g5.
J. D.   CARPENTER,  Swimming at  Twelve Mile.
Penumbra, n.p.

ALL SIGNS INDICATE that this country now has  the  heaviest   concentration of  poets the world  has yet seen. The  greatest bless­ ing  to  some   of  them   has been  finding  agencies  like  the  Canada  Council  which get them  on  their  feet, so to speak-out and  about and  into  print.  Gone  are  the days,  apparently,   when   poets  could   be born  to  blush   unseen.  Meanwhile   back at  the  little  magazines,  slim  volu es  review  have   been  really  piling  up.  And the worst  thing  that  can befall them,  pos­ sibly-short of  being  totally  ignored­ is to wind  up in a kind of spring clearance on   Parnassus at   the   tender   or   not-so­ tender   mercies   of   some   unknown   re­ viewer.   This  has  been   the  fate   of  the seven gathered  here.
Considered   as   narrative,  the   pieces
which  form  To Sleep, To   Love  may  be said  to  tell  the  story  of someone  in  love who  suspects  at  times  that  he ought  not to love,  that   the  facts  of his life  are  not congenial to  it,  that  his interest  in  verse gets  in  the  way,  that   his  verse  will  be about   love,  unsuccessful   love, about the violent  thoughts it  stimulates  about   the void it leaves  when  the objec;of it is not there   and   so  on,  around and  around a labyrinth of  agonizing convolutions and out  suddenly with  such  a  chirrupy  con­ clusion   ("The  Birds") that   we  confirm
 what   has  been  suspected   all  along: it  is he,  not  the  gods,  who  has  more  than   a slight  addiction to soap  opera. Also, the volume   arrives  trailing clouds   of  sweet puffery   from   several   quarters-Quarry and  The Gazette, for instance. Such  con­ fections    notwithstanding,  it   would    be slack  not  to  explain  that   its  many  bro­ mides-"Life is but  the  way  we look at it"  ("Mountain Outlook")  -are often ad  inistered	an   imagery-"your vmce  shaped and  shaded  by the  density of  telephone   wires"  ("You   Sound   Sad Tonight"),   the  leaves  swaying   "in   the breeze  like   soft    pendulums"   ("The Birds")  -which ought  to serve as a very strong  reminder  that   a  yearly  check-up with  an oculist  is not  a bad  idea.
Along  with  volumes  of completely bad verse  there  is also  another  category -a cottage industry practically-with  train­ ing  functions. Through  it  a   tenderfoot poet is given encouragement and  a means  to practise for future developments. Some­  times  one  wonders  whether it  is right  to fell the forests for this sort of thing.  Com­ ing Back,  for example, tackles  one or two promising ideas, as in "This Hotel  Room" and  "Metamorphosis at  the Construction Site."  But   the   remaining  pieces-ex­ tremely  tedious  stuff-almost two dozen of them,  draw  repeatedly on the same old
bag of effects: moaning, shuddering, pat­ tering,    fluttering, scuttling, and   things that  go   clink   in   the   night,   scenes   so fraught with   TV  horrors, a  worry-wart narrator  so spooked   that  even  a  "hang­ nail's   a  cataclysm."  Imagery likewise  is overripe, the word choice and  observation on which  it depends, careless and  likely to detach the  retina of  the  mind's eye. But why  go  on?   Simply   try   bringing  these
into focus:  "the  buoys I bobbling on their
anchors" ("Driving Through It") ,  "an­
kle deep in shards  of accusation" ("This pretty pace"), "its  surface I scruffed  by paws prancing" ("Territory"), "smears I
of   shit   like   lonely   mushrooms" ("No

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Phoenix") ,  "he   [a heron] has  waddled awkwardly /  through the  tall  weeds" ("Heron  Found and  Lost").
Excuses   for  Archery  is  another  book which  draws  substance and  manner from popular TV violence-country  and  city style-although it is at a more advanced embryonic stage  than  Coming Back. Con­ sider   the  words   archery   and   poetry  as interchangeable for  a  moment  and   the book  demonstrates  that  certain  matters are as neatly  impaled, occasionally, as one might expect  ("Things Given," "Excuses  for  Archery  with  Grady," and  "The sun plays  Painter"). In other places,  a skew­ ering takes place, forced  and  messy ("Hot your   blood   witch-kid,  it's  snowing," or "A   Few  pages   from   Black   Mask"). A comic  knack  ("In the Plant") and, over­ all,  an  aptitude for  colloquial  lingo-of the  tough-guy strain-raise expectations but  in  the  end  illuminate  little  of signifi­ cance.
Quotations, epigraphs, and other scene­ setting paraphernalia  serve  decoratively maybe,  and  as security aids no doubt, but as intensifiers in  poetry  they  ought  to be used-if  at  all-sparingly.  Forcing  the Field  is  cluttered with  them,  and  this is a shame. Some of the pieces stand  up well without them.  Others, because  of all  the cryptic signposts   (visual   aids -well  ex­ ecuted- nuggets 	from    Emerson    and Kafka and  so forth) make  for a disheart­ ening game, like a paper chase on a windy day.
A New  Improved Sky is inspired  by two things -a hearty  nostalgia for  the  past, in Saskatoon mainly, and  uneasiness about now  and  what  is to  come.  In  both  cases the  quality of  inspiration is slender, strained and  trite,  the  writer  having  been blinded   by  items  like  the  demolition of local  landmarks, the  minutes of  commit­ tee meetings  and  the compulsion  to recast them  in wearisome  detail. Several  pieces, in  fact,  would  benefit  greatly from  con­ densation. But  this  is  not  to  imply   that
 the  book is a failure as a cultural record, or  a  failure  of  love  and  sincerity   (these are  all  too  perfectly obvious) , but -an age-old problem-a failure  to resolve the difficulty of remaining true  to parochial interests  and  immediate to  the  world  at large.   Redeeming  lines   pop   up   occa­ sionally   ("the  building has  a  flat  latex stare"-"Edward  Hopper's  'Early  Sun­  day  Morning'");  surface  accuracy  and gusto  lend  fondness  and  vitality  to some pieces  ("Fishing lake  ball  tournament," "Whatever is ...")  -but the content of this  book,  overall,  is  undernourishing.
Together with  all  the welcome  growth of   interest    in   poetry    nowadays,    there thrives  also-particularly  among  hard­ shell  artsy  types -that  deadliest  of  all cancers,  the  religion  of  acceptance :  the dogma  that  anything  which  fails  to add up   must   be  poetry.   Thus    War   in  an Empty House  descends among  us already
-in its  blurbs-a critical   success.    It would  be nice to share  the enthusiasm for it, to join th0se  who we learn  effervesced over the writer's previous  books. It would, indeed,   make   life  easier.   But  one  finds small  consonance  between   all  their   fizz and  pop and  the actual contents  of this particular commodity. Many  of its pieces seem, in fact,  merely  depictions of either some   kind   of   subconscious  activity   or some surreal  territory where a variety of verbal  wallpaper is unwound, resembling here    and    there     Poe-sans..:horror,  Dr. Suess-sans-joy,   and   Salvador   Dali-sans­ humour. Readers who simply find  life all too  short,   and   those   who  prefer   their poetry   to  articulate  and  make   compre­ hensible  what emerges  from  the  subcon­ scious, might  like to skip this one.
What ranks  Swimming at Twelve Mile above  the  other books  examined  here  is its notably  even  quality and  the  poet's - J.D. Carpenter's-eye for striking  com­ positions.   There  is  also   resourcefulness with  techniques and  words-but no ex­ cess. Big themes like death and  life's iron-

145

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ies are  examined alongside  the  small  de­ lights that  abound everywhere. A new life of   surfaces   gives  vitality   to   the   book. Readers looking for a bargain should grab this one.
PETER MITCHAM


EXTREMES

ROBERT  WEAVER,   ed.,   Small  Wonders. CBC,
$g.gs.
MARTIN  AVERY,  Cottage Gothic. Oberon,
$15.95; pa.  $7.95.
SMALL  WONDERS is a collection  of twelve short stories commissioned by the CBC for broadcast   and    subsequent  publication. Perhaps this fact  accounts for  their tech­ nical  straightforwardness. These  are  not experimental  or   innovative   exercises­ although their authors are established  and frequently innovative  writers,  who  must have been most conscious of the intended original   medium   and   audience  for   the stories. While  relying  on strong  narrative  lines  and  dramatic incident for  the  most part, the stories also achieve  the economic realization of character and  mood  which is the  essence  of fine  short  story  writing.
Robert  Weaver's  decision   to  arrange the stories in alphabetical order by the author's names may exacerbate the patch­ work  quilt  effect  of the  volume. For  ex­ ample,  readers  are  called  upon  to  make a  rather abrupt change  of  gears  if  they move directly  into  "The Year of the Rev­  olution" by Alden  Nowlan  after  reading  Joyce Marshall's "The Case of Cassandra Dop."  Both  stories   have  academic  set­ tings,  but  there  similarity ends.  The  for­ mer is an ironical look at the fate of those revolutionaries who occupied  administra­ tive offices in the cause of social  justice in the late 196o's. Nowlan's satire  is, in fact, rather  heavy-handed  despite  some  neat thrusts.   Professor  Rosscoe  is  the   right­  wing   antagonist   of   Professor   Sandoval  (who  had  the  misfortune to marry  "just
 before  legal  marriage became  unfashion­
able") :

Professor  Sandoval ... predicted  that   one day  soon  Professor  Rosscoe  would   be  hung from   a  lamppost.
Professor Rosscoe's disgust at Professor Sandoval's  having  said    "hung"  when    he ought to  have  said  "hanged" was  militated by his pleasure in  the  prediction. "He says they're  going  to   hang  me,"  he   reported happily to  his  wife.
"Dear  me," she  said,   and   went   on   pre­
paring their dinner.
"Is that all you  have  to say?" Professor Rosscoe  said. "The man  says  he  is going  to hang  me."
"Oh, I'm sure  the  President would   never allow  that," she  said. "After all,  Professor Sandoval doesn't even  have  tenure."

The  contrast between  this and  "The Case of Cassandra Dop" is extreme: Marshall's story  centres  on  the   reaction  of  a  col­ league   to  the  gradual  unfolding of   the sordid  details  of Cassandra Dop's murder by her sadistic  boy friend. As a policeman questions her, he reveals a self-loathing in Cassandra  her   colleague   dismissed   too easily. The  colleague's  reactions progress from  impatience  through shock  explana­ tions  for sudden  death (a  hit-run driver,  an intruder)  through horror to exhausted outrage at  being  called  upon  to deal  with identification of the body and  with  the knowledge  that   she  failed   to  recognize any  signs  of  Cassandra's dangerous  dis­ tress.
The last  story  in  the  collection,  Helen Weinzweig's  "Causation,"   concerns   an­ other twisted  relationship, but despite the title,  her  characters'  motives  do  not  ring as true.  Both  the virile young piano  tuner  seeking  the easy life and  the aging  former opera  singer who takes him into her home are  stock  characters,  playing out  an  ugly game,  but one which is not really interest­ ing   to  anyone but   themselves.   On   the other  hand,  both  Jane Rule   and   Kent  Thompson are  successful  in  developing empathy  with  the  central characters of their   stories   which   reveal   the   low-key

BOOKS IN REVIEW



pleasures  that   relieve  life's  numbing  op­ pression.  Margaret  Atwood's "The  Sin­ Eater" is the  richest  of these stories in its originality and  in its challenge. One won­ ders  whether listeners  were  able  to  com­ prehend fully  the  narrator's  shifts  back­ wards   and   forwards in   time  and   from reality  to dream, but  for  a  reader  it is a story  to be savoured, read  slowly and  re­ read. W. P. Kinsella's "The Night  Manny Mota Tied  the  Record" is in  the  vein  of Death  Takes a  Holiday or  Heaven Can Wait, but  set in a baseball  stadium where a fan  is offered the chance to take a base­ ball hero's place  in death. Or  is he?  It  is simply good fun  to read.
As a volume,  Small  Wonders is not a coherent  collection:  it  is  too  varied   in theme,  tone,  mood  to achieve any sort of unity.  While  it may be rather indigestible if  indulged in at  one  sitting,  it  is,  never­ theless,  enjoyable  light   reading  for  odd moments.
In contrast, Martin Avery's  Cottage Gothic is an intricately interwoven collec­ tion of seven short  stories. In the last three stories, he comments on his perceptions of himself  as  a  writer   and  on  the  state  of Canadian  literature.  As  he  does  so,  he answers   some   of  the   questions  readers  may  have  asked  about  the  earlier stories but  raises  many  more.  The  result  is that  the reader returns to the beginning of the volume  looking  for more  clues. An exam­  ple:   In the second  story,  "Hockey Night in Canada, Jr.," the narrator describes an encounter  with  former hockey  teammate whom  he  calls Hockey  Night  in Canada, Jr. The   hockey   hero's  fate,   mysterious death at  2 I,  after   achieving fame   as  a player  and  corruption  by  that   fame,   is revealed in the last section  of a rather enigmatic story. In "NBSS: The  Ugly Brothers," the  fourth story,  the  narrator identifies  himself as Hockey  Night  in Can­ ada,  Jr. At  this  point  the  reader  mutters something like,  "Why  not?  They're his stories.  The  narrator can   be  anyone   he
 says." But in the sixth story, "Winter Car­ nival,"  the narrator contemplates his own story published  in a  journal:

It  was  a  first-person  story   about  Hockey
Night in  Canada, Jr.
There  is  something comforting about  a story  written in  the  first  person: you  know
the  main  character, or  the  narrator, is  not going   to  die.   There  is  a lot   of  death  in short   stories.   But   the   teller  of   the   story never   dies.   He   can't.  Who would   tell   the story?
But  the  question remains: am  I or  am  I
not,  Hockey  Night in  Canada, Jr?
The  story   in   the   magazine  by   Martin
Avery  is  called  "Gravenbridge."   There  is
no  such  place. I  cannot  remember writing the  story.  And  yet,  here  it  is with  my  name on  it. The  story  is written in  the  first  person. At  the  end   of  the  story,   the   narrator  dies.
It gets  very  complicated, doesn't it?   It's too complicated for  me.  Fiction is a difficult form.

In the  title  story,  the  narrator sets up a number  of "possibilities for violence and cliche'' but  abruptly ends  the  story  with the disclaimer,

No, cottage gothic is  just  a  regional style of  architecture.

This  is not  a story  by Atwood, Valgardson or  Joyce  Carol Oates. There is no  room  for gothic  romance  and   mystery   in   the  back­ woods  of  cottage country.

But  the  penultimate section   of  the  last story  is a  series  of  nightmare  vignettes from  the tourist  village  the narrator is creating near his old home  town. Abruptly a new section  begins:

Perhaps  all   this   gore   surprises  you.  Or perhaps you recognize these  scenes from Canadian literature. This  kind   of  violence is  new  to  me.   No-one   ever   dies  in  any   of my  stories.
All my stories  are  the  same : set  in cottage
country, they  describe an individual who is feeling   disturbed  to   some   degree.  He   de­
.cides to do  something about it:  take  a trip,
have  a  holiday, go  for  a  walk,  get  back  in touch  with  the  real   world  somehow. In  the end,  his  contact with   the  world   makes   him crazier  than ever.

147

BOOKS IN REVIEW



As   these   extracts  suggest,   these   are both   self-conscious  stories  and   the  work of  a  clever  and  witty  young  writer  who moves from past to present to fantasy in apparently free  association. As he  passes from  reminiscence of youth in cottage country  to  introspection  about   his  own sense  of personal disintegration, he man­ ages to satirize  many  institutions of small­ town   life.   Without   being   obvious,   he broadens the satire  to encompass  perspec­  tives of Canada as a  whole and  its place in  the  world.
PEGGY NIGHTINGALE


SINGING AGAINST DECLINE

Collected Poems  of Raymond Souster, Volume Two  1955-62 and   Volume  Three  1962-74. Oberon, $25.95; pa.  $12.95 each.
Collected Poems  of Raymond Souster, Volume
Four  1974-77. Oberon, n.p.

RAYMOND SOUSTER IS undoubtedly a ma­ jor  Canadian  poet-he  is  included   in any  notable  anthology, he  has  won  the Governor-General's   Award,   his   decep­  tively simple style and  passionate concerns for  social  justice  and  "being  alive"  have influenced other  writers  and  won  him  a not insignificant readership. Thus  Oberon Press   has   produced   four   volumes    of Souster's  Collected  Poems.  The  assump­ tion  is  that   a  poet   of  Souster's stature and   longevity   deserves  no  less.  Perhaps the  industry of Canadian Literature de­ serves no less either: Oberon writes, "We believe  this series will prove as important to Canadian poetry  as the New York edi­ tion  of the  works of Henry  James was to the  American  novel." However,  on  the basis  of  Volumes  Two    ( 1955-62)    and Three (I g62-74), it can be argued that  a carefully  edited   Selected   Poems   would have  done  Souster  and  his  native  poetry more justice. The  Oberon production sug­ gests  that  Souster  should  finally be read
 in bulk,  lugged  about in several  bound suitcases,  his  every  piece  of  creative  ap­ parel  tried  on  for  size, the  rags with  the riches,  the  sackcloth  with  the  finery.  As Souster  says, "[each volume] contains all the   verse ... that   Iwish   to  remain in print."
But, for all this quantity, Souster  offers indeed  a mixed  bag of goods. He  is obvi­ ously, in  the  best sense, an eclectic writer,  responding in verse  to human  experience of all  kinds,  and  especially  that  of daily consequence. He is awake  to what  he calls the  "beautiful  and   terrifying world" in which   man's  plundering  of  this  planet and  his fellow  inhabitants stands  in dark  contrast to  extraordinary  moments  dis­ covered  and  lived: moments in  lanes  be­ hind  houses  "where spring  air  [is]  some­ how   warmer,  more    gentle,   more    life­ giving  in its touch," or on country drives where  a  chance turning reveals

around a farmhouse door
. .. a girl  who  waved   to us and   tossed  her  chestnut hair larger, more beautiful
than the  whole  afternoon.

There are  also  vital  scenes remembered:
the now-dead stripper Rose Ia Rose "writhing, gyrating ... I caught up in the rhythm's spell!"; and   boyhood   baseball
games  so powerful still in  the  mind's  eye that  Souster cannot mourn, even  if  "all
the   smoke   [is]   gone   forever  ... I from
my fast one." The lost territories of youth,
especially   the  river   ravines   of  Toronto, before urban sprawl and pollution changed  them  forever, provided a  space in  which   the  natural and  human  worlds could  complement one another; occasion­ ally, such  a space  is found  today:

In these  times  keep  your  mind   as calm as  this  pool,  go  out  boldly  into life,
let  it  burst all  around you; let  it  blossom right through your  heart like  this  spring that
today
promises never   to  end :
and  be earth's
forerunner.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Souster  is indeed   a  poet  who  sings in the  face  of  his  own  and   all  the  world's decline. Those vanished friends  of  years ago  are  much  on  his  mind, as are  those who,   now   older   like  himself,   lie  dying with   "unconquered spirit,"  though   the poet  always  knows  this  is "somehow  ter­ ribly,   certainly,  finally   you."   Not   only memories, but  the genius  and  pace of  jazz sustain,  with   the  constant  awareness  of life's flow into  art  and  art's flow into life. Souster    frequents  the   clubs  where   he shouts  "Blow  it,  man"  to those  with  the "hard lines of time" etched in their faces,
but  who  "force out   I all  hate,  sickness,
fear  I from  [the]  dazzling end" of  their instruments "pointed  high   at   heaven   I
lowered  straight at  hell." Or  he  ponders the connection between  words and the objects  they  represent, the  latter  contin­ ually attracting, shaping articulations:

and  a  poet  reads on  about pomegranates, the  whole   bam of  a  building  glows
from   those  fruited  halves, those  quarters, blood-red, bleeding on  a  table....

When   Souster  puts   his  full  attention into his short  lyrics, completing the repre­ sentation of reality  with  words, conveying  to his readers that  the  poet's vision  takes its   sustenance  from    the   "fresh  green world," his directness and  conviction are triumphant, revealing a  voice  that  is "let
... go ... to  wander down  I the  flower-
beds I ... to   welcome    each    bird    that lights on the still-barren I mulberry tree."
The problem is  that  in the  bulk  of  the
Collected  Poems  Souster is largely  a poet of   unfinished    business,  one   whose  sus­ tained   attention  to  subject-matter  yields before fragmentary perception. Time and  again  he  seems  to  jot  down  responses  to what  goes on  around, but  fails  to shape  such  response  into  anything beyond  the banal  or personal. The impression is given of a writer  who carries with  him  a note­ book which enables him to record  on-the­ spot  reactions to  experience, simply  for the  sake  of  documentation.  So  Souster
 waves  good-bye  to  his  aging  father and mother after   a  visit,  realizing  that  "one
day they'll  not  be here I to say goodbye!"
-and that   comment  is  all  the   poem
amounts to. There are far  too many simi­ lar  pieces  that   are  well-intentioned  but slight,  such as "A  Letter to Biafra":

I once  sent  a  letter to  Biafra but  received no  reply.

I've often  wondered if it  ever  got  there,

and  if it did,
was  there  anyone still  alive
to answer it.

A brief  focus of  the  poet's  eye, a snippet of craft.
It is to Souster's credit  as an artist  that he  and  his other, uncommon revelations of   the   commonplace  do   emerge   from under  so much  ordinary verbiage.  In  his best poeins,  Souster's love of life and language   are   delivered   not  in  fastballs, but  in  dazzling  slow curves  and  change­ ups that constantly nick the inside comers of our  hearts and  minds. His contribution to Canadian poetry  cannot be measured in  terms of  quantity;  rather it  is quality, those   realized    lines   and    visions   that prompt  us to listen  hard   to  the  poet  be­ cause,  as  he  insists,  "we're  really  blood
brothers,  I both  of us acting out  I in  the best  way  we  can   I our  crazy  poems  of
living."
The  fourth volume in  this  series  con­
tains  "the   last  84  poems  from  Change­ Up  ( I974)"  and   all   the   poems   from  Extra   Innings    (I 977).  The  verse  from the  earlier   book   reflects  many  of  those established Souster  concerns about  man's relationship  with   the  natural world,  ur­ ban injustices,  and life-fragile but mag­  nificent-in the face of death. The limi­ tations  of  the  writing are  still  evident: the  fragmentary   perceptions  and   weak endings  of poeins, the failure of Souster's use  of  language  to  measure  up   to  the chosen  subject-matter  that   so  obviously

149

BOOKS IN REVIEW



affects  him   (as  in  a  memorial  poem  to John  Berryman), and the sentimental "notebook" response  to what  goes on around.
But in Change-Up Souster offers some­ thing  new -two  poems  under  the  gen­ eral heading "Pictures From A Long-Lost World."  One   is  about an  execution  in Kowloon, China, in  I 896, and  the  other  is a commentary on  Adolf  Hitler  staring  across the Channel at Dover in I 940. This  historical subject-matter, it seems, will not allow   the   poet   to  escape  with   glib  re­ marks;  experience   beyond  the   personal demands  investigation and   poetry  com­ mensurate with  the depths and  variations of human existence.  Souster  does present verse  of  consistently high  quality  in  the eighteen  poems   in   Extra   Innings that provide  more  insights  into  "A  Long-Lost World." Most   art   about   the   First  and Second  World  Wars: some of these reveal the ironies  of military action  and  profes­ sionalism; others  display   the  cruelty   of war  and  those who wage it, as in the gut­  wrenching description of  the  horrors   of the  quarries at  Mauthausen  near  Ausch­ witz. Two  of the finest attempts to convey something of the individual caught in the webs  of  history  are   not  found   in  war­  poems  but  in  "Louis Riel  Addresses The Jury, Regina, July  I88s: A Found Poem"  and  "Antoine de Saint Exupery,  3I  July, I944,   Poretta,  Italy." Riel's  speech,   in which  he  asks  the  world  to  re assess oonceptions of  sanity,  insanity,  prophets, and  the responsibilities of government, is delivered  with  dignity  and  force.  As for the  mystical  French aviator, Souster  por­ trays  the  man  and  the  symbol in a  prose poem  of startling evocation  about  Saint­ Exupery's final flight  "lost in the limitless reaches  of  the  sky he  charted  out  as  no man  then  or since, ending somewhere be­ tween  wind,  sand  and  stars...."
In these significant poems, some of the best he  has  written, Souster's   business is never   unfinished.  He   has  discovered   a
 larger type of verse that, with its attention to detail  and  sustained awareness of life's complexity, horror, and  beauty,  comple­ ments   tl1e shorter,  pure   lyrics  that   are scattered   like   wildflowers   among    the tamer growth of these four bulky volumes.

J. A. WAINWRIGHT


CULTURAL MARKERS

Paper    Doors:   An    Anthology   of    Japanese­ Canadian Poetry, edited by  Gerry  Shikatani and    David  Aylward  with   translations  by David Aylward. Coach  House, n.p.

FORTY-ONE  YEARS AGO last winter, twenty­ five  thousand Canadians were  taken  out of  their   houses   and   herded   into   cattle  barns  on Vancouver's exhibition grounds. Their  houses,   businesses,  fishboats,   and  household   goods  were   confiscated. The families  were  split  up  and  sent  to primi­  tive  "camps" in  the  interior mountains for  four   years.  Once the  war  was  over they  were  dispersed   across  Canada  and the  Pacific.
I  mention the  devastating story  of  the Japanese-Canadians'  Evacuation because it  has  become   the  central fact   of  their history. All  emotion, all  self-knowledge, all   achievement  is  unconsciously   meas­ ured  against this  moment of  humiliated disillusionment. The details  of  the life led in   the   evacuation  camps  have  become what Gerry  Shikatani, editor with  David  Aylward of Paper  Doors: an anthology of Japanese-Canadian poetry, calls in his ex­ cellent introduction "cultural markings": "The poems  may  not  recount ethnic ex­ perience as data or story,  but  they  are  in fact,  repositories for the collective  experi­ ence  which   exists  as  fundamental myth beneath the  surface  of  language.  And what  could be termed 'cultural markings'
-... these  shape the sensibility."
The book he and  Aylward  co-edit  is ambitious and  provocative. Provocative because    it   challenges  our   fondly-held

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ideas. Ambitious, because it attempts to present   a  panorama of   Japanese-Cana­ dian   poetry.  Such   an  attempt aims  to­ ward   two  books  in  one,  poetry   in  Jap­ anese  and  poetry  in  English.  But  the  two groups   of  poems  share   more   than   the jostle  of  genes:   they  tell  the  same  fas­ cinating story. Minority status  (or rather, lack  of status) ; the  evacuation, the pain, survival,   the   aftermath,  the   pride   and shame   mixed  up  together:  the  cultural markers  are  the same.  Furthermore, the linguistic  gap  here  is a  marker itself.  It is the age-old  immigrant "shokku": when the  first generation ("Issei")  speaks,  the second   ("Nissei")  answers,   but  in  Eng­ lish; and  the  third ("Sansei"), now thor­  oughly  anglophone, can't  answer  at  all. When  we turn  the  page  from  an English poem  to a  Japanese one,  we are  experi­  encing  for  a  moment the  enormous rifts that  are  simply  facts  of  life for  an immi­ grant family.
Aylward    helps   the   anglophone  cope with  the Japanese poems  by means  of his skilful, tripartite translations. First we see the  visual  shape of  the  original haiku  or tanka. Beside it, the  phonetic rendering enables   us  to  pronounce and   hear   the pattern of sounds.  And  finally an  English version  adds  a  translation of  the  lexical level, together with  a careful   (though at times overdone) attention to spacing to suggest the Japanese emphasis. It's  a tour de  force,  possible  only  with  poems  from such  a  tradition of  brevity.  The quality, in  general,  is high; several  authors, such as  Minoru Furusho and  Takeo Nakano, are award-winning tanka and  haiku writ­ ers  and  have  earned  impressive  honours  in Japan.
The authors are  not  presented  chrono­
logically  and  their  poems  are  not  dated. This  is disappointing, because  the  devel­ opment of  the  poetry   (here  hidden)  is fascinating. Even  from  the beginning, the poets  write  not  about  Japan, hut  about  the  new  experiences in  Canada:  Christ-
 mas,  February winds,  April  Fool. Chusa­ huro Ito uses the resignation of  the tanka, for example, to capture  melting snow or a   prairie   farm.   Only   rarely   does  con­  sciousness  of  Japan  obliquely  suggest  it­ self, as in  this  snapshot by Sukeo  Sam­ eshima:

From   the  air
it  looks  the  same-

an  endless  plain  of  snow
My second  home.

Takeo Nalmno  moves on  to confront the drama of the evacuation, and  the P.O.W. camp  at  Angler,  Ontario, directly:

They make  me  wear the  rising  sun
on  my  back.

Should I be  proud
of  this  perfect target?

or more  subtly:

Night thoughts on  this  journey far  away
from  my  family ...

Cricket comes  to  me crying.

As we move from  the Japanese into  the English  poetry, from  first  to second  gen­ erations  and   from  leaving   Japan to  re­ discovering  it  with  Canadian eyes, it  is a pleasure   to  find  Roy  Kiyooka   and   Joy Kogawa's  poems   again.  From   Wheels, Kiyoota  takes us on a physical and mental snapshot-studded "Roots" tour  of Japan, filled  with  humour and  sensitivity.  Ko gawa's  poetry  is  remarkably varied. She presents    private    abstracts	("Minerals from  Stone")   and  public  witnesses ("What  I  Remember of   the   Evacua­ tion")  with   equal   authority,  and    can move from  "Zen Graveyard" to the  fully North  American "Finally That There Is" with impressive  grace. The youngest poet, Kevin  Irie, is a real find. True, his poetry is  "safe"   in  terms  of  technique,  but   at twenty-seven  he is to be commended for the  rare   practice of  walking   before   he

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tries  to  fly.  And   indeed   his  "Crow  in Flight," original in  the  sense of Hopkins and Stevens, does fling itself into the air despite its flaws and  can be read  aloud magnificently.  "Autumn"   confirms   the nice   deftness   of   Irie's   ear,   and    "The Camps:  Burning the  Dead" reminds   us that  the  evacuation is pure  drama in its emotional violence, its philosophical iron­ ies, and  its cultural revelations.  I  find  it very  instructive  to  note   that   lrie,   like several  other  of these  poets  (such  as edi­ tor   Gerry    Shikatani   in   his   successful "Cultivated Earth")  adopts what   I  call an   Asian-objective   tone  for   the   poem. This   tone-artfully   achieved   by  care­  fully manipulated  juxtapositions, omission of modifying words,  and  reinforced by a resolute,  slow   rhythm-gives  the  same sense of  bald, irrefutable truth as the lean brevity of the haiku. They  are both hands­ off   poetry:  the  author seems  to  efface himself and his opinions, and  the resultant eloquence can  be shattering.
Shikatani implies Irie is a Nissei, or second   generation.  One   wonders    why there are no Sansei poets here  to add  their third   dimension.  Some   Sansei   are   ap­ proaching fifty, and  even  the  Yonsei  are entering their   twenties.  Similarly,   if  the intent  is a panorama, why limit  the  poets to those still living?  A  quarter or a  third of the scene is missing. The editors  have begun  ambitiously, but  have  pulled  their punches somewhat....
"Ambitious and  provocative": I use "provocative" because  Pap,er Doors opens a  real  can  of  worms.  It makes  us  face some  facts  about Canadian literature we've preferred to ignore.  In defining CanLit most  of  us still struggle  with  the alien-wilderness/youthful  identity   com­ plexjbranch  plant-colonial  combination. We  ignore  hyphenated-Canadian litera­ ture  because  we  perceive  immigrant art  as a temporary phenomenon of restricted interest, and  classify  literature in  minor­ ity languages with  the  art  of the  mother
 country. Yet  a movement that  has lasted the  entire  twentieth century  is hardly temporary; and   since  relatively  few  Ca­ nadians are  not  of  immigrant  stock  the overall  phenomenon of  immigrant litera­ ture   should   in   fact   have   something  to say  to  and   about   us  all.  Furthermore, hyphenated-Canadian writing  is radically different in informing consciousness  from that  of the mother country. It is no acci­ dent    that    Japan's   anthologies   include only  the more  traditional poetry of  its ex­ patriates. There  is  simply  little   else  in common. If you compare a contemporary Japanese from  Tokyo-aggressive, con­ fident, intolerant-with a poet from  this book,  minority member  and  survivor of the  evacuation, you find  that  in  outlook, knowledge,  experience,  and    even   lan­ guage,  the  two  are  worlds  apart.
The fact  is that  this poetry,  even  when written in Japanese, is far more Canadian than  it is Japanese. It's  a matter of those cultural markers again. Where else could one  find  tanka so  rich  in  images  of  ice, snow,  and   duck   hunting? What  gentle­ man  in Osaka  knows or cares about Choi­  chi  Sumi's "gurein  erebeta"   (grain ele­ vator)? And  as  what   must  be  an  enor­  mous   portion    of     (largely    un-antholo­ gized)    Canadian   writing,  hyphenated­ Canadian literature deserves  to  be  read and  learned  from. The stories that under­ lie  it,  such  as  the   tale  of  the  Japanese evacuation, form  collectively  the story  of Canada. Few editors (except, as Aylward  and   Shikatani  point   out,  John   Robert Colombo and   J.  Michael   Yates)    have understood that  such  an  endeavour does not  fragment and  polarize. Instead it  re­ veals  and  celebrates  common  bonds   of emotion,  experience, and  strength.
Paper  Doors has its flaws, but  in open­
ing our eyes to this fact and some highly rewarding poets it thoroughly deserves its place  on  our  shelves.

TARA CULLIS

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



PRECIOUS TONGUE

MARGARET MACDONELL,   The  Emigrant  E;cperi­ ence: Songs of Highland  Emigrants in North America.   Univ.  of  Toronto  Press,  $27.50; pa.  $1o.g6.

PERHAPS  ANCESTRY HAS GIVEN ME a feel­ ing  for  the  themes  of exile  and  lost-and­ found   homelands  present   in   the  songs Margaret  MacDonell has  collected    and for ·the haunting and  eloquent lan  uage in  which  they  are expressed.  From  boy­ hood  I  recall  a sense of wonder and  ex­ citement about the  Mod, the yearly festi­ val  of  Gaelic  poetry,   song,   and   music, held  in Dundee on the eve of the Second  World War.  Much later,  something of an exile myself, I was able to take an evening  class in Gaelic  for one winter. It was held in   a   Vancouver  high   school,   and   was taught  by a remarkable lady  from  Lewis, Mrs.  Malcomina Thompson, who  for many  years passed on to pupils  of all ages in  far-off   Western   Canada a  warm  en­ thusiasm  an? love for her  mother tongue,  and   somethmg of  her  knowledge  of  its rich  treasures of story and  song.
These treasures are  revealed in  a  fas­
cinating way by the texts and  translations presented   by   Dr.   MacDonell	who   is chairman  of  the  Department 'of  Celtic Studies at  St.  Francis Xavier University in Antigonish, Nova  Scotia. She  is a Ca­ nadian  native  speaker   of   Gaelic,   who learned  the  language  from   her  parents, and   deepened  her   awareness  of   its  re­ sources  as  a result  of  the  stimulation of her  teachers, Sister  Mairi  MacDonald at her  own university and  Charles Dunn  of Harvard. Her  texts have been  principally selected  from  printed sources:  collections of  Gaelic   verse  and  periodicals such  as The Casket, published  weekly as Antigo­  nish since  r852,  and  Mac-Talla (Echo) published  at  first  weekly  and   then  fort nightly   at   Sydney,   Cape  Breton,   from
I 8g2   to   r 904.  The work   of  twenty-six bards   is  represented  in   the   anthology,
 ranging   from   Donald  Matheson  ( r 7 r g-
82) , who  grieved  over  the  misery  of  his people in Sutherland and  saw emigration to  the  Carolinas as  a  passage  of  the  Is­ raelites out  of Egypt,  to anonymous Cape  Breton  bards  of the  rg2o's  who wrote  of their  feelings about migration from  their New   World   homeland to   Boston   and California. Tantalizingly, Dr. MacDonell withholds from  us the verse  of a twenty­  seventh  bard, Alexander MacLean (Alas­  dair   MacEoghian), who   lived   on   the River Denys, Cape  Breton,  at  the tum of this  century,  and   impressed  his  fellow­ Gaelic speakers  in Inverness County  with hi.>   powers  of   impromptu  satire  - an ancient  form  perfected by Irish  bards whose  command  of  invective   was  such that  it was said  they could  rhyme  rats  to death.
The  book  provides  a full  biographical
and  historical commentary to amplify  the texts. As a result  of  this and  the service­ able  translations of  the  disciplined intri­  cacies of the original Gaelic,  we penetrate as readers  into  that "world we have lost," as  Peter  Laslett  and other social  histori­  ans have called it, of a pre-literate society. In  ·this  case,   the   society   consists  of  a warrior aristocracy in  the  Highlands and Western   Islands  of  Scotland,   violently tom  apart in the  eighteenth century by political  reorganization and  military  de­ feat,  then   aggressive  land  improvement measures   which    brought   depopulation where poHcy and  war had failed  to effect change.   Visiting   Scotland  in  1773,  Dr. Johnson   became aware of   the  "general discontent" of ·the  Highlands, and  when he  inquired about  the  subject of  a  song sung   by  some   ladies   on   the   island   of Raasay,  he  was  told  "it was  a  farewell  composed   by  one  of  the   Islanders that  was going, in ·this epidemical fury of emi­ gration, to seek his fortune in  America."  This  seems  to  be the  first  recorded men­ tion  in  English  literature of  the  songs of the  emigrants. Burns,  of  course,  sympa-

153

BOOKS IN REVIEW



thized  with   the  motivation  of  the  emi­ grants,  and  in the "Address  to Beelzebub"  of  1786,  he  satirized   the  efforts  of  the alarmed members of  the  Highland Soci­ ety,  "which met ... at  the  Shakespeare, Covent    garden,  to   concert   ways   and means   to  frustrate   the  designs  of  FIVE HUNDRED   HIGHLANDERS  who ... were  SO audacious  as  to  attempt to escape  from theire lawful  lords  and  masters ... to the wilds of CANADA, in search  of that  fantas­ tic  thing- LIBERTY."
To a degree,  the songs of the emigrants are   formulaic,  as   John    Macinnes  de­ scribes them,  performing the "celebratory act of uttering names, energizing  a poetic map  or ancestral territory and reinforcing a  sense  of   identity." Thus   Anna   Gillis took leave  of  Morar in  1 786 before  emi­ grating  t:o  Upper Canada by recounting the  place names  of  the  MacDonald  ter­ ritories  on  the  mainland and  among the Hebrides, and   she  encouraged  her  clan to face  the challenge of the future by recollecting their  warrior ideals :

The MacDonalds were  always  wont
to stand boldly  in  the  face  of hardship, eagerly putting opponents to  rout, faithful, intrepid in  adversity.

Religious feeling  is reflected  in  some  of the  compositions, as in  the case of those of  Donald  Matheson of  Kildonan, who saw the hand  of Providence in the exodus from  the Highlands. However, Rob Donn, a  contemporary bard   from  Strathnaver, is reported to have said  to Matheson: "There is more  piety  in your  poetry,  and more  poetry  in mine." While not entirely fair  to  Matheson, the  epigram   points  to the  fact  that  the  emigrant poetry  in  cer­ tain   moods   stressed   the   values   of   this world  rather than  religious  hope. Calum Ban  MacMhannain, for example, a Skye bard  who sailed  to Prince  Edward  Island  with Lord  Selkirk's colonists in 1803, pre­ sented  the voyage in the Polly in terms of a  spirited  adventure, and  described   in bitter   words  the  distressing  state  of  the

154
 homeland  which   forced   emigration  on him:

A new  master has  come into the  land,
a sad,  woeful  matter. The people are  leaving;
their possessions  have  dwindled
They haven't a  cow  to  put  to  graze. Some  were  put  to  rent,
others died;
rare were  those  that survived. What would  it  profit  me
to remain in  this  land
where I can  learn nothing by shoemaking.

I'11 go  to  sea; I'11 fo11ow others
in  search of  a  place to  dwe11. We'11 get  new  land
which can  be  bought outright,
and  we'11 not  be charged a shiiiing for  it
[afterwards].
Better for  us  the  shelter of  the  forest than the  heather-covered  hiiis
facing towards Grobainn.
On the bare, forbidding rocks, when the  cold  weather  came the  moorland seemed endless.

In  contrast to Skye, the new home of this bard  became Eilean an aigh I "isle of contentment,"  where   it   could   be  said
Bidh  an coirc' ann  a fas  I "Our seed  is
fruitful here."
To be 'Sure, the  America or Canada of the   reality   facing   the   emigrants,  when they sought to make  a living  in  the  New World, did   not  always  square with   the high  hopes of their  departure from  the homeland. One  result   of   this  was   the poetry    of   dispraise,  for   example,  the "Song  for  America" of John the  Hunter MacDonald (lain Sealgair)  from  the Braes  of Lochaber, who  landed   in  Cape Breton  in  1834.  He  was  unhappy in  his new  home   at  Mabou Ridge,   and  com­ plained  of  the  country  and   its  inhabi­ tants:

I am  bound, brought low,
in  the  land  of snows  and  sere  grasses.
It is not  what I have  been  accustomed to,
looking at swarthy folk, ugly,  drab, du11,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



with  wide  trousers, the  loutish long  coat, an  unattractive  style.

You'll see groups of them drinking at  the  store  if you  go  there.
They are  rowdy  and  boastful, intoxicated by drink;
their place  untidy, mud   under their  feet, glass flagons  raised  to their heads,
peeling off and  tearing their jackets like a pack  of tinkers.

Another Highlander, Kenneth  MacDon­ ald,  who  settled  in  the  Bras d'Or region in  1842,  found   his  first  winter there  so numbing 'that   his   "Song  for   America" says that  he  was  ready   to  sell  his cattle  and  go home:

Cape Breton is so cold
that one's very ears  will freeze
the  frost  penetrates the  axe  so deeply that only  fire  can   thaw   it  out.


America, the  white-coated,
I would  much prefer to  be  in  Gairloch, where  spring comes  in  March
with  real  warmth in  the  sun.

A similar  fluctuating viewpoint about emigration  to  Nova  Scotia has  recently been  depicted with  considerable artistry in Donald MacKay's historical novel, Scotland Farewell:  The People of the Hector   ( 1981), about the  aftermath of Culloden and settlement in  Pictou County.
The westward movement of settlers  in
the 187o's and 188o's to the prairies also brought out  powers  of invective, as in  a song by "Resentful Donald" (Domhnall Diombach) entitled "Donald's Testimony about Manitoba":

A  thousand liars,  well-rewarded, went   about  with   books
extolling the  North  West
and  the  excellence of  Manitoba.

There was  no  information pleasing to
women,
from  the  Butt  of Lewis to Barra Head, that was  not  being propagated about the
land,
with  unhesitating promises.
 We  reached the  land of  promise, The frost  was  as  hard as  rock,
more  than twelve feet  into the  ground;
not  even  an  ant  could  survive it.

Yet, a persistent theme  in the emigrants' poetry  is that  the  New  World is the  land of freedom: Tir  na saorsa, tir na buadh-
Land of the  free,  land  of endowments, where  the  rent  is not  demanded from  the
tenants,
and  where the  cruel bailie  is not  seen
forcing  the   people   into exile

as the "Reply to Resentful Donald" puts the matter. Answering the  complaints of lain Sealgair,  his cousin  Allan  the  Ridge MacDonald sings:
The land  you  left  is a land  without kindness, a  land  without  respect for  tenants;
they  are  sorrowful leaving it, fearing the  stormy seas.
·Poor  people, sons  of  cotters, without stock  or  herd-
it is not  fitting to dispraise the  land  of
promise
where  they are  now  respected men.

Now that  you have  come  across  the  sea to  this fair land,
you will  want for  nothing the  rest  of your
life;
everything  prospers for  us.
You'll  get  honey  from  the  flowers,
sugar  and  tea;
better that than the  land   you  left
with  the  rabble in  charge of its  forests.

As the emigrants made  a success of settle­ ment  and  took  root  in their  new conntry, we can trace  the poetic act of appropriat­ ing  the  landscape, for  example, in  Dun­ can Black Blair's song of the 188o's about a river in Pictou County, Nova Scotia:
Come  with  me  to  Upper Barney's River in  the  forest, where strawberries grow
and  an  abundance of ripe  nuts. The tall   moose   very  proudly
makes  his circuit with  elk-like grace;
the  squirrel  whizzes
back  and  forth among its  thickets.

In time,  too,  migration westward   or  to the south  from  the  early  settlements pro­ duced   songs   of   nostalgic   affection   for

155

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Gape  Breton: Far an cluinnear  fuaim na piob  I  Agus   piobaireachd  le  {arum­ "where could  be heard the sound  of the
pipes  I and  piping of a high  order"; or
for maintaining the old custom of visiting
friends  on  New  Year's Day.
In his recent Introduction  to Gaelic Poetry, the  foremost critic  of  Gaelic  lit­ erature, Derick  Thomson, is politely dis­ missive of most  New  World  Gaelic verse, noting  the survival in it of panegyrist and invective  styles from   the  eighteenth cen­ tury,   well   represented  for   him   by  the work  of John Maclean  (lain  MacAilein, Bard Thighearna Cholla), who had  been bard  to the Laird of Coli before emigrat­ ing  in  I8Ig  to  Pictou  County.  Thomson says of him  and his successors:  "the  links with   the  Scottish  tradition  were  closely kept;  there  were  occasional   new  themes suggested   by  the  new  environment, but no  new  voice  or  style."
The measure which   Thomson applies to  this  New  World  poetry  and  to  much that  was composed  in  the homeland dur­ ing  the  nineteenth century,  finding  little in  it  to  inspire   enthusiasm,  is possession of   "special  individuality,   strength  and gravitas." He  finds these qualities in Wil­ liam  Livingstone of  Islay  ( Uilleam Mac­ Dhunleibhe),  John   Smith   of  Iarsiadar (lain   Mac   a'Ghobhainn),  and    Mary MacPherson  of Skye  (Mhairi  Mhor  nan Oran -Big  Mary of  the  Songs), all of whom championed freedom for their  peo­ ple in  the  nineteenth century  in one  way or another in  the  homeland, and  tapped  a vein of bitter  social  criticism.  Thomson also responds favourably to the modernist movement in  Gaelic  poetry  in  this  cen­ tury, to which  he has himself contributed work  that  is innovative in  technique and theme.  Yet, if these intensities and  devel­ opments are absent from the poetry of the township bards and  isolated  practitioners represented in Margaret MacDonell's an­  thology,  we  do  find  ·them  keeping   their ancient language sinewy, overcoming the
 heartache of the loss of the old homeland, and  singing   the  song  of  the  freedom of the  new  one.
We are  not allowed  to forget,  of course, that   we  are  dealing with  song-texts. In an   appendix,  nine   airs   to   accompany songs are  reproduced from  a variety of printed and  oral  sources. Dr.  MacDonell believes that  the decline of the Gaelic singing  tradition in  the  third  and  fourth generation of families outside  Scotland makes  it  difficult  to  recover  more  of the music  of  the  SQilgs. Since  song-texts  di­ vorced   from   their   music  have  less  than  their  full  vitality,  it is surely  to be hoped  that  the  appearance of this book  will en­ courage others to  collect  all  that is pos­ sible of Gaelic  emigrant songs and  music from  oral  tradition  whenever it survives. Repertoires of  traditional fiddle  and  pipe music,   for   example,  would   seem  to  be promising sources  for airs.
Also, emigrant songs  and  airs  are  still to  be  recorded from  tradition-bearers in the  Highlands and   islands   of  Scotland, as the field workers  of the School  of  Scot­ tish Studies have  shown.  In  I952, Calum Maclean  recorded  Kate  Ross  of   Lairg
singing    Cur   cidthaobh   ri   Asainnte    I
"Leaving  Assynt   behind,"  with   its   ac­
count of an emigrant who  left  the  "land of the Gaels" when  "young and  foolish," went   to  "Great Glasgow  of  the  shops,"
and  ended up "sad  and  weary,  I Walking
the streets of Canada." The songs of emi­
grant bards  are  still  vividly  remembered on  Tiree, particularly among those  who come   from    or   have   associations  with Balephuil-baiZe nam bard (township of the   bards) -which   was   the   home   of lain MacAilein, Bard Thighearna Cholla, who  went  to Nova  Scotia  in  I8Ig. When Margaret  Mackay was  collecting  tradi­ tional  material on  Tiree in  I973,  and  it was known  that  she came from  the Cana­ dian  prairies, she  received   a  particularly warm welcome from  Hector  Kennedy of Hilipol, connected with  lain MacAilein's

BOOKS IN REVIEW



family,  who  sang  for  her  with  great feel­ ing the song Manitoba, occasioned by the departure from   baile  nam   bard  of   two brothers, one of whom  was the bard  I ain Dhomhnuill 'ic  Eachainn. Kennedy could provide many  details of  these  and  other  Tiree emigrants of the  187o's  and  188o's who went  first to Bruce County, Ontario, to  stay  among  fellow-islanders and   then pass on  to the Canadian West.  It is rele­ vant  to note that Hector Kennedy cannot read  or write Gaelic,  and  his traditions of bardachd (poetry)  and  seanchas  (genea­ logical  and   township lore)   are  entirely  oral,  which  was  the  case of  many  of the bards  who  emigrated to Canada, for ex­ ample,    Calum   Ban   MacMhannain  of Skye and  Prince  Edward Island, or  who were born  there in the first generations of emigrant   families   and   stubbornly  held onto   their   traditions.   Margaret   Mac­ Donell   is  aware,  of  course,   of  the  re­ sources of the  School  of Scottish Studies and _records ?er  gratitude to Dr.  Macka; for  mformat10n   about  Gaelic  settlers  in Saskatchewan  and    Manitoba.   The  re­ search  base of The  Emigrant  Experience is, in  fact,  very  wide,  reflecting devotion to  its  subject and  great   sympathy  and affection  for  the bards  whose story it tells.
In Notes  towards  the Definition of Cul­
ture  ( I948), especially  in Chapter III­ "Unity and   Diversity: The   Region"­ T. S. Eliot  made a strong case for valuing  the contribution of Ireland, Scotland, and Wales  to what he calls  the  "constellation of cultures" in Britain and,  in particular, to  the  dominant culture of  England. In his  view,  there would  be  an  irreparable loss  if these  "regions" were  to  lose their own   languages. By  extension,  the  book reviewed   makes   the   same   point   about Canada: its  larger culture needs  knowl­ edge and  understanding of its tributaries, among them the songs of  those emigrant Highlanders and  Islanders  and  their  de­ scendants. To  Gaelic  speakers and  those who do not have  that  language, it says in
 the words of the Laird of Coli's bard  that
Gaelic  must  live:

na treig  gu  brath i,
'S na leig  air  dlochuimhn' ri linn  an  ails' I
never  neglect it
and  do not  let  it  be  forgotten in  this
generation.
IAN ROSS


POETRY CHRONICLE

GILBERT  LANGEVIN,  Le  Fou  sofidaire. L'Hexa­
gone,  $5.95; Issue   de  secours. L'Hexagone,
$5.95.
"SA POESIE  N'EST Nl CRI  ni chant " affir­ mait  Pierre  Nepveu; "elle  est  le  ouvoir souverain  de !'affirmation sur tout ce qui, en  nous et  dans  le monde, est  dispersion et  mort"   (Livres  et   auteurs   quebecois,
1973).  Langevin  continue  sa  tache,   sa poesie  sage  represente  la  mise  en   vers d'un discours  moral.   Poemes  brefs   vers courts,  aucune faute  de gout,  pas opeu de  violence,   c'est  cette   regularite, cette brievete,  ces  limitations choisies,  ce  Hou
voulu  qui  donnent a la poesie de  Lange­
vin  un  certain charme, le charme  peut­
etre de la desuetude, une certaine "aura." Mais  le  lecteur   ne  risque-t-il  pas  de  se lasser de cette forme  breve et reguliere, de ce vers qui  trop souvent  manque d'image de musique,  de couleur de souffle  d'en vergure?   On   est  heurex
parfois  la  revolte  bien  surrealiste contre la vulgarite et !'ignorance bourgeoises,  la purete merveilleuse d'un Eluard (Issue  de secours)  ou de savourer un distique pour sa simplicite, pour  sa  justesse:
Je  reviendrai panni  vous
nu  comrne  une  grande misere
(Le Fou  solidaire)


MICHEL   GAY,  Plaque   tournante. L'Hexagone, n.p.

On  se demande tout  d'abord, et  c'est  le cas de  bon  nombre de  recueils  poetiques

157

BOOKS IN REVIEW



quebecois-voir   Pylones,   Architecture pressentie, La Surface  du paysage-quel est le but  de l'auteur qui choisit  son titre dans  un  domaine specifique,  que  celui-ci appartienne a la construction, aux mathe­ matiques ou dans ce cas-ci a la mecanique et a la biologic. A la page  I 0  de ce mince recueil  de  23 textes,  l'auteur  nous  donne  une definition de "la  plaque  tournante et sensible," tiree  du Petit  Robert, definition  fictive   qui  en   meme   temps   cumule   et occulte  les sens disponibles.  Nous  revien­ drons sur  cette definition, notons aupara­ vant  qu'au fil de ces textes nous avons pu retrouver,  avec  ou  sans  guillemets,   avec ou  sans  italiques-et il est  certain que nous  en  avons  laisse  echapper -dix  de ces  definitions. On  sait  que  Hugo se ser­ vait abondamment et de fa<;on semblable du dictionnaire de Louis Moreri; serait-ce une  fa-.on  d'inclure  ce  poete   dans   son oeuvre? En effet il est interessant de noter aussi  la  fa<;on que  Michel   Gay  a  d'user de la citation. On  reconnait par  exemple la   presence   de   Mallarme,  "un   coup," "quel  nombre lance  quand" = Un  Coup
de  de,  sans   parler  chez  ce  dernier  de
l'emploi qu'il  fait  de  la symbolique  de la fenetre.  On    retrouve  Duchamp  et   la
"question des  devantures," Lautreamont dont  le "Viel  ocean,  aux  vagues  de  cris­ ta!"  (Les Chants du  Maldoror, 1,  g)  re­ tentit  chez Gay  dans  "plaque de verre  ou de  cristal" et  "vieil  ocean," il  y  a  Boris Vian,  Chloe  etant un des personnages de L'Ecume des  jours et  maints  autres au­  teurs  auxquels fait  appel  ce  texte.
Mais  revenons-en a ce que la definition de "plaque tournante et sensible" occulte. Le Petit Robert  dit: "plaque neurale d'un embryon." Or  le livre  n'est-il  pas dedie  a Chloe?   Et  a  la  page  15, c'est-a-dire au centre du livre-mais au texte gfneuf­ on  peut  lire:   "Une  blancheur. Le  chant des oiseaux  que  ton  petit  doigt  fouineur designe  si  maladroitement, la main  poin­ tee partout, imitant en cela, pourquoi pas, le  premier  papillon  qu'il   m'est   venu   a
 l'idee  de t'offrir, devenu peut-etre, en  toi, papa, sous sa forme  adulte, ailee."  Chloe, elle est l'envers, l'autre cote  de la  plaque de verre, elle est l'intertexte, elle est le "ver(s)" de  "verdure" (sens  de  Kloe  en grec),  l'avenir, l'irnaginaire et  elle  est ecloison  -"Chloe" = "eclo (s)" ="ecla­ tement,"  "eclampsie,"   "declenchement"
-du "ver" du papillon "devenu papa  en toi." Elle represente aussi le moment d'un aveu  intime et  de la reconnaissance de ce que son oeuvre  doit  aux  autres createurs, carle papillon voltige-"la main  pointee partout" -de meme  que  le "coucou" est "grimpeur."
D'ailleurs si  Plaque   tournante est  pa­ rallele  a  L'Amour  fou  (les  Post-scriptum repondant  .a la  lettre  l'Andre Breton  au dernier chapitre) en passant peut-etre par Hugo et  ses  Contemplations- pour   M. Gay son oeuvre  et sa fille se rejoignent, se confondent: "Tu sauras un  jour  ce  que c'est  cette   fiction,   tu  seras  elle"  et  elles sont  gaite,  gai  savoir.   Plaque  tournante c'est  le plaquette Chloe.


FRANCOIS   TETREAU,   £'Architecture pressentie
(Precis  d'intuition).  L'Hexagone, n.p.

Si nous crayons deceler  chez Claude Beau­ soleil  (La  Surface du   paysage)   la  pre­  sence  diffuse  de  Francis Ponge, chez Te­ treau il  est  la  en   exergue   et  dans   "le parti" que  lui aussi a "pris" "des chases."  Voyez  de  Ponge  "La  Mousse" (Le  Parti pris des  choses,  N.R.F., 1967)  et  de  Te­ treau  "Paprika." C'est   la  meme  ecoute,  la  meme  attention donnee a  l'inertie, au detail  et transmise avec un semblable bon­ heur   d'expression, non  qu'il   y ait  de  la part de Tetreau plagiat mais on retrouve chez  ces  deux   poetes   une  sensibilite  pa­  rente.   En   effet   le  rythme  de  l'ecrivain quebecois  est   plus  varie,   des   moments calmes  sont  suivis ou coupes  de moments saccades,   l'image   y   est   plus   virulente. D'ailleurs  le  propos  de  Tetreau c'est  de nous  eveiller  aux  dangers de  la  ville, de

BOOKS IN REVIEW



les denoncer. II s'agit  d'une variation sur un   theme   surrealiste  expose   d'une  ma­ niere  elle aussi surrealiste. Le corps  de Ia femme  y est comme  chez Eluard, Breton,  etc.,  le lieu  d'une metamorphose; elle est celle  que  permettra que  se  retrouve l'e­  quilibre, que  se regenere  Ia ville, que  soit refuse  un ordre petrifiant qui est en train de  precipiter l'hwnanite  vers la catastro­ phe.   La   poesie  de  Tetreau  plus  sentie qu'intellectuelle,   !'intuition  c'est   l'irra­ tionnel, vibnet  fait  vibrer,   accroche et frappe, ses images ont  cette  force  qui fait qu'elles  heurtent la  sensibilite  du  lecteur  et  s'imposent dans  son  imagination.


JEAN-LOUIS     ROY,    Terre    fCconde.    Lemeac,
$6.gs.
La   tache  allait   etre   ardue,  un   grand theme,   un   theme   traditionnel  et   long­ temps  favori  de la litterature  quebecoise, tout   allait   resider   ici  dans  Ia  far;on  de traiter ce  su jet,  dans  !'inspiration, dans Ia maitrise dont  Roy  allait  faire  preuve.  Or   tout,   meme   Ia  recolte,   est  laisse  au
hasard  et   a une   certaine  facilite:   vers
reguliers ou  non  se  suivent, Ia  rime  est
sou vent  puerile:

Tels des confettis  infimes les arbres  flottent
Comme  un  tissu soyeux coupe  en  redingote.

On  tombe  dans  l'heteroclite qu'aucun souffle poetique ne veut animer, revigorer. Sur  "Vergers d'Occident," "Du  doux matin d'Asie  couleur perle  pubere," "Du sielnce  soyeux  habite par  Mo!Zart,"  "pa­ labre  d'Afrique," "main de  I'Amerique," le lecteur  ne fait  que trebucher, trop  c'est trop,  "Terre piegee" que !'auteur n'a  pas su eviter.


JEAN-PIERRE  LEROux,   Dans   l'intervalle.  Le-
meac,  $4-95·
Avec  cet  ouvrage on   demeure  en  effet "dans  l'intervalle." Ils  ont   en   commun avec  Langevin  qu'il   cite   en  exergue   Ia facture, Ia brievete  du recueil et du poeme
 mais  si chez  Langevin !'on   reste  sur  sa faim,  sur un  non  resolu,  un  non  affronte avec Leroux  on se trouve  plonge dans une totale    ambigllite,   dans    I'"equivoque," dans  "l'enignie" et  on  reste  sur  "la  tan­ gente." II  s'agit   au   moyen  de  l'ecriture d'une  mise   en   question  de   l'ecriture, comme  chez  Beausoleil,  mais dans  ce re­ cueil-ci  l'on  se situe  bien  en  da
n'y a ici aucune demarcation nette  par rapport a ses predecesseurs -Rene Char
et  Roland  Giguere -aucune  innovation mais simple  experience sur  le langage et choix d'une lisibilite  ambigiie. Suffit-il  de se laisser bercer  de sonorites, de se laisser prendre au  charme de  l'enigmatique?


MARCEL  SABOURIN,    Chansons.   VLB   Editeur,
n.p.

Chansons  se presente comme  le reflet d'un Quebec a un  moment precis,  1964-1971. Bon  nombre  des  themes -la liberation
des femmes  par  les femmes,  Ia definition des roles hommejfemme au  sein du  cou­ ple-ont  ete  repris  depuis  avec  plus  de vigueur   par   des   femmes  interpretes  et compositeurs. On  regrette  de  ne pouvoir  toujours   trouver ]'unite  qui  devrait etre presente   dans  chacune  des  parties,   d'ou  peut-etre les "Batard  I" et  "Batard II."  On   peut   dire   sans  se   tromper  que  ces chansons  souffrent  d'etre lues,  y perdent leur force, la chanson choisissant souvent  pour  etre  efficace  un  texte  et  des  struc­  tures  simples. Leur  ecriture ici doit  beau­ coup  aux  automatismes, le  jeu des sono­ rites   primant   le   sens.   La   langue  de Sabourin est  une  langue  quebecoise   au­  thentique, !'auteur sait user avec bonheur de  la  satire   et  garder   toujours  un   ton personnel  et  vif.  Nous  ne dirons  rien  de la preface  pompeuse en regard de la sim­ plicite de !'expression  de ce recueil.


ROLANDE GIGUERE,   A  l'oree  de  l'oeil.  Editions du  Noroit, $ss.oo.

Chez Giguere les !ignes s'appellent comme

159

BOOKS IN REVIEW



s'appellent  les  mots   quand   la  sonorite prime  le  sens,  quand  le  projet   est  de­ vance  par  la  main,  meme  si  peu  a  peu avec  plus  ou  moins  de  retard il le  rein­  vestit  (voir  la  legende  accompagnant le dessin). C'est  bien d'ailleurs, nous semble­ t-il, l'un  des sens que  contient  le titre  du recueil  qui le situe sur les rives de la cons­ cience. C'est aussi pour  cela que le dessin de  Giguere est repetitif, variation sur  un motif  pour  un  meme  dessin et dans  plu­
sieurs dessins differents. D'ailleurs comme si l'apprentissage permettait d'atteindre a
une  couche plus  profonde et  plus  riche, la ligne  vase compliquant done s'obscur­ cissant   jusqu'au  point   ou   ayant   revele "son  bestiaire" elle s'y tisse sa toile et s'y perd  meme  si c'est  pour rena1tre "comme nalt  l'oiseau,"   "comme  naissent  les geodes"  et  comme si l'artiste refusait  de se laisser devorer par sa chimere  sans par­  venir  pourtant a garder ses ailes:  ''!'ele­ vation" ne  se fait  plus  en  effet  que  par decapitation, jeu des forces centripetes et centrifuges qui  accompagnent le vertige. Les  resultats d'un  tel  exercise  sont  ir­ reguliers  et  la  profondeur de  la  medita­ tion,  la  descente de  plus  en  plus  pene­  trante de !'artiste en lui-meme n'entra:ine  pas  forcement une  meilleure reussite,  le dessin devient un  mode  de connaissance. Cependant cette  experience  nous  revele combien   est   riche   l'imaginaire,  la  per­ sonne profonde de !'artiste, combien  il est sur  et  maitre de  sa  technique. C'est   un
beau  livre.


J .-H. LETOURNEUX, Pylones. VLB Editeur, n.p.

LeTourneux poete  dont  la voix provient des chantiers a su, pour  nous y faire pene­ trer,  pour  nous faire  partager pleinement, brutalement aussi  ses experiences  et  leur realite, choisir  la  hauteur, la  force  qu'il  fallait  a son  ecriture. Les pylones situent  son  recueil  mais  ils sont  aussi !'armature ( la  structure)  dure,  roide,  froide,  haute, hautaine meme  de son oeuvre,  ils l'enca-

16o
 drent  et   en   constituent  l'intertexte  de meme  que  ceux  qui  s'elevaient a !'entree des   temples   egyptiens.   D'ou   l'exotisme, d'ou parfois   de  trop  somptueuses  meta­ phores,  d'ou  une  poesie qui  par moments peut   sembler  artifi.cielle.   Seules   conve­ naient  pour   se  faire  ecouter sur  un  tel
sujet   a  partir d'un  tel  lieu  et  d'un  tel
milieu -et  sa crain te s'exprime ici et  la
dans  son recueil: "Mere, oui  je suis la, l'etranger.   N'arriverai   jamais" -!'elo­ quence,  la   fulgurance de   l'epique  que rien  ne  limite  ni  dans  le  temps  ni  dans  l'espace. Ce  n'est  qu'a  cette hauteur que LeTourneux  pouvait  donner libre  cours a  son  lyrisme,  a  son  spleen  mais  aussi  a
!'expression de la souffrance physique  et morale associee  de  si  pres  aux   rigueurs
d'une nature indomptee d'une solitude totale,   a }'expression  de  !'amour, de  l'a­
mitie  et  de  l'ivresse  de  la  reussite  liee  a la  perseverance, a  !'endurance.  Peut-on
regretter un lexique  trop  riche, un style parfois  compasse?


CLAUDE  BEAUSOLEIL,   La  Surface  du   paysage.
VLB  Editeur, n.p.

C'est  par la nouveaute de son ecriture que
!'oeuvre de Beausoleil s'imposa, avec celle de  Des  Roches,  comme   une  oeuvre  d'a­ vant-garde.
En effet, devant ces "textes et poemes" ou  la  clarte succede  a l'hermetisme, une certaine linearite a une  dislocation  syn­
taxique complexe, le  lecteur  se  retrouve devant  un   "paysage" aux   aspects   con­ trastes  et  varies. Ceci  se reflete  d'ailleurs aussi  au  niveau  de  la  typographic. Reste a  savoir   si  seule  a  change "la  surface" done  l'apparence du  recueil,  ou bien si le texte,   le   contenu   lui-meme  a   change. C'est   bien,  nous  semble-t-il, ce  dont   le titre  du  recueil, entre autres choses, veut s'assurer, c'est que "la surface" et le "pay­ sage"  ne  font  qu'un de  meme  que  l'ap­ parence  du   texte  et  le  texte.  Et  on  re­ marque tout d'abord que ce sont les textes

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



les plus lisibles qui  s'imposent au  lecteur. Serait-ce que  l'efficacite de ces sequences vient de la difficulte de ce qui precede? L'auteur ayant alterne du  lisible a  l'her­ metique,  on   pourrait  dire   que  les  mo­ ments  lisibles s'enrichissent de la  tension exigee  par  la complexite du  passage  an­  terieur. Une  chose est certaine, le lecteur  derange par   la  difficulte, se sentira   de­ range   cette  fois  par  la  facilite pour  de­ couvrir que "rien n'est  moins certain que ce  que  l'on  semble   avoir   cerne," ''l'ap­ parence est peut-etre la forme  la moins palpable." Ainsi est mise en doute lacon­ ception que  nous  faisions  de  lisibilite,  de simplicite, de  "quotidien,"  de  "surface." Dans  cet  ouvrage, ces  moyens  d'amener le lecteur  a rornpre avec ses habitudes de lecture  sont   multiples  et   vont   du   plus subtile  au plus grossier; il cite ace propos Lyotard. A coup  sur  on se serait  passe de certaines  techniques grace   auxquelles il veut  deranger  (voir   par   exemple "poly shit   j  poly  tic") .
Son  but  c'est  du  meme  coup  de  mar­ quer  son  refus  d'une litterature et  d'une  culture devenues institution: "la  littera­ ture  releve du  savoir  qui  peut etre huma­ niste,  informatif, creatif. le  Texte lui  est un  non-su,  un  nowhere,  ce  qui  le  rend intolerable, comme  idee et comme  realisa­
tion  a tous les tenants de la mise en con­
serve  intellectuelle et  academique." Lui
veut   relcver   un   defi:    "faire  du   Texte comme  on  fait  du  ski."  Finis  le poetique et  le sacre,  la  poesie  est  le geste  le  plus trivial,  dans  la parole la plus banale, dans le fait  le plus  quotidien; tout  cela  a  une epaisseur  et  de  meme  que  notre  etre  est multiple, un  instant est  pluriel. C'est  au poete de savoir  faire  passer  le courant, de faire  en sorte  que soit possible-et Beau­ soleil cite Barthes -"le passage incongru
<<dissocie» d'un  autre  langage,  comme l'exercice d'une  physiologic  differente."
Et c'est,  dans  ce sens, la partie appelee "Angles" oil  le  travail sur  le  texte  nous semble la plus reussie, la plus innovatrice.
 L'ecriture y coule  claire  et  pleine  de  se­ renite,  elle met  cote  a  cote,  mais comme  sortant d'un  meme   elan,   l'acte  et  son verso,  son  double, le corps  et  ses  gestes, couches,   "angles" multiples d'un  meme instant, richesse  et  complexite de  l'ephe­ mere,  "la  scene  se passe au  present  plu­  riel."


PAUL  CHAMBERLAND,  L'Enfant  dore. L'Hexa-
gone,  $7·95·

Paul  Chamberland devait,  en  1981,  pu­ blier  trois  recueils   de  textes  poetiques: L'Enfant  dore,  Emergence  de  l'adulten­ fant et Le Courage de la  poesie  fragment d'art  total.  II est a  noter  toutefois  que  le poete   a  eu   soin   d'integrer  au   titre   de L'Enfant dare  la date  de sa composition, d'ou   son  importance. Cette   importance est-elle  liee  aux   evenements  politiques, sociaux,  internationaux ou  plutot   a   un fait personnel? Connaissant !'engagement total de Chamberland, on devine que tout cela est present dans ce besoin de circons­ crire   L'Enfant  dare.  Cependant  si deja,  dans   Demain  les  Dieux   naitront   et   Le Prince  d.e  Sexamour il avait  annonce la fin de  la  Civilisation dite  moderne, de  la Culture  (avec un  grand   C), de  la  Ma­ chine   antisociale   et,   prenant   le   role du   prophete,  predit  l'avenement  de   la "Sphere   et    Civilisation  harmonique," dans  L'Enfant dore,  il occupe  carrement la place du medium: "je suis un relais specifie,"  "je me decouvre etre  le  labora­ toire  d'une specifique  mutation,"  "je   ne suis  que   ce   milieu   fertile," de  celui   a travers  lequel s'accomplira le passage.  En effet  c'est  "Transmigraphie" qui  conduit a L'Enfant  dore:  "du  futur fonds sur moi irresistible Enfant dore  je suis ta  proie  ta nourriture  ton  sol placentaire ta  materia prima ta gangue," ecrit  le poete. On  peut  done etre  tente de  lire  un  poeme  intitule
Appel  d'Akenaton a Smenkhare a travers
les  etoiles,  comme  le  message  livre   "A
Paul" et qu'il  doit  transmettre. II  prend

I6I

BOOKS IN REVIEW



la  releve,  il est  le "mi" qui  perrnettra  le retour   de  "!'Enfant  dove,"  du   "peuple dieu"  sur  terre  afin  que  s'etablisse  l'har­
monie.  "0 Pharaon, mon  coregent  I rna coessence  en  un  seul  peuple-dieu  I  re­ viens .a sol  I les temps sont  accomplis   I tout  est pret  I renais  de  moi, enfin,  moi, ta mere  male fourrni-reine, 1 corps delec­ table,  /  preuve   du  dieu,  I parais!" con­
tinue  le  poete  dans  ce  meme  poeme.  Il nous  dira  dans  Emergence de l' Adult.en­ fant  que  l'ecriture  poetique  vehicule  un mode  symbolique et  intuitif,  parfois   ly­ rique,  la vision du  nouvel  amour." Et en effet  dans  L'Enfant   dare  le  choix  qu'il  fait  de  la  religion  de  l'Egypte  ancienne, du  tarot,  de  textes  gnostiques,  Lao-Tse, Ruzbehan,   Hermes  trismegiste   et   tant d'autres est symbolique, comme  est  sym­ bolique  le  fait   qu'il   precise  dans  ce  re­ cueil,  "<;a fait  34 ans  que  j'existe." Il est dans  la  lignee  de  ceux  qui  tenterent par leur  voix, leur  message,  de  faire  en sorte que  s'accomplisse la  revolution totale,  la metamorphose de  la  boue en  or. Et  c'est surtout les differentes formes de cette ecri­ ture-limite,    ecriture-frontiere,   ecriture­ ouverture   en   l'homme  amour,  qui   est interessante. Elle  constitue la  cornue  qui distille,  elle  tente,  ramasse,  efficace,  per­ cutante d'etre le  principe actif  et  dyna­  mique  qui ouvre sur un nouvel age amou­  reux.  Cette   ecriture  fonctionne  selon  un triple  niveau:  ecriture  poetique,  ecriture
analytique  (voir   soleil  double)  et  ecri­
ture  que  l'auteur nommera  "metagram­ mes," les citations prises a certains auteurs ayant ete  integrees a son  propre  texte.
Il  est  heureux  que  Chamberland ait reserve  les pages  theoriques pour  la  fin, on peut  ainsi  apprecier le tns
de   "Journal  d'un  intraterrestre" et   les
poemes  de  la  partie   centrale du  recueil. C'est   un   ouvrage  plein   de  lyrisme,  un recueil-somme (plutot que  synthese)   car
il correspondait a un  moment exception­
nel dans  la vie de  l'auteur et  dans !'evo­
lution  du  "Kebek." Est-ce  pour  cela qu'il
 devait   attendre  1981  pour   le  publier et sortir   la  meme   annees deux   autres   re­ cueils?

GATIEN  LAPOINTE,   Arbre-Radar. L'Hexagone,
n.p.
Il  est clair,  des le  titre-qui  n'a  rien  ni de specialement attrayant, ni de speciale­ ment    seduisant-que  le   lecteur  allait
avoir   a  vaincre  maints  obstacles.   Tout
d'abord a essayer  de  le lire,  de se le lire,
on  sent  monter  une  certaine irritation:
les  mots  semblent  avoir   ete   jetes  pele­
mele,  dans   une  phrase  fort  complexe, a
la syntaxe disloquee et pontuee de blancs,
de  tirets  et  ou  l'on  cherche, tres  souvent en vain,  le sujet  des quelques verbes qui y apparaissent. On   remarque  ( mais  com­ ment  ne pas les remarquer, illes a mis en relief)   les jumelages du type "tigeltigre," on peut  en denombrer des dizaines et cela tourne tres  vite  au  procede. C'est   done  ailleurs que  dans  ce  jeu  intellectuel que reside !'interet du  recueil.  D'autres points  de  repere   vont  nous   permettre de  con­ tinuer la  lecture. On   retrouve, en  effet, une  certaine  diffusion  (plutot  que   dis­ position)  du   texte  en  sequences de  lon­ gueur  variable avec une preference cepen­  dant pour  celles de 4 ou slignes. Lapointe
a  attache  une   grande  importance  a la
typographie. Au texte  en caracteres regu­
liers se melent quelques passages  en itali­ ques,  qui  accentuent  ou   developpent  le theme  evoque precedemment, et quelques voyelles  ou  mots   brefs   (mots  clefs)   en majuscules  alors  qu'au centre du  recueil l'auteur a  place   toute   une  sequence en caracteres  majuscules. Serait-ce  vers  ce centre que convergerait !'ensemble?
DE    LA    BOUCHE  D'OMBRE ••. JE   PRESSE   LA MAIN   DE    MON  ENFANCE  j'ECOUTE    BATTRE LA  VIOLENTE  EMOTION
ecrit Lapointe. Et aussitot  retentit en nous
le poeme  de Hugo, "Ce  que dit la Bouche d'ombre." Tandis que Hugo ecrivait  dans son  poeme:
Sache ...
Que  tout  a confiance  en la creation;

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Et  l'oreille pourrait avoir  sa  vision, Car  les choses  et  l'etre ont  un  grand
dialogue.
Tout parle ....

Lapointe dans  un communique de presse sur Arbre-Radar demande: "N'entend-on pas encore,  des fois, des matieres d'arbre, d'ours ou d'astre grouiller et grogner  dans notre  chair?" Il est lui aussi venu "ecou­ ter"   ( ce  verbe   revient   souvent  sous  sa plume) ' reentendre, capter et retransmet­ tre  ses visions, car  il s'agit  davantage de visions  que   d'images.   Bien   vite  on   est certain    qu'il    est    question   aussi   d'un "corps-radar." De "LA BOUCHE o'oMBRE,"  "gueule  vorace,"   "l'egarant  de   jouir"  monte  aussi  "une  vapeur monstrueuse": "ces  tenailles  qui  tetent  par  coups  tout  le poitrail rotant  rut  du  vin  de  l'ancestrale grotte ... ," la chair  y est noircie  de ''l'an­ cienne   nuit"  et  c'est  de  cet  "effroi," de cette  "extatique Chimere" que  Lapointe tente  de  la  liberer. Ce  parallele ne  veut
pas reduire le poeme  de  Lapointe a celui
de  Hugo,  au  contraire, ce  n'a  ete  qu'un
moyen  d'en  decouvrir Ia  richesse.  Pour "acquitter" le corps  de "l'ancienne nuit," il le dira  comme  si enfourcher Pegase  et le laisser piaffer,  pousser le dire  jusqu'au paroxysme, exacerbation des pouvoirs  du
langage, c'etait  le  blanchir,  l'amener  a
aspirer    au    plaisir    qui   "desentenebre."
"C'est le songe,"  nous dit  Lapointe, c'est le sien  et  c'est  sa  raison  d'etre; "c'est  le son  j'E,"  ou "E  est blanc," nous dit Rim­
baud,  car  de  Nerval   a Yves Bonnefoy  en
passant   par   Rimbaud, le  poete  a  choisi
ses relais.
C'est   une  oeuvre  qui  avance en  devo­ rant,  en effet  si !'on  est pris par  le  texte, c'est  par  sa  voracite. C'est  la  que  reside l'efficacite  de  l'ecriture de  Lapointe.
On  aimerait noter  que Beausoleil  a cite
Hugo en  exergue et  Lapointe l'a  mis au centre   de  son  oeuvre,   c'est  que  l'un   et
!'autre ont   voulu   aller   "au-dela,"  faire
apparaitre les multiples facettes  d'un meme  instant et  degager le  corps  de  la
 conception simpliste,  monolithique qu'on s'en fait pour  en jouir dans sa complexite.
DAVID F. ROGERS


HERACLITEAN KNOWLEDGE

AL   PURDY,  Bursting Into  Song:  An   AI  Purdy
Omnibus. Black  Moss, $9·95·
HENRY  MOSCOVITCH,  New   Poems. Mosaic/ Valley  Editions,  $7-95·
BILL  HOWELL,  In a White Shirt. Black  Moss,
$7·95·
HENRY   BEISSEL,    Cantos North, with    litho­ graphs  by  Friedheim  Lach.  Ayorarna   Edi­ tions,   $9o.oo   (six   folios);   luxury  edition,
$300,00.

IT IS A   STRANGE  and  sad  thing  that, in the early  198o's, a  poet  in his mid-sixties as near  to the Canadian bone as AI Purdy should   not  be  able  to  bring  out  a  Col­ lected   Poems  that   would   allow   readers and students to follow, between  one set of covers, his development and  his achieve­ ment  seen as a whole.  But  the economics of  large-scale commercial  publishing - and  especially the high cost of printing­ seem  to make  this  impossible. Such  vol­ umes  are   becoming   much   more   infre­  quent  than  in  the  past.  The  only  recent retrospective collections that  come imme­ diately   to  my  mind   are   those  of   F.  R. Scott   and   of  Robin   Skelton, the   latter brought  out   by   a   westem   publishing house, Sono Nis, that  has close links with its printer.
Purdy's    new   volume,    Bursting    Into
Song,  draws  attention to this situation. It is called  an  "AI  Purdy  Omnibus," but  in fact  it  is only  the  back  half  of  the  bus. As Purdy  explains in  his "A  Sort  of  In­ tro.,"  Bursting  Into  Song  has  to be  read "with   an  earlier  selection,   Being   Alive, plus another book called The Stone Bird" to  appreciate "what I  think   is  my  best work."   Being   Alive,   which   is  subtitled "Poems  1958-78," was  itself  a  reflection

BOOKS IN REVIEW



of publishing tendencies as early  as I978, for instead of reprinting all of Purdy's poems from volumes that were quickly running out  of  print,   McClelland & Stewart offered  merely  a selection.  It was a good selection,  sensitively done  by Den­ nis Lee  and  including all the spectacular virtuoso poems  and  much  else, but  quite  obviously, like many  of his readers,  Purdy  is not content.
Bursting  Into  Song  is designed  to  fill the  gap.  It does  not  complete the  whole range  of Purdy's poems  up  to The  Stone Bird  (his  most  recent  collection)  but  it does  make  up  for  the  absences  in  Being Alive  by  restoring all  the  poems  which Purdy  thinks  worth  preserving and  which Dennis Lee, for spatial or critical reasons,
decided   not  to  use. Its  arrangement,  by
Marty Gervais who  runs  the Black  Moss Press  which  publishes   the   book,  is,  as Purdy  says,  "much less deliberate and studied," but  that  is hardly  likely to dis­ turb  readers who  will  again  have  access to good  (and  not always so good)  poems from  out-of-print collections  that Lee did not  choose  to select.
Purdy suggests  that,  because  so  many of the "lighter" poems were included in Being  Alive,  Bursting  Into  Song  is  "a more   serious  collection,  not   to  say  sol­ emn," but  in fact  the  sardonic comedian is freely  at  work even  here.

"Bend over,"
the  doctor said
(he  was  an  extremely treacherous person), and stabbed me  with   a
pickle  fork  and
 Alive. Dennis Lee  picked  off  the  best  of the erotic  poems and  of the moving poems of historic  nostalgia and  topographical passion.  There is  nothing here  as  spec­ tacularly good  or  as  lyrically  moving  as "The  Country North of  Belleville"  and  "The Necropsy  of  Love," as "The Cari­ boo   Horses"  and    "Arctic  Rhododen­ drons." But  there are  the poems of direct  human   contact    like   "Joe  Barr"   and  "Percy  Lawson," compassionate and  em­ pathetic, and often  in  their own  way ten­ derly  comic,  like  "Washday," in  which  Purdy  remembers the  slightly  ambiguous encounter on a remote Arctic island when he helped an  Inuit woman  with  her daily chores.
In  most of these poems  there  is a sense of probing awareness which  Purdy recog­
nizes  when  he  talks  of  "the   pure   joy of
some  discovery  in a  poem,  feeling  a  per­ sonal  euphoria flow from  me to the poem and  back  to me,"  and  which gives its own exploratory character to his work.  When  I look at many of Purdy's poems in terms of their  content, I am  reminded of prose analogies - the    sharply     observational narratives  of   Victorian   naturalists  like Darwin and Bates or of early investigators of  urban  low life  like  Thomas Mayhew. Purdy's  triumph is  perhaps to  have  re­ versed  the  direction Herodotus initiated when  he  brought the  matter of epic  po­ etry  into   prose; he  has   transferred  the matter of anthropological and  historical prose  into poetry,  and  has  done  so with an  unusual combination of concrete  vis­
ualization   and    natural  euphony. The

grinned for  very  joy-
("Miss Adventure")

for  nobody makes  friends with  an  onion except another one
and then they  don't trust  each  other like  two  skunks
("Helping My Wife  Get  Supper")

Still,  I think  one can say that  in Burst­ ing  Into  Song,  despite   the  lyricism  im­ plied   in  its  title,  a  more   demotic  and  didactic  Purdy   appears   than   in   Being
 strange  lurid   portrait  of  Purdy   on   the cover  of  Bursting  Into  Song  suggests  a man  in vatic  trance, and  there  is in fact a shamanic feeling  about much  of this po­ etry,   a  sense  of  common  reality   trans­  figured,   which I  think   explains  the  way Purdy  can  touch  our  feelings  by  evoking some  banal situation in  common  speech,  but common speech  given  the rhythms of incantation.   Certainly,   equipped   with

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



both Bursting  Into  Song  and Being  Alive, the reader will possess most of Purdy's memorable poems and hear most   of  his various voices.
Purdy's considerable production of po
ems -he  estimates that  those  he  thinks worth preserving would fill a 300-page volume-is the  result of years  of contin­ uous  writing, and of  publishing what he writes in  collections issued  at fairly short intervals. Few  years  pass  without another Purdy  volume coming either  from  Mc­ Clelland & Stewart or  from  some  more  private press.   In  comparison  with  him,  Henry  Moscovitch and  Bill  Howell  are  extraordinary slight  producers  and   can­ not   be   regarded   as   poets  in   the   same  devotedly  professional sense.  New  Poems is  the  first   book   Henry  Moscovitch has published since The Laughing Storm ap­ peared in  1961.  Bill  Howell's In  a White Shirt   follows eleven  years   after  his  only other volume, The Red  Fox, which came out  in  1971.
Bill Howell has spent the intervening years  mainly in  radio production, but  his poetry carries few  signs  of  this  vocation, and   indeed has  the  tone  and attitude of escape from mundane considerations that might justify  one  calling it Sunday poetry, a series  of small releases from routine into fantasy and nostalgia. There  is  no  great sense  of  commitment, but   one   is  aware here  and there of feelings of  warmth and even  regret for  the  sites of the  poet's Maritimes childhood:

And  here
We  still  are,  where this  place is amazingly as  it  was  once,   or  was  it
'twice,  we  went  here  anyway, then as  now,   whatever  the   weather.

There is never the  kind of complex o session with  place and time, with personal experience reaching into tradition, that inspires the   elaborate structures of   Pur­ dy's  poems of  Loyalist Ontario. The tone  of  Howell's poetry is simple  and muted, given  to descriptive image rather than to
 metaphor, and always returning, as  if  to an  emblem of escape, to  the  figure  of the fox  as  trickster.
To see, after all  these  years,  a new book by Henry Moscovitch is a reminder of the days when  Montreal was a great centre of English poetry in  Canada. The historic magazines published there,  Preview  and First  Statement  and   Northern Review, are  more than a quarter of  a century in the  past; many of  the  poets  who  made Montreal such  a centre in  the  194o's and
195o's  are  either dead, like  A. M.  Klein
and  Patrick Anderson, John Sutherland and John Glassco, or  departed, like  P. K. Page  and  Irving Layton and Leonard Cohen. Of   the  few  who   have remained
-F. R.  Scott and Louis Dudek among them-Henry   Moscovitch lapsed into the  longest  silence, at  least  so far  as pub­ lication is concerned, though there seems to  be  internal  evidence in   New   Poems that he has been  quietly writing all along. In    a  rather   fulsome  prefatory  poem, "Stanzas to H.M.," Leonard Cohen cred­ its  Moscovitch with   writing "the  bravest songs  we  have of  loss and love's  repair," and   certainly loss  and   the  endurance of loss are  poignantly present in his work.  It is  the   peculiarly  compelling  work   of  a man  who  has remained privately devoted to his art  over the  years  without the sense of  a need  to  offer  his  heart immediately to  the  public,  a poet to  whom Cohen's description later in  his  dedication, "well­ ordered  and   alone,"   seems   clearly  to apply.
Reading Moscovitch's poems I am  re­
minded, by  their  form as  well   as  their mood, of  those  modest fountains in  Jap­ anese  hermitages  in   which  a   thin,   un­ broken and oil-smooth jet  of  water falls  into  the mirror of an  old  stone basin.  The poems are   arranged in   narrow  columns
-like water  jets-with  lines  rarely  of more than  four syllables, and   in  feeling they   have   the   cool   certainty  of   falling water,  and  the    Heraclitian   knowledge

BOOKS IN REVIEW



that   it  is  never   the  same  water   or,  by analogy,  the  same  human situation.
The days  go  by like  swift running water.
I am  disturbed
in  my  little shell.
I miss  you
but  it's  not  that as I  can  hardly remember your  name. The years
have  erased  you
from  my  memory. I hardly know what to  call  you: force or  destiny. When you  come back  you  will
find  me lost
in the  fields of another.

Cantos  North  by  Henry   Beissel,  an­ other   Mont:-eal   English   poet  who  is  a good  deal  more  productive than  Mosco­ vitch,   is  an   elaborate   example   of  the printer's craft,  handset,  assembled  in six folios  of  two  cantos  each,  and   accom­  panied   by  lithographs "about Canada" by  Friedheim Lach; there  is even  a lux­ ury  edition  of  twenty   copies  priced   at
$3oo.oo.  After  the cool economy and cer­ tainty  of Moscovitch's tiny lyrics,  Cantos North   seems  like  a  sprawling  and   un­ focused work. Of course, its subject-the vast  untidy   land   of   Canada-has  the same  attributes, but  one of the functions of  poetry   is  to  draw  a  pattern  out   of chaos.  For  me  the  pattern that  emerges  out  of Beissel's  poem  is neither clear  nor very  significant.  Frank Scott,  in  a  eulo­ gistic  note,  describes  Cantos  North  as an "epic," but  it  has  none  of  the  epic's re­ lentless narrative movement, and  one can best consider it as a series of  geohistorical odes,  devoted  to  the  life of  man   in  the great   Canadian  wilderness.   Examining the work  in detail, one finds clear  lyrical passages,   striking   images,   but   the   real uniting sweep  is lacking,  so that  even the virtues  of  the  poem  tend  to  become  im-

J66
 pediments. Unlike Purdy,  it seems to me, and  unlike  Pratt also, Beissel has not suc­ ceeded  in  bettering those  who  have  pre­ ceded   him  in  prose.  As an  evocation of the experience of the north, Cantos  North falls   short   of  Hearne's   or  Thompson's original narratives or, for  that  matter, of Donald Creighton's  mytho-historical  in­ terpretations of   them.   Pound set  a  bad example when, in his Cantos, he  tried  to do in verse  what could  be better  done  in prose,  and  Henry  Beissel has  been  influ­ enced  in more  than  his title  by the  Pisan master.
GEORGE WOODCOCK


POETRY & PROSE

GEORGE  BOWERING,   Particular  Accidents:  Se­ lected  Poems, ed.  with   an  intro.  by  Robin Blaser.  Talonbooks, $5.95.
FRANK   DAVEY,  The  Arches:  Selected  Poems,
ed.  with  an  intro. by bpNichol. Talonbooks,
$4.95·
FRED WAH,  Loki  is Buried  at Smoky Creek: Selected Poems, ed.  with  an  intro. by George Bowering. Talonbooks, $4.95.
BILL BISSETT, Beyond  Even Faithful Legends: Selected Poems  1962-76, ed.  bill  bissett,  in­ tro.  by Len   Early. Talonbooks, $5·95·
BP    NICHOL,    As    Elected:  Selected  Writing
1962-1979, ed.   bp  Nichol   and   Jack David,
intro. by  Jack David. Talonbooks, $5.95.

TALONBOOKS' SERIES of selected  writings is a potpourri of poetry  and  prose, picture and    sound    poems,    drawings,  doodles, song-chants, "konkrectisms" and   a  host of uncategorizable works. Each  editor has had  free  rein  in  the  compilation of  his own volume  and  each,  thankfully, has considered carefully the implications of juxtaposition:  the  essentially  interpreta­ tive  act   of  anthologizing.  The result   is something of  a  very  mixed  bag.
On  one hand  we get a welcome  variety within an  overall  series format (there are no consistent/perspective principles of selection) .  Individual introductions for

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the  most  part are  critical and  intelligent, outlining the basis of selection,  a brief biography,  and   the  literary  significance of the  poet.  Best of all,  each  volume  has a comprehensive bibliography which is, most  notably   in  the  case  of  Bissett  and Nichol,  a scholarly contribution of the highest  sort.
On  the  negative side we have  rather a large dollop of hype, jargon, and bathetic platitudes, especially  in  the  introductions to Wah,  Bowering, and  Nichol.  Consider for example Bowering on Wah:

Wah's poems   tangle with   the   phenomenal, the  first  act   of  noticing something, &  they try  to signify  it  without overusing "society's"
1name for  it,  which  latter is next  to be peeled away  after we  have  discarded abstraction &
description, &   their  simi-lies. In   the   poem "Here," we  catch the  poet's attention as  it is  caught,  attention  being for   Wah   more
!important than reflection. Thus rime is more important  than  reason.

Rhetorical?    Deliberate    overstatement? We've   not,   it  seems,  heard  the  last  of Martinus Scriblerus or  Charles Kinbote. But critical bathos aside,  the series is a significant one,  particularly as it  gathers in  one   convenient  place   representative
selections  by  three  of  the  co founders Tish. Although each  is decidedly an indi­ vidual   "voice," the  present  volumes ac­ centuate  by  proximity the   connections, inter-lacings, the  networks  that  join par­  ticipants into  a coherent  group. In  every case  there  is the obsession  with  language as  political   tool:   inherited  verbiage   as ideology,   as  imposed,  and   therefore  as suspect  idiom  to be treated with  critical dubiety.
Robin   Blaser  has  made an  intelligent choice  from  Bowering's voluminous  out­ put,  using stuff  from  as far  back  as  1961 as  well  as   (to   name a  few) ,  Baseball, Autobiology,  Curious,  and   A  Short  Sad Book.   bp   Nichol   has   thoughtfully  ex­ cluded  Frank Davey's pre-1970 works be­ cause  "the published  work  from  1970 on is vastly superior & gives a  much  clearer
 picture of  the  author's intent & power." Hence, excerpts from   (among others) Weeds,  Arcana,  and  War  Poems. As an anthology Bowering's Wah  is the most balanced  of the  three,  starting with Mountain, progressing   through  each   of the  subsequent collections (including  su­ perb  extracts from  Pictograms)  and  con­ cluding,   though not  always  wisely,  with some  previously  unpublished  poems.
By far  the  most  successful  vo1umes are
those self-edited by Bill Bissett and  bp Nichol.  Not only do we get an interesting insight   into   what   each   artist   considers worth  re-presenting, but  also an astonish­ ing  gaze  into   the  range,  versatility   and power  of  two  "renaissance" poets.  Len Early,  whose introduction is the  clearest,  least  cliche-ridden, and   most  cogent   of the  lot, sensibly  remarks of  Bissett  (and  it might  also  be said  of Nichol)  :

Bissett's  poetry was so closely  identified with the    political/cultural    convulsion  of    the
196o's  that even  its  admirers were  bound to wonder how  many  of  its  features would  re­ tain  interest as  the  years  passed.  This  selec­ tion  should reassure them. In the  first  place,  it  will remind us that his  poetry had  deeper sources  than topical issues  and  literary fash­  ion.   In   the   second, it  shows  that  his   best work   has   always    been   charged  with    the energy   and    formal   ingenuity  of  enduring art.

Further along:

Objections  to   avant  garde  poetry  in   the
·name  of   "the  tradition" ... usually    imply either an  undeveloped or  a fixated aesthetic sense.

These  two  volumes  set  out   to  unfix,  to loosen up  those  hardened aesthetic arter­ ies. Bissett offers a large selection, running back  and  forth throughout  virtually the entire canon, incorporating voices "erotik, politikul,  humorous, lyrikul, sound-vizual, narrative,  meditative,  konkreet, collage,  nd song-chaats." Nichol  opts  for  a "defi­ nite  pattem" and   groups   his  works  ac­ cording   to    formal   properties    (visual  poems, sound   poems,  prose,  and  so on) .

BOOKS IN REVIEW



In  both  cases  the  intention is the  same: to  share   the  vision,  the  energy,  the  de­ light,  the moment. From  Nichol's "Maps" here  published for  the  first time:

a  trance
your  eyes wide  open  or

,a heightening
letting defenses drop opening the  senses up  & out
widening into   the  wide  world

No "selected writings" ever convey  the essence of a movement or group  or indi­ vidual oeuvre. But the anthologist's juxta­  positions  can  provide a convenient point­ of-entry,  a critical  indicator of what  any given  accomplishment is about.

GARY  BOIRE


FOR WORDS

ARTHUR  ADAMSON, Passages of Winter. Turn­
stone, n.p.
MICHAEL  BULLOCK,  Lines  in  the  Dark  Wood.
Third Eye  Publications Inc., $7.25.
STEPHEN  GUPPY,  Ghostcatcher. Oolichan
Books, n.p.
KEVIN   ROBERTS,  Stonefish   and  Other   Poems.
Oolichan Books, n.p.

NATURE  AND  SEASONAL  CHRONOLOGY have long served as metaphor for  the different  stages  of  man   throughout  lit­ erary  history. The classical view holds the metaphor as  instrument  of   clarification to  reveal   a  reality   of  a  world  which  is
basically  unchanging. Linear time,  peri­
odicity with its own particular imagery, settings, and spatial configurations, evolves towards one temporal climax  of winter  and  death. But  there is also a more romantic view  of  a  cyclical  process  as­ sociated  with  the seasons where although man   exists  within   a  temporal  structure beyond  his control he holds the power  to move  through cycles where  vertical  time becomes   a   fallacy.   Arthur   Adamson's

168
 Passages of Winter is a collection of poems where   the  cyclical   overcomes  the  tem­ poral  and  the  dark  images  of  winter give way  to  spring   and  summer  solstice.  Ad­ amson's theme is not  new -a fact  he  is well aware of-but in the face of a basi­ cally   unchanging   world   he   recognizes each  individual's responsibility to impose  himself  and  creatively adapt  and   shape  his own:

in  my  acute sameness and difference I
call
my sameness nature's gift  and  curse  ...

each human a monster offspring	lover 	flame
of a creating mind that no god  could  stamp.

In  reading Passages of Winter I was  re­ minded of Coleridge's theory  of the imag­  ination which  holds  the  power  of  recon­ ciliation   between     opposites:    sameness with  difference,  the  old  with  the  fresh, nature, that   "primal  genial  artist" with man's creativity. It is  refreshing to  read  of winter as an integrative passage which intensifies  the living  span  instead of sym­ bol of  alienation and  fragmentation. I do think, however, that  the link between  na­  ture  and   Adamson's  poetic   imagination could  have   been  stronger had  he  left  a more   individualistic stamp.  Also,  many of the illustrations at  the end of the poems should have been left out. They tend to overstate and   undercut the  poetry.
In Lines  in  the  Dark  Wood,  Michael
Bullock  writes  "how  tempting to seek solace  I in  despair" and   his  latest  book
is indeed  a struggle against loneliness, ad­ vancing age, death of loved ones, the dark  wood  a  state of  mind   so  threatening it can  never   be  considered  labyrinthine or exploratory with  hope  of  light  at the end.  Bullock,   who   is  an  artist  as  well  as  a writer, fills the page as he would  a canvas.
Images of  "tall green   ferns  I looking askance I from  one  red  tulip  eye" trans­
form   innocent  gardens into   forests  and
jungles   which   recall   exotic   settings   of
Rousseau   paintings, as  does  the  photo-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



graph of  the  writer   on  the  back  cover, peering through broad-leaved foliage. His impression of  a setting sun -"a  splodge
of orange ink  I soaks slowly away into the
blue-grey  blotter I of the evening sky"­
could  also have  been  Monet's. Several  of
the   images   are   beautifully sharp  ("the heron I dying  on its perch  of bone") but
eventually they  all veer  inward where  all
is tangle and  web  and  "only   the  thorns that  embrace us I console us with  the knowledge I that  our  blood  is still warm.
... " Even   the  last  poem,  "Paris in  the Rain," one  of  the  three   poems  of  "Re­ birth," ends on a note of defeat and  artis­
tic impotence: "rapacious clouds   I have bitten   off  the  finger   I that   could   part
this curtain...." Unfortunately  Bullock's lines, those "needles of light" required to gather his dark  thoughts, are never  bright enough  to  pierce  the  dark   mood  of  this book, and  both  writer  and  reader  are left in  the  dark.
Ghostcatcher is an appropriate title for what   I believe  is  Stephen  Guppy's first book  of  poems.  While   it  is not  inacces­ sible, it is elusive, as Guppy's voices either  "hover in  doorways like  birds,'' "gleam and  fade,'' or are  "lost  in forests."  There are  poems  about  the anima, female  per­ sonification of  male  unconscious  usually identified with  vagueness and   the  forces of   darkness,   about  men  who    have drowned   chasing  dreams,  and   children who  burst  into  flame.  The images  do  not merge  as much  as blur  and  dissolve  into a dreamy  quality luring the  reader  away from  any sense of reality.  To  add  to this dreamy  quality, many  of  the  poems  read as sing-songs. Lines are metrically divided into  equal parts-which  is almost  never encountered  in   poetry    anymore-and while  rhythm may  reinforce content, in this case it only serves  to call attention to itself  and   becomes   forced   and  monoto­ nous. The poem  which  stands out  is "Oc­ tober   Turn,'' where  Guppy's  clear   lan­  guage  stems from the everyday  and  grows
 into   wider  but   never   careless   meaning, and  the rhythm, quiet  and internal, moves with  a pulse  of its own.
"Stonefish,'' the   title  poem   of  Kevin
Roberts's sixth  book  of  poetry,  Stonefish and Other Poems, is based on elements of Gauguin's life  in  the  South Pacific.  The relationship between  despair and  creativ­ ity continue<> to be  the  centre of  modern art  and  there  is perhaps no finer example than  Paul  Gauguin to personify  the artist  as romantic symbol. The long poem  of 35 pages  attempts  to  capture  the  complex relations  of the artist  caught between  na­  ture  and  culture, the ideological and  the traditional,  desire  and  some   forbidding governing law.  No  longer   able   to  live within   the  confines  of  European values,
Gauguin sought  to trade the "white I celluloid  collars  tight  I black  weave  I of his coat" for "this  place  I where  all things curved   I bright   as  vahines' hips."  The
trade-off,  which  is never  achieved, proves to be  destructive. Behind   the  bright  col­ ours,  the  sensuality,   beauty,   lurks  Gau­
guin's  demon,  his guilt: "the  stonefish   I
spines flared  upon  its I back  I awaits  the dancing I foot."
While I found  Roberts's poetry  very competent I kept  hoping for  a language that   would  transcend  the  familiarity  of his  theme.  Gauguin may  not  have  been able  to solve  the  tensions  of his  personal life  either   in  Europe  or   in   the   South Pacific but he was the cause of a great moment  of liberation in the history of Western  Art.  He  was one  of the  first  art­ ists  to  risk  his  medium,  colour,  as   an expressive end in itself instead of a means  of describing aspects of the natural world. While  Roberts understands this  in  Gau­ guin  he seems reluctant to take any  risks with his own art.  It seems that most writ­  ers, unlike  most  modern  artists,  have  not yet  grasped   the  significance of  thinking about  their subject  on the basis of literary  practice instead  of neurosis.
There is  no  finer  example of  artistic

169

BOOKS IN REVIEW



practice as end  in itself than  Gauguin's Vision after  the  Sermon   where  two  dis­ tant  figures,  Jacob  and  the  Angel, strug­  gle  against  a  background  of   red.  This  background thrusts  itself  forward and  be­ comes   the   subject   of   the   painting.  In view  of  this  masterpiece  it's  difficult  to convince   oneself   of   what   Roberts  de­ scribes as "the great  poison of Gauguin's mind."  For in  the  final  analysis  (and   to quote  Roberts quoting Gauguin) "seul  le travail  /  explique l'homme."

LOLA LEMIRE-TOSTEVIN


AQUIN EN RELIEF

RENE   LAPIERRE,  L'/maginaire  captif,   Hubert
Aquin. Quinze, $10.95·
DANS soN INTRODUCTION, Rene  Lapierre met  en  relief  ce qu'il  considere  avec per­
tinence   etre   a  Ia  source   de  Ia  ferveur
envoutee  que  !'oeuvre  d'Hubert  Aquin
suscite:   elle  est  lieu  d'un   jeu de  ressem­ blances et de sollicitations entre auteur et lecteurs.   Toutefois, avant  d'etre  lieu  de projection et  d'identification pour  le lec­ teur, !'oeuvre !'est  d'abord  pour  son  au­
teur,  ce  a tel  point   que  Lapierre  cons­
tatera: "Lire, ecrire  ne constituent done
pas   chez   Aquin   des   actes   libres,  mais plutot les simples episodes d'une quete  de Ia connaissance et  de  l'identite  condam­
nee  a s'etourdir dans  ]e vertige  du  texte
speculaire." En  tant  que  reflet  de !'iden­
tification   narcissique alienante, !'oeuvre d'Aquin s'avoue  oeuvre  fermee  aux  yeux du critique, d'ou  il met en question  sa modernite. Sans   que  Lapierre se  refere
explicitement a Lacan, il saisit que !'oeu­
vre  acquinienne s'affirme  sous  sa  plume
comme   illustration  du  stade   du  miroir. Au  reste,  son  etude  de  Ia matiere  roma­ nesque,   parsemee  de   nombreuses   refe­ rences  psychanalytiques, recoupe  d'essen­ tielles  notions  lacaniennes. A ce sujet,  le titre   I'Imaginaire   captif    est   lui-meme
 frappant. Bien  que  le  projet   du  critique ne soit  pas  de  montrer Ia captivite d'un auteur et de son oeuvre  dans le registre imaginaire par  rapport au  registre  sym­ bolique,  il  n'en   decoule pas  moins  qu'il  rencontrera  Ia  theorie  lacanienne de  Ia refente en  demontrant que  les narrateurs
d'Aquin, de  Prochain   Episode   a Neige
noire, se projettent constamment dans des
doubles  d'une maniere telle  que  chacun entretient  invariablement  une   relation avec  le  Meme  plutot qu'avec !'Autre. II en   resulte   que   "l'ecriture   d'Aquin  est l'exemple meme  de Ia depossession"  puis­ que  "du  roman d'espionnage au  cinema, en  passant  par  Ia  peinture, le  theatre et l'histoire, son univers culture!Ia cautionne sans  cesse;  tout  Ia complique et  lui  res­
semble  a l'infini,  mais  en  revanche, tout
Ia dispense  d'affirmer sa  propre identite,
de s'eprouver comme  differente et de pas­
ser par cette differenciation pour arriver vraiment a elle-meme, a ce qui  Ia fonde
en  depit  de ce qui  lui  ressemble."
Dans   cet  esprit,  Rene   Lapierre  prou­
vera  de  f on
que   les  prisons   des  narrateurs-ecrivains
d'Aquin sont  des  complexes culturels, d'autre part, que !'absence d'identite qui
en  est  Ia  consequence voue  l'ecriture a
devenir  principe de mort. Cette alienation
du romancier dans ses identifications ima­ ginaires et  dans   son  discours,   il  Ia  fait ressortir   en  tenant  toujours  compte   des
composantes  et   personnages  propres    a
chaque roman, ce qui donne  souvent  lieu
a d'interessantes et penetrantes reflexions. Pour   Prochain   Episode, relevons  !'oscil­
lation   d'une  ecriture  impuissante a  se
stabiliser  soit sur le registre  fictionnel,  soit
sur le registre scriptural; pour Trou de memoire, l'enfermement d'un discours qui s'avoue  fascinant   trompe-l'oeil  deploye sur  le vide,  d'ou  Ia  parole  recele  ici  l'in­ finie   valorisation  du   manque   originel; pour  I'Antiphonaire, l'ecriture-maladie en ce  sens  que  l'ecriture  s'identifie dans  ce roman-limite  au  haut  mal  qui  l'habite et

BOOKS IN REVIEW



la  possede;   pour   Neige  noire, l'apparte­ nance  simult'l.nee  a la parole et au silence d'un  texte-scenario qui  en  appelle a un sacre  a la fois divin  et diabolique, done  a
une  ambigllite qui  debouche sur !'impos­
sible   denomination.  Dans  le   chapitre
"L'oeuvre dispersee, la mort  manquante," Lapierre elaborera la mise en question initiale de la modernite de !'oeuvre. S'il range   Aquin  hors  de  la  modernite, c'est
que  son oeuvre,  a la difference des recits
ouverts et  ludiques de Sabato, Borges ou
Michaux, ne s'abandonne ni a l'incertain,
ni au  possible;  c'est  qu'elle programme et
circonscrit la lecture, qu'elle se revele in­ capable d'imitC!r, tout   en  les  detruisant, la tradition et les codes realistes qui l'ins­
tituent, a savoir  Balzac,   Holbein,  Para­
celse, Shakespeare.... Cherchant au con­
traire a  se  fonder  sur  eux,  l'imaginaire
d'Aquin demeure de ce fait  un imaginaire
captif. Ces  refiexions  du  critique sur  la modernite et  le  traditionalisme d'une oeuvre  ne sont  pas sans  inciter le lecteur
a s'interroger sur les criteres de la moder­
nite   ici  retenus:  y  aurait-il  lieu  de  les
elargir, de distinguer entre autres des va­
riantes  et  particularites nationales?
En  resume,  le  livre  de  Rene  Lapierre est  captivant  et   bien   ecrit.   Le   regard lucide   et  aiguise  que  !'auteur porte  sur
I'oeuvre   presse  le  lecteur d'Aquin  a "la
ferveur  envoutee" de  depasser cette  der­
niere.
FRAN OISE


***   Wyndham  Lewis:   Letteratura/Pittura, ed.  Giovanni Cianci. Sellerio Editore, Palermo, n.p.     By  an  irony   he  would   hardly have  ap­ preciated,  Wyndham  Lewis    has   become   an  academic commodity. Alone  of  the  great mod­ ernists, he  still  remains largely  impenetrable to the  general reader. Among writers and  painters he  commands the  respect  accorded to an  origi­ nal  mind   and   a tireless  diligence, but  he  had no imitators. A cult  of  dilettantish devotees has slowly   built   up,   yet   it   shows   no   signs  of  a capability to  provoke  a  widespread revival   of devotion  to  The  Enemy. But  for   the  scholar, Lewis   (with  his  monstrous  idiosyncrasies and
 his wayward erudition)  is a gift; students may not  like  him,  but   the  material for  an endless series   of  papers  is  there,  and   now   they   are beginning to appear abundantly, and  not  in English only.  The latest Lewis  collection, Wyndham Lewis:  Letteratura/Pittura, is  pub­ lished  in  Sicily,  and   includes  contributions in Italian, French, and   English.  It ends,  appro­ priately, with  a survey  by  Bernard Bergonzi  of other such  collections on  Lewis.  The contents are   not  uninteresting.  There are  sane   discus­ sions  of  what   Vorticism really  was,  the  con­ sensus   being   that  it   was   nothing  more   than Lewis  and  that  Pound was  an  intruder. And some  little-discussed  texts  are  considered. But one misses the  insights of fellow  writers and  of the  dwindling remnant who  knew  Lewis  him­ self.
G.W.


***   J.  L.  GRANATSTEIN, The   Ottawa   Men: The   Civil   Service   Mandarins, 1935-57.  Ox­ ford,  $24.95;  pa.    $14.95·  The   underlying thesis  of  Granatstein's book  is  that  Canadian federal administration was  shaped  by  a  small  group  of   civil    service    mandarins   operating between 1935   and    1957   who  departed  from earlier  bureaucratic   traditions   by   becoming sharply politicized and  whose  particular brand of nationalism led  them  into  alliance with  the
Liberals.  That   era    has    ended.  "Intelligent generalists, such  as  the  Ottawa Men,  came   to be  replaced  by  hordes  of  'experts.'" But   the mandarins  of   that  classic   period  helped  to transform  the   country and   to  "alter the   way Canadians  lived,    acted    and    thought   about themselves." The crucial question, "For better or   for   worse?"  is  left   virtually  unanswered, though  in   general  Granatstein  admires the men  of whom  he  writes  without disguising the thirst   for  power   that  drove   them   all.  It is  a smoothly   written  book,   but   this  quality adds to the deliberate and  deadening neutrality with which  Granatstein tends to  evade the  question
-crucial in  a  country like  Canada-of   the powers  a central bureaucracy should  wield  in  a confederal society. The  result  is  that   in  detail
-as  a series  of  portraits of individuals  encap­
sulated within  their careers-the  book  is  ef­
fective, but  as a  reflective study  of a class  and a  time  it  lacks  a clear direction.
G.W.
co





BIRNEY'S BEAR

EARLE BIRNEY's "Bear on  the  Delhi Road"1  has  long  been  a  favourite  poem of mine.  It has also been a source of some anxiety   and  frustration, because  I  have never   been  able  to  understand it  com­ pletely.  I  know  it  as  a series  of   words; I know  it  as  a structure of  images  and statement; I carry  it  in my head  and  use it  to  relate  to that world  out  there  that  surrounds this consciousness  in  here  that  I  call  me.  The  poem  says something to me  that   is  very  profound and  very  im­ portant, but I have  always failed  to pin it down and explain  exactly what  that some­ thing  is. At least  that  has been  the situa­ tion   until   now.  Recently  I   have  come upon  an  article  by  anthropologist Robin Ridingtori2 that seems  to account for  my fascination  with  Birney's   poem,  and   to illuminate the basic truth  that it expresses. Before   dealing   with   Ridington's  ideas, however, I would like to discuss the poem, setting out  my insights  and  responses  up to the point at which I used to become overwhelmed and  bewildered.
Birney tells us that  the poem developed from  an experience he had  while travel­ ling  through India in  I 958. On  the  road outside  Srinagar, he carne upon a curious  sight:  two  men   with   a  wild   bear.   Al­ though   his  encounter with  the  trio  was momentary, the experience was vivid and unforgettable. The   significance   of   the event seemed  unquestionable but also un­ graspable,  and   so  the  image   stayed   in Birney's mind  for more than a year before he  was  able  to  exorcise  it  by  putting it into  the poem  that we know  today.3  For Birney, this bear  and  these men stood  for some basic relationship between  man  and nature, for  some  fundamental process in

172
 
which  we, as civilized and  cultural beings, are  involved.
Birney  begins  the  poem  by .setting  up the scene of the men  and  the bear on the road,  the opening line presenting two important points  of reference:
Unreal     tall  as a  myth
by the  road  the  Himalayan  bear
is beating the  brilliant air
with  his crooked  arms

Besides rendering  an   effective visual image  of  the  bear,  the  words  are  loaded with  information. The bear,  exaggerated in stature and  somewhat incredible in this particular circumstance, is characterized as "unreal" and  compared to  a  "myth." The two words are  placed  strategically at either end  of  the  first  line.  They  are,  in fact,  the  poles  of  the  axis  on  which  the poem   will  tll!'n.  However, the  question arises  as to why these terms apply  to this particular bear,  who  is certainly real enough to make  his captors lively.

About  him  two men 		bare spindly  as locusts 	leap

The figures  of  speech  tend   to humanize the  animal, who  has  "arms," and  to de­ humanize the  men,  by  comparing  them to spindles and  insects. There seems to be some kind  of reversal  going on, or is it an exchange? Birney  fills in  more details  of the scene:

One  pulls  on  a  ring
in  the  great  soft  nose      His  mate
flicks      flicks with  a stick
up at the  rolling  eyes.

It is not a case of torture but  of training, as the  poem goes on  to point  out.

They   have  not  led  him  here down  from  the  fabulous  hills to this bald alien  plain
and  the  clamorous  world 	to kill but simply  to teach  him to dance.

The adjectives set up a pattern of contrast between the bear's natural home,  the hills, which   are   now  characterized  as  "fabu­ lous," and  the "clamorous world" of men,

OPINIONS AND NOTES



which  happens to be  the  bald  plain  that is alien  not  only  to  the  bear   but  to  his keepers,  who have  come  here for the pur­ pose of exploiting the  animal  by  turning him  into  a performer and   then  putting him  on  display.

They are  peaceful both 	these  spare men  of  Kashmir	and   the  bear
alive is their living 	too
If	far  on  the  Delhi way around him  galvanic they  dance it  is  merely to  wear 	wear
from   his  shaggy body  the  tranced wish  forever to  stay
only  an  ambling bear four-footed in  berries.

The   relationship  between    men   and bear  is becoming more  detailed and com­ plex.  In  order to  render the  bear  ame­  nable and  marketable, the men must wear him  down.  The  word  "galvanic," as ap­  plied  to  the  dancing  men,  is  the  key  to the  central metaphor  of  the  poem.  The  word  is  derived  from  the   name   of  the eighteenth-century inventor of the electric  cell, Luigi Galvani, who demonstrated the flow of electricity in a circuit by attaching frog legs to a wire between  zinc and  cop­ per electrodes in an  electrolite solution  of sulphuric  acid.   As  the   chemical action took  place  in  the  cell,  the  current in  the wires animated the frog legs. I  remember in my high  schoe>l physics class we did  the same  experiment, but  used a galvanome­ ter in place of the frog legs. It is Galvani's primitive model,  however,  that  underlies  the  poem's image   of   dancing men  and rearing  bear.   The   metaphoric  figure   is composed   of  two  corresponding images. On   one  hand   we  have the  allusion   to Galvani's electric cell, its frog legs dancing in response  to the current that  is flowing through the   wire.   On   the   other  hand  there   is  the  poem's image  of  two  men dancing around a bear,  connected to him by a  rope and  a stick.  The animation of the  men   is  powered  both   literally   and figuratively by the energy of the bear. The frog  legs  and   the  men  will  dance   until
 they have exhausted the charge  in their respective  energy  cells. In the case of the bear,  this  charge is  his  energetic  deter­ mination to remain a natural, wild  bear.  Depletion of this energy  will result  in the bear's domestication, after which  the men will be in control and  the bear  will dance for them. Of course,  their aim is to reduce and channel the bear's energy  rather than  to use it up completely. As the poem  men­  tions, a dead  bear will  not  provide  them with  a livelihood.
The poem  would  present few problems if it were to end  at  this point,  but  it goes on ,to comment once  again  on  the  men's activity   and   the  process  in  which   they are  involved :

It is no more  joyous for  them in  this  hot  dust  to  prance
out  of  reach of  the  praying claws sharpened to  paw  for  ants
in  the  shadows of deodars.

Birney then presents  us with  the interpret­ ing statement to which  the poem has been leading:

It is not easy  to free myth  from  reality
or  rear  this  fellow  up
to lurch	lurch with  them
in  the  tranced dancing of men.

It was here  that  my comprehension of the poem  habitually faltered. I could  ap­ preciate the  irony  that   both  the  natural wish of the bear and  the civilized dancing of men  are  characterized as  "tranced." I could  also understand that  the bear,  as a finished  product ready  for circus  tents  or carnival lots  of  Delhi,  would  at  best  be able  to "lurch" in  spastic  parody of  hu­  man  locomotion.  However, I  was baffled by  the  second  equation  that   the   poem draws  up. Although I could  glimpse  some of  the  implications of  the   metaphor,  I could  not fully appreciate the correspon­ dence  between   the  attempt  to  "free    / myth from  reality" and  the effort  to "re·ar this fellow up,"  using either or both senses of  the  verb  "rear." Clearly, my  problem

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



was  in  comprehending  the  meaning  of the  two abstract terms,  "myth" and  "re­ ality,"   in   the   concrete  context   of   the poem.
In  his  paper,   "Monsters and  the  An­
thropologist's Reality," Robin  Ridington discusses  the  relationship  between   myth and  reality  as he interprets his experience of encountering the culture and  traditions of  the  Athabaskan Dunne-za Indians of the  Peace  River  area.  The  problem  that he sert:s out  to  explain   is the existence  of the dual  and  conflicting realities of the Dunne-za and  himself.
In Dunne-za tradition, as  in  the  traditions of  many other North American native  cul­ tures, there was  a  time  when   the  relations between people   and   animals were  reversed. Giant  animals that  spoke  and  had  culture hunted  humans, who   were  their game. In these  stories  about this  time, terms  normally used   to   describe  animals   were   applied  to people, and  human  terms  were  used  for  the giant  animals.4

To  the  Dunne-za,  traditional  stories, which  we would classify as myths, are  not outside    nature   or   human   experience. The giant animals that characterize these stories  now lie buried  in the earth, giving shape  to the various  contours of the land­ scape  and   exerting an  influence  on  the lives of  people.

When Dunne-za children  are  sent   into   the bush    to   obtain   "supernatural   power" ... they   experience  directly  the   power   of  the giant animals. It is from  these  giant animals of  mythic times   that   the  Dunne-za acquire the  powers  that  enable them  to perform competently as adult members of  their  soci­ ety.  The giant animals are  encountered di­  rectly by  every   normal  person   at   the   time of the  childhood vision quest  experience, and  they  remain a constant  presence behind the appearance of everyday reality.  Through the vision  quest   people  learn to exert a control­ ling  influence  over  the  animals of  the   real world.5

Ridington goes on  to  point  out  that  the giant  animals "are  intelligible transforma­ tions  of the  natural animals  upon  which the people's  lives depend." The Dunne-za
 "live  by making contact with  animals in the bush  and  transforming them  into cul­ tural   resources,  such  as  food  and  cloth­  ing."  In  their  myths,  "where human-like animals overcome  animal-like  humans," the  pattern  is  reversed,  until   Saya,  the culture-hero-transformer, sets  things right.6 Just  as the mythic events are inter­ pretations of  the  Dunne za
trapping activities, their day-to-day activi­ ties are  concrete expressions  of  their  un­  derlying  myths.  The  unity  of  this experi­ ence  is fundamental to ,their traditional world.  The giant  animals, therefore, are not  a separate,  occult,  reality,  but  rather an  essential component of the context of Dunne-za  life.
The function of myth  as Ridington has explained it here is similar  in any culture. Myths reiterate and stabilize our historical and    traditional   relationship   with    the world  as we experience it. In the Dunne­ za situation there i's no need to "free  myth from  reality," because  the  categories are functionally inseparable;  myth  is part  of reality.  In  a less integrated culture, such as our  own,  myth  has  a more  ambiguous status. We can,  and  frequently do,  iden­  tify  and   study   it   as  an   isolated   form. Nevertheless, even for us there  are certain rudimentary mythic patterns that  remain a   presence  behind  our   everyday   lives. Many  of our  own  public  rituals, the bull­ fight,  the  rodeo,  and   the  circus,  for  ex­ ample,  act out  the residual myth of man's  triumph over,  and  domestication  of,  the wild  beasts.  This  fact   accounts  for   the lasting  appeal of  these forms of entertain­ ment  and  the fascination Birney had  with the stark example of the ritual  which  was being  prepared once  more  at  the  side of the Delhi  Road.
Let  us consider what  is going on in the poem in the light of Ridington's illumina­ tion.  The task that  the men have  laid out  for   themselves   involves   transforming  a natural item,  "an  ambling  bear   /  four­ footed    in   berries,"  into   a   commercial

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



product, the humanoid dancing bear fro which   they   will  eventually  make   t:heu living.  At  the  same   time   this  task  also involves  freeing myth  from  reality  in the sense  of  transfonning a  real  bear  into  a mythic entity: t..h.e trained bear  as symbol of man's technical domination of nature. The two transformations are  parallel  and mutually dependent:  one  motivates the process,  whereas   the  other   interp ets Unlike  the  Dunne-za, we, as analyt.J.c and specialized   beings,   have   developed  the technique of separating the  real_ and  t e mythic  here  on  this  bare  and  ahen  plam of   our   clamorous   civilization.  Birney's poem  gives us a rare  perspective on  this separation and on the nature of the myth­ making process  itself.  The  experience of comprehending the  poem  is  the  experi­  ence of standing back  to witness a parody of  our   own   technological  competence. That is why the poem is a masterpiece. In its metaphor of the  bear  and  the electric cell  in its vivid and  evocative imagery  of the \nsect-like men  and  their  exaggerated charge, in its sonorous and  ironic  play of words, the poem illustrates and  comments on the mysterious exchange which is basic to the history of civilization: man's simul­ taneous exploitation of  nature  and crea­ tion   of  myth.   Technological   man's  in­ volvement in this process parallels that  of the Dunne-za, though the outcome of our involvement is  much   less  inspiring than  theirs.  Birney,  of course, is not  endorsing the  process  or  the  particular myth  wi which    the   poem   is   concerned.  He   IS merely  laying  it  bare.
We  are  the  men  on  the  Delhi  Road, even  as  we sit  in  our  warm horuses and turn  on  the television  or fill our  cars with gasoline and  drive  to the movies. Perhaps we are  about to  watch a  bear  in  a  Walt Disney  cartoon. Anyone  for  a dance  or a trance?

NOTES

1 Ghost  in  the  Wheels: Selected Poems  (To­
ronto: McClelland & Stewart, 1977), p. 75·
 z  "Monsters and  the   Anthropologist's   Real­ ity" in  Man-like Monsters on  Trial:  Early Re'cords  and   Modern   Evidence, eds.  Mar­ gone Halpin and  Martin Ames  (Vancouv r and   London:   Univ.  of   British   Columbia Press,  1980),  pp.   17 2-86.
a   Earle Birney   commenting on   the   poem. at various  public readings, and  in conversat10n with  the  author.
4   Ridington, "Monsters," p.  173.
5    Ridington, p.  173·
6   Ridington, pp.  173-74.

LIONEL KEARNS


THREE LAMPMAN LETTERS

READERS WITH   A   PARTICULAR INTEREST in Lampman studies  will be delighted to learn  of the discovery of three letters  from the poet's father, the Reverend Archibald Lampman  to one  Joseph McNeely.  Me­ Neely,  wh se
the  poet's  aunt, was a farmer in  Lanark
county  and  discovered what  _he  thoug t were  promising rock  format.J.ons on  h1s land. He then contacted the Reverend Lampman to arrange to have  samples  of the rock assayed  to determine their value. The  letters  in question, donated to the Chancellor Norman M. Paterson Library, Lakehead University, by a direct descen­ dant   of Joseph   McNeely, and  dated re­ spectively   "Sep.  I 8th    I 886,"   "Sep..  23.
1886," and   "Sep.  I2.   I888,"  cons:tltu:e
replies to McNeely's enquiries. The earh­ est  letter   recounts the  Reverend  Lamp­ man's    visit   to   the   Geological   Survey  Office  during which   he  learned,  among other  things,  that  "they [the Survey  Of­  fice]  could  not  send  out  a man  to satisfy every  'Sporadic' attempt  that   scattered parties  might   make  to  find  metals." He goes on to note  that "'Sporadic' is a new word to me;  it means separate, isolated." The  letter  of  "Sep. 23. I886" reports  the actual   findings   of   the   assay   ("copper

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



pyrites, a useful  order  of iron") and,  like the earlier letter, contains the usual wishes to be remembered to family and various friends.   It is  the  letter   dated   "Sep.   I 2. I888" which  is the most interesting of the three.  In it ·the Reverend Lampman notes that  Mr.  B. T.  A. Bell of the  [Canadian] Mining  Journal wished to mount "a large exhibition" of ore samples, including some from  the  McNeely property. Among  the fairly  precise  instructions which  McNeely is then  given for the shipment of these materials  is   an   admonition  that    they "must be sent  him  [Bell]  not  later  than the I gth  inst." and  then  follows  this  in­ triguing paragraph :

To comply with  this proposition will cost you some  trouble; but  no  more  than a man  who will  grasp at all  means   and   helps   to  gain his  end  is  bound to  incur. Whether this  or that  Ticket will   win   in   the   Lottery  none can  know.  I have  been  groaning under  the heavy   load    [in  manuscript  "burden"  has been  struck out  and  "load" written in over the   eliminated  word]  of  idleness   and  self­ burdened old  age:  have  some  kind  of  pity and regard for  me  if  you  can....

The  surprisingly despairing tone  of these  remarks suggests  not  only  the  dis­ appointment of  a  man  disillusioned   by what   he  saw   as   the   narrowly   focused activities of  an  increasingly materialistic age -a perception s:hared in full measure by the writer  of the sonnets "Reality" and  "To a Millionaire"-but also something of   wha:t must have  been the prevailing atmosphere in the Lampman family household. Shortly after  he took  up resi­ dence   in  Ottawa  to  work  in  the   Post Office Department,  Archibald  Lampman was  joined  by  the  rest  of  his immediate family.  The household then, and  for sev­ eral  years  thereafter,  seems  to have  con­ sisted   of   the   Reverend   Archibald  and  Mrs. Lampman, the poet himself and  the three sisters, Sara  Isabelle  ("Belle") , An­ nie  Margaret,  and   Caroline   ( "Bebe") . The   ordinary   expenses   of  daily   living would  have  been  quite  enough   to strain

q6
 the  resources of most  families  of this size at that  time, but, in addition, Annie Mar­ garet   had   aspirations  to  be  a   concert pianist, for  which  expensive  lessons were necessary,  and  Caroline wanted a  career as an artist. The financial resources  avail­ able  to fund all this were modest  enough : to Lampman's salary as a clerk in the Post Office Department (less than  $750 a year until I 8go, according to Desmond Pacey), there was only what  the Reverend Lamp­ man  had  a:s  pension  as a retired Church of  England in Canada clergyman. Appar­ ently   to  help  ease  the  financial burden, Mrs.  Lampman assumed  a role a:s the manager of a music  academy specializing in  dance. Even  so, the  disparity between the money needed  and that actually avail­ able   resulted  in  a  home  doininated  by the   necessity   for   utmost  frugality. The financial  situation  was   further  exacer­ bated   by Lampman's marriage to  Maud Playter in  I887, and more  still by Annie's removal with  her  mother to study  piano in Germany.
This  background makes  more  under­ standable Lampman's acerbic  complaint in   November  of I 888   to   his   Toronto friend, May  McKeggie, that both  "Belle" (who had  not  yet succeeded  "in  hunting up  anything to  do")  and  "Bebe"  (who  "is working  at  the  art school") were  still at  home.   And  it  is  in  this  context that we must  see  the  remarks quoted earlier of  the  elder  Lampman  to  Joseph   Mc­  Neely.  Quite  clearly,   the  debilitating  fi­ nancial strain which  evoked  the commen­ tary   by  both   Lampmans  suggests   that  there  was a real  basis for the  anxiety  felt by the  poet and  that  we are  dealing here with   something other   than   merely   the subjective response  of  an overly  sensitive  romantic spirit.   It  seems  clear,  too,  that  the  happy family atmosphere even  of the Nicholas Street  address,   referred  to  by almost  every  critic from  Carl  Connor to Margaret  Whitridge, must  now  be  seen in a  qualified way. Finally,  it is clear  that

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



those  interested in  pursuing further  de­ tails  of the  Lampman biography  for  the light  which  may be shed  on both the poet and  the  work  will  have  to  take  into  ac­ count such  letters as  these  of   the  Rev­ erend    Archibald  Lampman   to  Joseph  McNeely.
S. R.  MACGILLIVRAY
J.D. RABB

JACQUES GRAND'MAISON
JACQUES	GRAND'MAISON,    universitaire, ecrivain, theologien, sociologue, auteur de plus  de  vingt-cinq volumes,  a  aussi ecrit de nombreux articles dans  les revues spe­ cialisees  et  les journaux. 11 a  publie  chez Lemeac, en I g8o les deux  livres : De  quel droit?   (Les   Fondements  critiques,  tome I); De  quel  droit?   (La  Pratique  sociale, tome  II). L'auteur nous  parle  de ]'evolu­ tion  historique du  droit; il  nous situe  les ideologies  dans  leur  "contexte  socio•poli­ tique" et  il  nous  explique les  "pratiques sociales  des  droits" et  plaide  "pour une pedagogic sociale  du  droit."
Dans Les Fondements critiques,!'auteur
tente  de repondre a la question sociale du droit,   et   quand  il   interpelle  "de   que[ droit?"  il le situe  dans  la societe  actuelle, c'est-,a-dire  '\me nouvelle  conscience  qui interpelle, les deux  grands systemes domi­ nants  du  monde  contemporain":  le  capi­ talisme et  le   communisme.   Jacques Grand'Maison vulgarise   d'une  fa(_;on  re­ marquable les  syntheses  soumises  a  son attention, mais  il oublie,  parfois,  de  pre­ ciser  le sens des  mots  et  la  valeur  reelle des idees. A titre d'exemples, il nous parle d'"une  nouvelle  conscience" en  passant  de Socrate a Sakharov, "leur  conscience"; "de   la  conscience  moderne,  on  se  de­ mande avec  objectivite, comment etablir, avec clarte, les rapports ou les differences  de la conscience morale de  la conscience psychologique?
Le  role de  la conscience morale est de
 juger les faits, les actions,; la conscience psychologique  s'etend a  tousles faits psy­ chiques;  la  conscience   morale  s'appuie necessairement sur  la  conscience  psycho­ logique,   ca:r  pour   juger   un  acte  qu'on vient  d'accomplir, ce qui  est  le cas  vrai­  ment   typique,   il  faut   que   je  connaisse
!'intention, le  motif  auquel j'ai  ohei;  or,
cette  connaissance est !'oeuvre de la cons­ cience psychologique. Aussi ces deux cons­ ciences  sont,   au  fond,  intimement liees. La  conscience  morale, sans la conscience psychologique, serait probablement restee superficielle    et   confuse,    car   c'est   par "l'examen de  conscience," par  la  recher­ che   anxieuse   des   faits   et   des   actions, qu'elle s'est entrainee a ]'analyse  interne, a  une  introspection de  plus en  plus sub­ tile.
Quelle  serait  la  valeur  intrinseque du droit sans une conscience objective et scientifiquement eclairee? Et  quand !'au­ teur se pose la question: "De  que[ droit," il  nous  parle  des  droits  de  l'homme, des droits   linguistiques,  de   La   Charte  des droits.... 11 explicite le  point  de  vue  in­ dividuel  et  le point  de  vue social  tout  en precisant la nature du  droit,  fonde  sur la force,   l'utilite  sociale   et  sur  la   liberte.  Dans  Les  Fondements  critiques,  !'auteur precise  qu'il  y a  dans  chaque  personne, un  droit   primordial,  absolu,  eternel, qui fonde  la  justice,  ce  qui  signifie  qu'il  y a dans la personne raisonnable et libre,  une valeur   absolue,   qu'elle   ne   doit    jamais etre   traitee   "comme  un   moyen,   mais comme  une  fin."  Jacques Grand'Maison
nous convie  a la  prudence quand il nous
parle   "du   liberalisme"  et  "du   collecti­
visme," qui, selon  lui, tendent "a balayer
les differences culturelles et qualitatives."
Et   dans   toute   evolution,  il   faut   tenir compte  de  la  liberte  de  chaque individu qui   n'a   de   limite   que   dans   la   liberte d'autrui;  par   suite,   il  y  a  autour de chaque individu, une sorte de cercle sacre, a l'interieur duquel il est inviolable; le cercle  de liberte  est son droit.

177

OPINIONS AND NOTES



La conception du role historique est universelle, c'est en son nom que des esclavages ont  ete  abolis, que  des revolu­ tions ont  eu lieu, qu'une  multitude d'ins­  titutions protectrices de  la  personne  hu­  maine, ont ete creees; que les nationali:tes, considerees  comme  des personnes  collec­
tives, ont  proclame leur droit  a !'existence
et  a l'independance. Et  !'auteur n'a  pas
oublie  le point  de vue d'Auguste Comte,
pour  qui l'individu n'a  pas  cette  valeur
mystique  que  lui  attribuent les idealistes, les  rationalistes,  les  Kantiens.  II   n'est qu'une partie  d'un tout,  une  cellule  dans
!'immense organisme social. II n'y a done aucun droit  inherent a l'individu. II  n'a
que des  devoirs  et  pas de droits.  Ce  que nous  appelons le  droit  est  done  concede
par  la  societe  a l'individu. Elle  peut,  en
cas de besoin, le modifier  ou le supprimer,
c'est Wle institution sociale. L'essentiel  du debat   revient   done   a  ceci:   Ou   est  la
veritable existence  du  droit? Dans l'indi­ vidu  ou  dans  le  groupe? La  theorie  in­ dividualiste  implique  une  sorte  de  mys­ tique  de  la  personne  humaine; mais  la theorie   sociologique  implique  une  mys­ tique du groupe, considere  comme un etre
reel, superieur a l'individu.
Apres  ce  bref  rappel   historique,  !'au­
teur   revient   au   "tournant  actuel" avec des dessous ideologiques; et ces "dessous ideologiques" se  traduisent par   les  con­ flits de  travail, l'incapacite  des gouverne­
ments,  des  syndicats  a assumer  leurs  res­
ponsabilites respectives.   A  chaque  crise,
le meme  scenario se repete:  "Une loi speciale,"  que   ce  soient  !'education,  la sante,   les  pompiers,  les  conducteurs du
metro,   etc.... "U ne  loi  Speciale"!  une
convention collective  signee a la  vapeur,
et le droit  est sauvegarde. La  democratic
est ·saine et sauve.

Etat  legislateur, ernployeur, planificateur, prornoteur, entrepreneur, coordonnateur, rnediateur, distributeur, conti'oleur, tantOt acceMrateur, tantot arnortisseur, tantot corn­ presseur, tantot rnoteur, tantot  preneur. Je
charge  a  dessein,  dit   !'auteur,  pour    bien

q8
 rnontrer l'enchevetrernent des roles de nos machines institutionnelles rnodernes et  par­ ticulierernent de  l'Etat.

Succinctement, Jacques Grand'Maison se mefie autant de  l'Etat que  des syndicats. Les contradictions internes de ces deux pouvoirs   "renvoient  aux   calendes  grec­
ques"  toute  reponse  qui conduirait a !'ac­
tion   positive   et   qualitative. De  part  et
d'autre, on  est  beaucoup plus  preoccupe d'ideologies  que  du   bien  commun.   Les faits   le  prouvcnt:  apres   le  compromis liberal,  l'ideologie socio-democrate,  l'ide­ ologie  marxiste, etc.  Et  !'auteur  termine Les Fondements critiques  en reflechissant sur   la  morale   traditionnelle,  la  morale  liherale,   la  morale  socialiste,   la  morale chambree,  la  morale libertaire. II  se de­ mande:  "Que serait le droit  sans la mo­ rale?  Apres  avoir  nuance la  morale   juri­ clique,  la  morale de  la  lettre,  et  non  de
!'esprit; il nous  dit  que  le rationalisme a pris laplace, aujourd'hui, au dogmatisme religieux.  On  deshumanise pour  bureau­ cratiser,  structurer,  encadrer   et   etablir des infrastructures. La morale doit  etablir
une   ethique  "d'une  conscience   adulte"
responsable, prise dans son individualite, face   a  la  societe   universelle   "des   cinq
continents."  En   etablissant  l'hierarchie des valeurs,  la morale, .a partir de  la conscience  morale  et   de   la   conscience
psychologique individuelle, soutient et donne au  droit,  sa substance et sa  raison d'etre.
Dans   son   deuxieme  tome:    De   quel droit    (La    Pratique     sociale) ,   Jacques Grand'Maison analyse les fondements critiques du droit. II s'appuie sur une phi­ losophic  de base, qui est "l'ultime garantie du  juste,  du  vrai,  du  bon,  de  l'honnete, du   pur,   de   l'integre."  On   sait   depuis longtemps  que   tout   ce  qui  est  humain n'est    pas    necessairement    la    rectitude ideale  et  parfaite. II aborde  "la  pratique plus  pertinente des  droits"  et  il  le  fait "comme  un   pedagogue  social   soucieux  d'aider au   fa onnement

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



des droiJts aussi riche  et qualitative que les autres pratiques sociales."  L'auteur ne se contente pas  d'expliquer et  de  critiquer les pratiques sociales  du droit; il les con­ fronte avec  leurs  principes, leurs  fonde­
ments,   en   les  evaluant  a  partir  d'une
donnee  sociale   qu'il   elabore   graduelle­
ment  tout  au  cours  de son analyse.  Cette eta:pe, il la veut  "explora:toire" en  ce qui concerne "les pratiques sociales du droit," en expliquant la  veritable dynamique du
droit   et  en  faisant appel   a son  histoire,
tout   en   considerant  les  forces   adultes,
latentes et  positives  du  peuple  "dans  le
champ de la conscience et de !'experience des citoyens." Jacques Gra:nd'Maison analyse  avec soin la demarche critique et
historique,   qui   servira    a  !'elaboration
d'une pedagogie sociale  et  philosophique
de base du  droit.
Dans  La    Pratique    sociale,    !'auteur
etudie  les questions  de choix politiques, sociaux,   economiques et  culturels,  relies aux  problemes democratiques dans  un cadre de liberte, axe sur la regle du droit et   de   sa   legislation.  Le   paradoxe   des droits, selon Jacques Grand'Maison, ce serait  que les "citoyens capables de se prendre en  mains,   de  faire   leur  propre
politique, d'abord .a partir de  leur  expe­
rience,  plutot qu'en fonction des regles exterieures." Au  lieu  de  se fier  a la  ma­
chine  des droits, et  de se debrouiller avec un million  de lois qui sont  modifiees quo­ tidiennement. II importe de bien discerner  ce qui  fait  avancer ou  reculer  les chases. II faut que  la  continuite, au  moins  rela­  tive,  soit assumee,  sans  trop  rompre  avec le passe, en evoluant dans  le present,  face
a un  futur a construire pour  une  societe
juste.  II  s'agit, en  somme,   de  bien  de­
meier  ce qui  dans  les faits,  dans  le  con­ cret,  ce qui appartient aux moyens et aux fins,   dans   les  domaines   psychologique, sociologique, culture!, moral,  economique et politique. Tout ne se resoud  pas par  la demarche juridique, il faut  tout  demeler, en  faisant   appel  aux  sciences  humaines,
 dans  leur  ensemble.  Cette demarche  cri­ tique   vient   remplacer  le  droit  dans  ce qu'il  est, pour  le  renforcer dans  ce qu'il doit etre.

"Ma petite ex rience
affinne   ]'auteur, a  plusieurs  reprises, lui  a
donne  une   conscience nette  de  combien  il
etait difficile  de  faire  comprendre aux  gens, d'assumer  et  d'aller au   bout   de  leurs  pro­ blemes,  de  leurs  diagnostics. La  Revolution tranquille  quebecoise,  n'a    pas  securise  les individus et  Ia societe. Au contraire, tout  est
controverse et  tout est  a refaire a Ia  base.
Et   le  sociologue- dagogue             "On  se
retrouve aujourd'hui  devant  certains   culs­
de-sac  pour  assumer un  tournant on  ne peut
plus  compliqUJe. La  nouvelle tuyauterie a pu rendre des  services  indeniables, mais  ce qui fait   de  plus   en   plus   de   difficulte, c'est   ce qui   y  circule, c'est   Ia  source  meme;  c'est aussi  ce qui  en  sort  au  bout."

Pour   ce  faire,   le  pedagogue  invite   les avocats et les juristes, a sortir  de leur domaine,   a  aggrandir  leur   champ  de
vision  scientifique   vers  un  universalisme
qui  viendrait englober leur  propre  disci­ pline  juridique, par  une  intelligence plus penetrarrte de  leur  epoque dans  !'evolu­ tion  des  etrcs  en  particulier et  dans  la societe en general.
Le contexte pluraliste s'accompagne de donnees  de  plus  en  plus  problematiques,
a l'egard  de  nouvelles  decouvertes, dans
tous les domaines, afin de mieux  mai:triser
cette   pedagogic   du   droit   et  des  droits. Sous pretexte de pluralisme, on ne peut ecarter l'exigence fondamentale: "La Charte des  droits  et  des libertes  des  per­ sonnes."  Elle  contient  les orientations de fond  qui  exige  un  consensus  minimal   en vue  du  bien  commun, avec  une  bonne philosophic de  base, sinon  la societe  perd son  sens et  son  impact face  au  cha:nge­ ment  historique. Peu importe les debats ideologiques que fera  naitre  La Charte, ils peuvent etre  utiles.  A quoi  bon  reviser  le code civil et d'imprimer de nouvelles lois, si on  ne comprend pas  la philosophic de base de La  Charte pour  le bonheur et  la liberte  integrale de  tous  les individus?

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



Cette complementarite des droits et des libertes  ne peut  se definir  et  s'appliquer, dans  la vie respective  des personnes,  sans une veritable education en pmfondeur du sens social et du  bien de !'ensemble. On  y insiste. Sirna liberte  commence  la ou celle de !'autre finit, il est imperieux, en demo­ cratie et dans la Cite, qu'on  tienne compte  de   la  complexite  des  exigences   et  des identites en  presence.   Depuis. le  fameux  message de  Jesus.:  "Pax  homnibus.  bonae voluntaJtis," les  problernes, dans  l'univers et le temps, se sont accentues.  La richesse etant  dans   la   diversite,   dans  la  vie  de chaque etre raisonnable, aux tendances et aux  passions  morales   et  psychiques  dis­ tinctes,  le droit  n'a  jamais reussi, a eriger une Charte de nature a repondre aux attentes infinies  des desirs moraux,  in:tel­ lectuels et humains de l'etre qui pense, qui travaille, et dont  !'ambition, souvent  con­ currentielle est insatiable.  Meme  les plus vertueux, parmi  les hurnains., (on  ne doit  pas  se  le  cacher,  l'histoire le  prouve   a sa:tiete) ,  ont   des  tendances vers  le  bas. Prendre et   donner,  queUes  differences dans Ia nuance! Et quand  l'idealisme  doc­ trinal,  fait  reflechir  la  conscience,  on  se doit   de   revenir   vers   le  realisme   dans l'espace  et le temps,  avec ses concepts angeliques (et d'animal) que !'instinct de
!a bete  tenaille  et flatte.
'Pour    Un    Nouveau   Contrat    social, dans  la  premiere  partie   du  livre,  Marc Briere,  juge au  tribual  du travail,  au Quebec, s'evertue a  nous faire  compren­ dre  !'evolution du  droit  quebecois,  dans le contexte  nord-americain, depuis  quel­ ques  decennies.   Marc Briere,  des !'intro­ duction, nous avertit qu'il na pas lu Rous­ seau et qu'il  ne connait pas De [',esprit des Lois  de  Montesquieu. Pour  un  Juge  qui doit  etablir Ia cause  a effet de !'evolution du  Contrat social depuis lors, cette  cons­ tation    nous   laisse   sur   notre   appetit  a savoir  comment peut-il  associer  les liens historiques, s'il  ignore ses principes  et ses sources?  Et  pourtant Jean-Jacques Rous-

180
 seau   avait   un   peu   de  genie!   En  lisant l' Emile   (I 762), notre  savant juriste  au­ rait   vite   compris  que   l'exemple   vient de  haut  et  de la nature, peut-etre? Jean­ Jacques Rousseau, si on le comprend bien, disai•t que  la  societe  corrompt !'enfant. Qui   est  la  societe?  Vous  et  moi?   Que  pense  la  jeunesse  actuelle   des  aines,  des penseurs,  des informateurs publics  et au­  tres? Quand une province, un pays, n'ont  pas de travail a offrir  aux  jeunes  de vingt ans? Comment voulez-vous leur enseigner  les valeurs  et le droit?
Quand on est  juge du  tribunal du  tra­ vail, que  l'on s'appuie sur la morale, avec un  systeme  politique social,  ou  les  riches deviennent de  plus  en  plus  riches  et  les pauvres de  plus  en  plus  pauvres,  la  res­
ponsabilite morale ou  juridique est-elle de
juger  a  partir de  haut, ou  s'il  ne  serait pa:s mieux  de former des juges pour mieux aider   et  valoriser   la  societe  en  donnant aux  jeunes  leurs  droits  de  vivre  et  d'oc­ cuper une  place   au  solei!?  N'est-ce  pas Jean-Jacques  Rousseau    qui   affirmait: "Tout est bien sortant des mains  de !'au­ teur   des  choses,  tout  degenere entre   les
mains  de  l'homme"? Il  fut  le  premier a
eveiller  les coeurs  et  les esprits  au  senti­
ment   proprement  roman:tique de  la  na­ ture;  son   amour  pour   elle  avait   pour corollaire un  profond  pessimisme  social;  Le  Discours   sur  les  sciences  et   les  arts ( 1750); Le   Discours  sur   l'inegalite
( 1755) ; ainsi  que  La  Lettre   d' Alembert sur  les spectacles  (I 758)   denoncent les mefaits de  la civilisation et  les injustices des  rapports etablis   entre   les  individus. Son   oeuvre    fondamentale   concerne  la philosophie politique.  Le  Contrat  social de  Rousseau  va  plus  loin  que  Montes­ quieu   et  Voltaire dans  la  defense  de  la liberte et  l'instauration de  l'egalite entre  les differentes  classes sociales;  son  but est de concilier  les libertes individuelles et les exigences  de la vie sociale, bref, de fonder  un ordre social "nature!." On sait  que  Le Contrat sociale  inspirera La  Declaration

OPINIONS AND NOTES



des droits  de l' homme ( et  de la femme  y compris). Il contient toute  la philosophic de  la  Revolution. Briere   nous  parle  du Code  du  travail, des dispositions  particu­ lieres  au  secteur public,  de  la  loi  sur  la sante  et la securite au  travail; de la loi sur les  normes  du  travail; de  la  dynamique dans  les relations de travail. L'auteur ale merite  de  reconnaitre, avec  beaucoup de franchise, que  "personne  ne  semble  satis­ fait  de  la  situation, ni  les  patrons ni  les travailleurs, ni les autres." Les principales causes:

greves,    vandalisme,   agressions   de    toutes sortes    reviennent  constarnment;  le   public est de plus  en plus  pris  en otage; des rouages importants de  l'Etat sont   paralyses; on  dit l'economie menaoee; on  reproche au  syndi­ calisme d'etre  trop   fort   ou  !'on  se   plaint qu'il soit  trop   faible.

Dans  tous ces mecanismes evolutifs, Briere admet que les quebecois veulent se realiser eux-memes en  voulant "une refonte  glo­ bale   de  leur   societe."  Ce   n'est   pas  en "civilisant" ni  en  "judiciarisant"  qu'on  va perfectionner le Code  du  travail, mais c'est surtout en faisant ·evoluer l'esprit  du droit  du travail et en ameliorant le climat  social  en totalite. Et  l'auteur a  confiance dans  l'avenir, il affirme  que  malgre  "tou­ tes nos gaucheries et  notre  droiture," nos "timidites  et   nos  audaces," il  est   con­ vaincu  "que  nous, Quebecois, sommes en train  de  nous  faA;onner un  nouveau  petit
modele  de societe  bien  a nous."
Il faut  dire que Jean-Jacques  Rousseau et Montesquieu connaissaient mieux  notre
temperament latin, avec  notre   caractere individualiste, e:t que c'est  avec  beaucoup de   difficulte    que   nous   respecterons   le Code  du  travail dans  sa version  actuelle. Briere,  sans  insister,   on   lui  suggere   de mieux  lire  la  deuxieme partie ecrite  par Jacques Grand'Maison, dans  ce present travail, ou  il nous dit  que  nous avons  un comportement  d'adolescent  voire  infan­ tile.  L'etatfadulte est  de  necessite  pour batir  un Quebec viable  et coherent.
 'Dans  la  deuxieme partie  de  Un  Nou­ veau Contrat social, Grand'Maison  parle  de la societe en  projet, "le  contrat social, un  mythe"?  D'une nouvelle  pratique so­ ciale  du  travail qu'il  nous  faut  redefiner  avec  tous ses dynamismes culturel, socio­
economique.... Cette  jeune    societe,   a
racine    judeo-chretienne,   d'un   modele
d'avenir unique, detaille, monolithique, avec  un  peuple capable "de  faire  la  so­ ciete, son histoire, sa politique, sa culture, son  ,economic."  L'auteur  nous  convie  .a agir  en  fonction de  nouvelles  syntheses, qui   tiennent  compte  des  meilleures   ex­
periences  des  forces  qui  sont  a l'oeuvre
chez  nous  et  ailleurs.   Il  importe de  dis­
cerner  ce qui  fait  avancer et  ce qui  fait reculer  les choses, principe important dans l'idee  du sociologue  et  pedagogue, qu'est Grand'Maison. Etant de  surcroit theolo­ gien, appartenant .a  un ordre  religieux,  il demeure fidele  a  ses  engagements  poli­ tique,   social   et   culture!;  il  defend   des principes  de base, auxquels on ne peut  pas mettre sa bonne foi en doute.  Il est direct, sincere  et absolu.  Pour  le constater, on a lu  Jacques  Grand'Maison, le  Roc  et  la Source, entretiens  avec  Gilbert   Terrab, ou  l'auteur se  raconte avec   un  naturel deconcertant, et  une dynamique toujours renouvelee! Qu'il  parle  de  son  enfance, de  son  cheminement  intellectuel, sa  li­ berte  de parole  nous  penetre et nous fait reflechir  avec  clarte. Il  est  une invite  au travail   serieux   et   bien   fait.   Issu   d'un milieu familial  modeste,  rnais affectionne, il evolua, au  milieu  de  cinq enfants, ou il apprit avec  art  et  intelligence, le sens de la  vie  qui  implaiquait  lutte   et   travail. Apres  des  etudes au  semina:ire,  a  l'Uni­ versite, au  pays eta l'etranger, il se mela aux  debats  de  son  temps:  conflits syndi­ caux; greves entre patrons et employes - A Saint-Jerome, a Tricofil, industrie auto­ geree, ou  il faisit  partie du  conseil  d'ad­ ministration, il apprit combien  il  e1 tait  et est difficile d'etablir ses propres regles, de

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



les respecter  face  a  Ia societe  democra­
tique.
Jacques  Grand'Maison,  dans   ses   en­ tretiens avec Gilbert Terrab, universitaire, avoue  que "l'utopie autogestionnaire," ce mouvement  cooperatif, Tricofil   en  par­  ticulier, etait une aventure audacieuse, un peu  nai:ve. Par   contre, il  se  console  en disant qu'il   a  mieux   appris  a  connaitre les humairrs  (on  passera  sous silence  taus les millions que le bon gouvernement que­ becoi:s a  investi  pour   que  cette  industrie devienne rentable, qui,  om le sait,  fut  un echec  economique et  social)   et  pour  ce faire,  il cite  Aristote :  "on  ne  comprend bien que  ce qu'on a vu nairtre." Meme  Ia naissance   d'une  industrie autogeree  par des  humains,  n'enleve pas  les  obstacles ideologiques,  irrtellectuels,  theoriques, les conftits  de  personnalite. Si  tous  les indi­  vidus  etaient  egaux,   ce  serait   peut-etre
!'ideal, etant  donne  que   les  individus, dans    !'ensemble,  sont   faibles   vis-a-vis
d'une infime  minori!te  de  forts.... Tous
les dechirements ont  pour  cause, souvent, cette latence dans  le psychique des etres rationnels   qui    deviennent   irrationnels, des  qu'un  interet  personnel est  en   jeu. Et  par  extension, Grand'Maison  declare avec  sagesse, en  parlant de  notre  evolu­ tion quebecoise:

Depuis Ia revolution tranquille, nous  avons developpe une  attitude, un comportement collectif   en  porte-a-faux, a  savoir: !'illusion de   croire  que   nous   pouvons  tout   faire  en meme  temps  et sur  tous les terrains a Ia fois: les meilleurs salaires du  monde, les meilleurs services publics du mondc, les meilleures mesures sociales  du  monde, le controle total de  l'economie  (des  autres),  l'independance du  Quebec, c'est Ia un comportement adoles­ cent, pour ne  pas  dire   infantile.

On est d'accord! Pourquoi? C'est  toute Ia verite.    A pres    avoir    parle:   "De    que! droit"? avec  une nouvelle  approche pour Un  nouveau Contrat social, ses entretiens, dans le Roc  et la Source, nous font pren­ dre conscience de  notre  idealisme, de nos reves,  un  peu  de  notre  realite,  de  notre
 immaturi!te  et de notre  manque de sagesse en general. C'est  grave  et serieux.

DENISE & EMILE DASTOUS



APOCALYPSE NOW
Frye's Vision of the  Bible

NoRTHROP  FRYE's The Great  Code:  The Bible and Literature (Toronto: Academic Press  Canada,  I 982)   presents   the  first comprehensive structuralist interpretation of  biblical  literature. Its publication thus matches the  significance of hi:s Anatomy of   Criticism  (I 957),  which   remains a touchstone of structuralist  literary theory. From the  title   and   frontispiece on,   the debt  rto Blake  remains as  deep  as  it  has been    since   Fearful    Symmetry   (I947) opened  that    poet   to  serious   academic study.1  The style  of The Great  Code  in­ tensifies Frye's familiar bricolage. Erudite, unabashedly  allusive, extravagantly theo­  retical, often  leaving specific  teX!ts unrec­ ognizably in  the  background, the  book is lucid  and seminal, exhibiting the author's formidable power  for synthesizing  masses of  detail   into  systems  that   are   at   once elegantly simple  and  capable of complex intelleotual  development.  A  profoundly original scholar, Frye  has  also  proved  a brilliant popularizer, as in The  Educated Imagination. At a time when  the humani­ ties seem under siege, it is gratifying to see Canada's  foremost  literary critic  figuring as a cover  story  for  Maclean's  (April   5,
I 982), to see such  a demanding book  as The Great Code  displayed  prominently in bookshops across  the  na:tion, and  to hear from   the  publisher that  the  volume  sold over I o,ooo copies  in  Canada during the first five months and  reached a fifth print­ ing after a year.
The book  grew  out   of  the  university
classroom, and  the introduction deals shrewdly with  the   problems   of  teaching

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



the  Bible in  a secular context by using  a mixture of  tact,  wit,  and  Socratic irony. The  subject is neither biblical  scholarship, nor theology, nor even the Bible itself, but "the impact of  the  Bible  on  the  creative imagination," that  is, "how  or why a poet might  read the Bible"  (pp. xxi, xvii). The first  part  of  the  volume,  "The Order of Words," consists of four  theoretical chap­ ters  on  language,  myth,  metaphor, and typology;  the second  part, "The Order of Types," mirrors the  first  with  four  chap­ ters investigating specific aspects  of bibli­ cal  rhetoric  ( ch. 8),  narrative ( ch.  7), imagery   ( ch.  6) , and  theme  ( ch.  5) . A promised  second   volume,  awaited impa­ tiently, will survey "the Bible's relation to Western literature"  (p.  xxi).
The organizing principle of the Chris­ tian  Bible,  indeed for  The  Great  Code, is "Typology" ( ch.  4). Early  Christians saw  Christ   as  the  fulfilment   (the   anti­ type)    of  the   Old   Testament   (with   its prefiguring  types) ;   appropriately,  Frye discusses the  royal  metaphor at  length  in this   chapter.   Unlike    modern   writing,  which  bases its conclusions on past obser­ vation,  typology  concerns itself with  "the  future,  and   is  consequently  related   pri­ marily to faith, hope, and  vision"  (p. 82). Typology is thus a theory  "of historical process:  an assumption that  there  is some meaning and   point   to  history" (p.  8I). These insights  save  typology  from  its too frequent  whimsicality:  here   it  becomes the  tool  for  finding thematic  coherence in   a   diversified    and    self-contradictory book.
Chapter  5,  "Typology II:   Phases   of Revelation," sets out  the  book's  piece de resistance of biblical  criticism. In  34 breathtaking pages,  Frye  distills  the  es­ sence of biblical  themes  in  a structure of thought that many  books of  several  hun­ dred  pages  fail  to convey. Seven  roughly chronological  biblical  stages   are   dis.tin­ guished: Creation  (with  its concomitant Fall), Revolution or Exodus  (where  God
 forges  the oppressed Hebrews into  a  na­ tion), Law   (which   codifies  the  Revolu­ tion), Wisdom  (which  individualizes the Law), Prophecy (which individualizes the Revolution),  Gospel  (which   a:s  the  anti­ type  of all  the  previous  phases,  gives  an enlarged  vision  of the  possibilities  of hu­  man  life) ,  and   Apocalypse  (which   de­ stroys the mode of vision that  keeps man enslaved   in  the  world  of  time  and   his­ tory) .2      Occasionally  specific   texts   are treated at  length, Creation and  Ecclesi­ astes with particular illumination. But this chapter, more   than  any  other  piece  of biblical  criticism  I  know,  points  the  way out  of the impasse of analytical historical criticism  to  an  integrative reading of  the Bible. By indicating how each  phase  con­ tains  the  seeds  of  what   follows  and   the fruition  of what precedes,  Frye  recreates the phenomenological experience of the reader familiar enough  wi·th the book that he or she can hear, in any given text, scripture's own   cross-references and deeper  echoes.3
Chapter 2,  "Myth," unfolds several im­ portant critical commonplaces. Mythos is a way of organizing writing, whether nar­  rative   stories  or   conceptual  arguments. Myths are not unfactual fictions,  but "the stories  that  tell  a  society  what  is impor­ tant   for  it  to  know,   whether about  its gods, its history, its laws, or its class struc­ ture"  (p. 33) . This didactic  element ex­ piains why the Bible is so "violently parti­ san"  (p. 40). While  history  is the record  (usually damaging) of what  man  has  al­ ready   done,   myth   presents  a   vision  of what   man   might    become.   The   corre­ sponding ·seventh chapter deals  with  bib­ lical myth as "Narrative," that  is, as typi­ cal  action.  A  U-shaped  plot  defines  its structure, beginning in an  ideal  situa tion, descending to the  world  of disaster,  then rising  again  after   repentance to  deliver­ ance.  The Exodus is seen  as  the  typical action  of deliverance, and  Christ's resur­ rection  as  the  antitype.  After  a  brilliant

I83

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



expoSitiOn of the well-worn  theme  of Exodus    typology   in   the   Gospels,   Frye throws  new light on  the myth of the first­ born.   Jesus,   as  first-born,   becomes   the anti:type of all the exiles and rejected  first sons of  the  Old  Testament, as well  as of the  Passover  lamb  and  the  slayer  of  the sea monster Leviathan.
Chapter  3  discusses   "Metaphor"   in terms   of   self-referentiality.  It "is   the [Bible's] words themselves that have the authority, not  the  events  they  describe" (p. 6o) . Acceptable a:s this statement may be  in  some  current critical   theories,   it seems more germane to Frye's thesis of typological development that  in different parts  of ·the Bible words are chosen inten­ tionally to delineate different  mythoi. In other  words, the  system is not a:s closed as some theories  would make it.4  At any rate, Frye finds the "primary and literal  mean­ ing" of the Bible in the interconnection of all  its  words  and   the  various  meanings they evoke. These crystallize  into  the  pri­ mal  metaphor  found  at  the  beginning of John's   Gospel - that    Christ    and    the Word,  or  the  Bible,  are  identical meta­  phorically.   Chapter  6,   "Metaphor  II : Imagery,"  looks  at  "the   Bible  as  it  ap­  pears   to   practical  criticism"   ( p.   139) . Though this could  be the least theoretical approach, Frye structures the chapter  by contrasting the  divine  and  demonic  ex­ amples  of images  that  are  grouped  in a sevenfold  hierarchy on  pp.  I66-67.  Such systematic  study  of images  can  even  un­ tangle   textual  knots :  Revelation  I5 : 6 is discussed   on   pp.   I57-58.5   The   chapter ends   by   arguing   for   a   comprehensive typology of  metaphor, where every image is equal, in fact  identical with  everything else  because  Christ holds   all  categories together.
The first  and  last  chapters, on  "Lan­ guage,"  reveal   what   Frye  is   ultimately essaying  in  The Great  Code.  Chapter  I sets out  to is:>late the particular linguistic  mode  of  the  Bible  by  expanding  Vico's
 distinction  between   three   types  of  lan­ guage   that   have  succeeded each   other chronologically. The  first,  "metaphoric" or  "hieroglyphic," type  corresponds to  a mythic age where  the gods are immanent, where   mind   and   body  are  not  divided, where  poetry  i:s  the  primary mode  of  ex­ pression,   and   where   metaphor   (this   is that)  "convey[s] the  sense  of   the  pres­ ence   of  a  numinous  persornality  in   the world"   (p.   24).   The   second,    "meto­ nymic"   or  "hieratic," type  of  language corresponds  to  the  heroic  age,  where  the  "soul" is felt  to be imprisoned in an alien body, where syllogistic  prose becomes  the dominant   genre,   and   where   metonymy (this  is put in  place of that) uses abstrac­ tions  to talk of a  transcendant God.  The  third, "descriptive" or "demotic," type of language  corresponds  to  our  own  anti­ metaphysical   age,    where    the    "mind" forms   part   of  the   human   body,  where writing  becomes    scientific,   and   where truth  describes   "objective  reality"   (this is this)   and  unmasks   mere  appearances.
This  scheme  provides the second quint­ essential  insight  of  the  book,  though the implications affect  a type of  criticism  dif­ ferent  from   Frye's.   The   modern  critic  lives in a demotic society  that  communi­ cates   descriptively,   yet   the   Bible   has metaphoric and  metonymic aspects  that  resist  purely  descriptive approaches, as a century of  historical criticism  has shown.  The   literary  critic  is  faced   with   even greater  complexities, since  the  Western cultures he studies  view the  Bible from  a variety   of  different metonymic  perspec­ tives.  Western   writers who  use  the  Bible also introduce a second  metaphoric level corresponding  to  the  literary  usages  of their   time,  accompanied  with  a  second non-biblical   metonymic  structure,   and (since  the  Renaissance)  a strong  dose of the descriptive mode's distinction of illu­ sion from  reality.  This outline is the  first I have  seen in print to grapple with  such complexities.  Uninterested   in   pursuing

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



the  ramifications of  historical  considera­ tions,  Frye  typically catapults  the  discus­  sion  light years  farther  by  trying to inte­ grate  all   the   phases  into  a new   supra­ metaphoric phase in  the  last  chapter. In the  first  chapter, after 24 closely  reasoned pages, it comes as something of a surprise to  discover  that  the   Bible   belongs  to  a fourth class, "oratory"  (kerygma, to use a New  Testament term),  which is  the  ve­ hicle  of  revelation. At  the   top  of  p.  29, Frye  even  admits an  uncharacteristic  in­ ability to  relate oratory and  revelation to Vico's threefold scheme.
This impasse is created by a confusion between types  of language and the  means used  to  convey ideas. Oratory  and  reve­ lation  are   not   so  much  phases  of   lan­ guage  as   voices  belonging to  different phases. Each  phase of  culture  has  a  dif­  ferent view of truth and  a different means of conveying it:  revelation  unveils reality in  the  metaphoric  phase, oratory or  ke­ rygma  expounds the   truth in  the  meto­ nymic   phase,  and   description  explains facts in  our own   demotic phase. Thus, in  the  metaphoric phase it is difficult to distinguish the  oracle from  the  divinity, revelation  from  reality, the   Word from God. Revelation is  the  vehicle of  poetry belonging to  the  metaphoric phase. The Greeks, for   example, speak   of  "muses," "genius," and  "inspiration," all  of  them allowing the   poet to  embody  the  numi­ nous  sphere directly in  words:  the  Iliad begins,  "Sing,  goddess,  the    wrath   of Peleus'  son,    Achilles."   In   the   second phase, reality  is  not  revealed,  but   medi­ ated. A  reasoning  audience must  be  per­  suaded  of   the    truth   through   oratory, syllogism, allegory, sermons, commentary, and any number of metonymic devices.  In the  classical world, rhetoric provides the informing structure,  as  with   Cicero;  in medieval ecclesiastical circles, doctrine is the  great mediator, as  in  the  sermon or the commentary. The same mediation ap­ pears in  the  poetry of  this  phase :  just as
 the gods  are  no longer prime actors in the Aeneid, so  Virgil mediates the  story,  be­ ginning "Arms and  the  man I  sing."  In the  third phase, persuasion  normally con­  sists  of  explaining the   facts,   as   in   the empirical  proof    for   a   scientific  theory, ideal  parliamentary debate, or even Frye's books. Similarly,  the  modern epic  usually rests squarely on fact or sense  perception, and   might  even   delineate  a   pluralistic universe, as in  the  novel  or  in Browning's The Ring and the Book:   "Do you see this Ring? ... Do you  see  this  square old  yel­ low   Book ... ?  Examine  it  yourselves!"
(I. I' 33, 38) ·
Where does  the Bible  fit?  Frye  rightly
points to several metonymic tendencies - its  rationalizations  (p.   ro), the   problem of translations (p.  I I), its conception of a transcendent God  ( p.  2 7) , to which oould be  added  the   abstract  theses   in   Judges and  Kings, the  Exodus typology in Hosea and  Isai:ah  40-55,  the  elaborate allegories in   the   New   Testament  (e.g.,   Galatians
3:6-2g; 4:22-3I;  James  2:2I-24),  etc. But, as Frye himself  hints, the balance tips
more toward the  metaphorical in  the  Bi­ ble.   Its   language  is  "almost   obsessively concrete"  (p.    27),  with    an   elemental power when  vows   are   sworn   (p.  6)   or when God  reveals his   name  in  Exodus (p.  q) and  speaks to bring Creation into  being   (p.   I8).  The  Bible  usually makes no distinction between subject and object (p.   6),  between   mind,   body,   and   soul (pp.  Ig-20), nor,  it could be  added, be­ tween   imagination  and   intention  and  action   ( cf.   Genesis  3 : 6   and    Matthew
5 : 2 I -30) . Symbolic gestures and  oracles characterize the  prophets' activities in the Old    Testament,   and   Jesus    preferred teaching in parables and similitudes. God may   be   transcendent  in   the   Bible,   but only in Job, Ecclesiastes and some lamen­ tations is  he  a  Deus  absconditus.  He   is immanent in  Old  Testament history and  incarnate in   the  New   Testament. As  in all  didactic  endeavour during the  meta-

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



phoric   phase,   the  true  prophet  becomes God's   own  mouth, revealing   the  divine will  without intermediary:  "Thus saith the   LoRD"   is   the   prophets'  formula; Jesus'  style  is  "Verily, verily  I  say  unto you."
The last chapter, "Language II:  Rhet­ oric,"   begins   with   phenomena   that   a reader  stumbles over first:  the style of the  Authorized Version,  the Bible's oral qual­  ity, the parallelism of  Hebrew  poetry,  the aphoristic "auguries  of  innocence,"  the editorial levelling  of   "authors,"  the  Bi­ ble's  capacity for  self-re-creation, and  so on. Here Frye  is closest to the descriptive aspects   of   modern  biblical   scholarship, though   familiar  subjects   blossom  anew under  his  green   thumb. The  last  dozen pages  embark  on  an   ambitious  polyse­ mous critique for the Bible, isolating  four imaginative levels, or  "wider  contexts  of a continuous sense, unfolding like a plant out  of a seed"   (p.  22 I). The first level is the literal level of myth  and metaphor described  in  chapters 5  and   6.  On   the second  level,  myth  and  metaphor  collide with  their  opposites, the human contexts of   history   and   concept  that   the   Bible grew out  of and  sought  to unify. On  this level,  "man  creates his  gods  in  his  own image" (p.  228). The third   level  grows dialectically out of the first two, moving from  knowledge to  the  existential   plane of faith, which soon meets its complement in doubt. Facing the  bedrock  of doubt  in "the  total  nothingness of death," the ulti­ mate  question becomes,  "What speaks  to us across our  own death?" (p. 230). This leads to the fourth level, a mode  of vision beyond   the  constraints of  myth,  history and faith, framed in the language  of love. Glimrnerings of  this  kind  of vision  have shone  throughout the book, from  Ecclesi­ astes' "program of  continuous mental  en­ ergy ... determined to smash ... through every  locked   door   of  repression   in  his mind"  (p.  I 23)  to the  metaphors of de­ centralization, particularly and  interpene-

I86
 tration  (pp.   100,  I 67-68)   where   Christ becomes  the one knower  in a new heaven and  a new earth, like Blake's  Albion  en­ compassing all,  where  opposites  cease  to exist, where  nothing is objective,  nothing dead,  where  eternity shines in every grain  of sand.
Here Frye  passes  far  beyond  anything that  can  be found  in the  Bible or in most
Western interpretations of  the  Bible. He ends  not as a reader of biblical  myth,  but as  the  forger  of a new  myth  substituted for the biblical religions. The concluding vision is radically Rmnantic  (specifically Blakean)  in  the  imaginative sense,  sub­ jectivist  or idealist  in  the epistemological sense, totalitarian in the ideological sense, and   neoplatonic,  gnostic6   or  eastern  ( cf. p.I 68)  in the  philosophical and  religious senses. Frye is undoubtedly more  intellec­ tually impressive and  practical than  most theoretical critics. But often  the Bible disappears from  view,  so  tha:t orne is tempted to reach  for Dr. Johnson's touch­ stone: "I refute   [Berkeley]  thus." 7
Some  practical problems with  Frye's technique can  be highlighted by viewing his  polysemous   critique  from   the   non­ idealist    standpoint.  His   "literal"   level confusingly subsumes everything "verbal" in   the   Bible,   ranging  from   the  strictly  literal to  the  figurative, the  mythic,   the narrative, and   the  typological  (pp.   224,
226). In fact,  for Frye  this level is less lit­
eral ·than typological. Such a focus may be appropriate for the  English  Christian tradition, with  its Old  Testament ending in  Malachi's prophecy of the  second  Eli­ jah  preceding 1the Messiah,  and  with its New  Testament focusing  on  faith  in  the person of the  Christ. But  this interpreta­ tion  allows  the  Old  Testament no  voice of  its  own.   The  myth,   metaphor,  and  typology  of  Hebrew scripture concern a place  that  is  regained through obedience to the Law:  the  Hebrew Bible ends  with the  pmmise of  the  restoration of  Jeru­ salem  in  2 Chronicles 36:22-23.8

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



Like  many  literary critics,  Frye  views the Authorized Version  as the exclusive vehicle of  the  "literal" level  of the Bible. Indeed, the AV supplies the handbook for biblical  myth  and  metaphor in  the  Eng­ lish tradition because most English writers read  it, and  because  the metonymic inter­ pretations  of   the   English   tradition  are embedded  in  its  language  and   chapter headings.  But   this   position   leads   to   a parochial  impatience for  everything out­ side   the   bailiwick   of   the   AV   and   its tradition. Critical biblical scholarship is viewed excessively negatively (p. xvii and note,  p.  202,  etc.), while  modern textual omissions are attacked without a clear explanation of the  facts  (pp.   I4I, I6g).9
Even  though the AV is sufficient  for Eng­ lish literature or for a general structuralist approach,  the   reader   interested  in   the myth and  metaphor of  Mark or Job  must become familiar with some of the textual,  philological and  other knowledge that  has accumulated   since    I6II.  Who    today would  turn  to  Nahum  Tate's acting  ver­ sion  of King  Lear  or  to  the  bad  quartos for  a study  of  Shakespearean myth  and  metaphor? For  many  critics, a more satis­ factory treatment of the literal  level of the Bible  appears in  Robert Alter's The  Art of   Biblical   Narrative,  the   only  book  I know  other than  The Great  Code  to pre­ sent  a synthetic literary approach  to the Bible.10
Non-idealists will find  the  emphasis  of the second level of history and concept misplaced, since  they  view  texts  as  crea­ tive  expressions  of  writers  responding to the   cultures  they   have   grown   up   in. Frye's  uneasiness  with  the Bible's insistent  reference   to  history, to  levels  of  reality outside itself,  will  have  to  be  limited   to one  example here. He  sweeps  aside  the differences between  Protestant and   Ro­ man   Catholic   translations,  commenting that  he  is "not  concerned with  the  true  meaning of   such  words  as  episcopos  or ecclesia,  but,   for   the   most   part,   with
 nouns  so  concrete  that   it  is  practically impossible  for  any  translator to get  them wrong"  (p.  xiv). Firstly,  even  concrete words can change dramatically when  they are  translated, "carried over,"  from  one phase of language to another, as when  the metaphoric  Hebrew  phrases   "nostril  of God"   and   "heat  of  God" become   the metonymic English  idiom "wrath of God" (d. another example noted  on  p.  18). Secondly,   the  connotative  overtones of concrete  words can change radically  when they are  incorporated into  a structure of thought different  from   the  original.  As Frye  himself  sagaciously  points  out,  "all comrnentJary  is allegorical interpretation, an  attaching of ideas  to 'the structure of poetic  imagery" (Anatomy, p. 8g). The Great  Code  takes images  from  a  book of faith   and   metamorphoses  them   into   a secular   manifesto  for   the   imagination. Finally,  one  sympathizes with  the  deter­ minatiton not  to get bogged  down  in the quagmire of   denominational  wrangling, but  ('as Frye knows)  writers  have  a habit  of  responding  to the  intellectual debates of   their   times.   The  word   ecclesia,  for example,  can  stand  for different concepts at the heart  of quite  different views of the world,  as  a  list of  a few  poets  will  have to demonstrate: Dante, Langland, Chau­ cer,  Spenser,  Milton,  Blake,  and   Eliot.  For each  of these  writers,  the community that  the word  "church" stands for on the second  level  resolved  into  different exis­ tential    and   visionary    stances    on   the third  and  fourth polysemous  levels. King  James  I  realized  this  when  he  called  for a new translation, not  because  of any  lit­  erary deficiencies in the Anglican  Bishops' Bible,  but  because   the  widely  used  Cal­ vinist Geneva Bible contained a marginal note  to  I KingsI 5:I 3 exhorting the pun­ ishment  of  monarchs for  lapses  in  piety. James's qualms were fully  justified:  both his mother and  his son were executed as much  on  religious  as political gmund. At any rate, Frye's  metaphoric critique levels

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



the  significant differences between world views that have an  historical habit of confronting one another.
Frye's third  level  of  faith is  more an imaginative than a doctrinal quality, so that  it can  be treated here with  the  fourth level   of   the   fulfilled imagination. This level  of  vision  reduces the  Bible  and  the
.entire universe, with all  their  superabun­
dant  variety and antitheses, to a  single monad.  Historically, similar  views  have had   a very  uneasy relationship  with   the biblical religions, which have tended to focus  on  the  individual in  the  existential flux  of  a  history that  exhibits elements of good  and evil,  sin  and  grace. As an introduction to the  Bible and its influence on most  Western writers, this fourth level and  the participating Apocalypse of chap ter 5 are  highly misleading. Critically, the goal   resembles  the    Anatomy, where a critical meta-system razes  the  particulars of different books  and the individuality  of their various authors.
Of course, the  historical, non-idealist approach  has  equally serious  shortcom­ ings,  which Frye  exposes  ruthlessly. The contribution of The Great Code is to have opened the Bible  to students of literature as no other book  has. Wha:t is even  rarer for  an academic work, it unfolds a vision of the possibilities of  fulfilled human ex­ perience, so that the external world enters the  argument more seriously than in  the Anatomy. The Great  Code  will  exercise enormous influence in  the humanities, the final   effect   of  the   book   being aesthetic and  Frye  being the  most  poetic of  schol­ ars. To everything there is a season; with  Frye  we  turn from the  dust on  a bowl  of rose-leaves to  a vision  where  the  fire  and  the  rose  are  one.

NOTES

1 The  title   was   suggested  by   a   phrase  in Blake's  Laocoon, "The Old  and New Testa­ ments are   the  Great Code  of  Art"  (see  p. xvi  and   note) .  The enigma tic  fran tispiece from   Blake's  fob   heralds the  possibility   of

188
 human deliverance from  the  chaos and darkness within creation  (seep. 196).
2    As a critical tool  for  showing how  the  vari­ ous  parts of  the   Bible  foreshadow  and   re­ capitulate each   other, Frye's  system   is  un­  paralleled.  To   cavil    over    details  seems ungenerous.  Nevertheless, a  few  oversights and   misplaced  emphases   deserve mention. The  Psalms are  not  systematically included in  the  chapter,  though  they   belong to  the phase   of   Wisdom,  adapting  to  individual piety  the  great themes of Creation  (Psalms
104,  29,  96),  Revolution ( 105), Law   and Wisdom ( 1, 7 3,  II 9), and  the  lamentations and   thanksgivings that individualize the religious concept of retributive justice (most of  the  Psalms) .
A crucial phase, Monarchy, is omitted, possibly  because the  royal  metaphor is dealt with   at length in  chapter 4· The  Israelite monarchy  viewed   itself   as  the   antitype of all  four  previous phases, which  it  proceeded to   subsume.  As   far    as   Creation  is   con­ cemed,  the   Israelite king   assumed   several divine  prerogatives,  being    styled   "son   of God," "begotten" at his  coronation,  seated at the  "right hand" of  God  himself   (2  Sam.
7:I4,  16; Pss  2:6-7; 8g:26-27; I10:1-3;
13 2: I 1-14).  Occasionally cosmological  im­
ages  were  associated with  these  prerogatives
(Pss  72:5-7, 17;  8g: 29, 36-37, and  the dec­ oration of  Solomon's  Temple-see  W.  F. Albright,  Archaeology and  the  Religion of Israel    [Baltimore:   Johns   Hopkins   Press,
1953], pp.   147-55). The Exodus is  not  so much subsumed as  suppressed by  the  mon­ archy, since  an  absolute king  views  the idea  of  the  equality of  all  members of  society  as subversive  to  his  power. Psalm  78  presents the  history of Israel as a "parable," explain­ ing  why   the   "stubbom  and   rebellious gen­  eration" of  the  Exodus  (v.  8)   necessitated the   election  of   a  king,   David, to  organize God's  chosen   people    (v.   70;   cf.   I   Kings
8: 16) . The period of revolutionary theodicy
under  the   Judges  is  dismissed    with   con­ tempt by the  final,  monarchial editor of  that book  ( 2 1 : 2 5 ; cf. 17 :6 and  18: 1 ) . The Law  becomes the  king's prerogative  (Pss  72:1-2;
99: 4), while the   rhetoric of  the  court  sug­ gested the  absolute surservience of   all  Is­  raelites to the  crown ( 2 Sam.  I4: I 7; I9: 27;
1   Kings  3: 16-28).  Because    the   Law   in­ cluded  sacred as  well  as  civil  and  criminal jurisdictions,  it   is   no   surprise to  see   the earliest monarchs absorbing the  nation's re­ ligious traditions.  David  moved  the  Ark  of the  Covenant to  Jerusalem  (2  Sam. 6:12-
19),  while   Solomon  built   and   personally

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



dedicated  a  Temple  tn  house   it  beside   his royal  palace  ( I Kings 8) . The monarchial absorption of the  phase  of Wisdom was complete. Solomon was  credited with  com­ posing  "three thousand proverbs" ( I Kings
4: 32)  ;  all  of  the   biblical  and   apocryphal wisdom   books  except Job  and   Ben  Sirach were  attributed to  him.  Similarly, David, credited in  the  titles  as author of 73 Psalms, was by New Testament times considered as author   of    the    entire   Psalter,   including Psalms  that are  not ascribed to him in the superscriptions  (see  Acts  4: 2 5  referring  to Psalm   2, and   Hebrews 4: 7  referring to  Ps
95;   cf.   2  Sam.  I: 17-23;  3:33-34;  22: I-
23: 7).
The  phase  of   Prophecy  is  dialectically
antithetical to the  phase  of Monarchy, with­
out  which  it makes  little sense.  But Frye's description  of  Prophecy  is  so  heavily   col­ oured by Christian typology that it  is  closer to biblical apocalyptic. Actually, Old  Testa­ ment  Prophecy does  not  extend  "from crea­ tion  to final  deliverance" (p.  I  28)  as much  as  it   sees  everything   sub   specie   exodi   et legis;  it  is concerned with  contemporary re­ newal,   with    reformation.    The   prophetic voice  works  itself  out  in  a  dialectical strug­ gle   with   the  Monarchy.  The  destinies of Elijah  and  Elisha are  intimately connected to  the  fate of  the   house   of  Ahab  and   its usurpers.  Where  the   prophets  envisage a continuation of the  royal  line,  they  speak  of an   ideal   Messiah ruling  righteously  (e.g., Is.  9: 2-7).  Intimately connected with   the revolutionary and  legal  phases, Prophecy attempts to  keep  the  social   revolution alive in a post-revolutionary society. Prophecy perpetuates national and  denominational concerns (for  Israelite and  Jew), while apocalyptic moves   to  the  genuinely "wider perspective" ( p.  106)   of  the  redemption of the individual (Jewish or Gentile) and  the renewal of the universe (heaven as well as earth).
To   this   reader, _the phase   of  Apocalypse
belongs  next  after Prophecy: it first  appears in  the  Old   Testament book  of  Daniel.  Bib­ lical  apocalyptic remains firmly  anchored in what  Frye   calls   the   passive   "panoramic" stage, where a series  of  marvels  and  terrors leads   to  the  end   of  the  world   in  the   near  future  (p.  I 36).  Frye's  active  "participat­ ing"  Apocalypse is   found  neither  in   the  Bible  nor  in  traditional Christianity, but  in Blake,   the  Neoplatonists,  the   gnostics   and  some    millenarian   cults.    (See     Kathleen Raine's study of Neoplatonism in  Blake  and
Tradition [Princeton, I 968]. For  the  gnos-
 tics, see  the  Treatise on  Resurrection 49· I 5 ["already you  have   the  resurrection"],  the end  of The Gospel  of Philip, and  the  intro­ duction in   James  M.   Robinson,  ed., The Nag  H ammadi Library in  English  [Leiden: Brill,   I977; repr.   New   York:   Harper and  Row,   I98I], pp.  53,   ISI, 5·  See  also  Nor­  man  Cohn, The Pursuit   of  the  Millennium [New  York,   I96I]. On  disputes concerning the  canonicity of the  New  Testament Reve­ lation,  see   A.   Wickenhauser,  New   Testa­ ment   Introduction   [New  York:  Herder, I958], pp.  s62-6g.)
While  biblical apocalyptic merely   revives
and  expands an Old  Testament form, the Gospel  phase  introduces something radically new.  Though Paul  is given  short   shrift,  his letters and   Acts  fit  into this  phase. Frye  is right  about Jesus' conviction of the Gospel being  a  realized eschatology in  the  here  and now;  typologically, it  is the  most  advanced phase  in  the  Bible.  In other chapters, The Great   Code   sees  the   Gospel   as  the  fulfil­ ment,   since   Christ  is  the   antitype   of   all biblical   imagery  and   myth    in   chapters  6 and   7.  Frye   could   have  followed  a  micro­ cosmic  hint  in  Blake's The Everlasting Gos­ pel, which  finds  the anti type  of all the  Bible, including the   transmogrifying  Apocalypse, in Jesus  (Complete Writings, ed. G.  Keynes [London,  I966], p. 754):
He  laid  His  hand on  Moses'  Law: The  Ancient Heavens, in  Silent Awe Writ   with  Curses from   Pole  to  Pole, All  away  began to  roll.
Though introducing  the   phase   of   Mon­ archy    upsets    the   sevenfold   perfection  of Frye's    model,  early   Christians  sometimes used  an  eightfold  scheme. Since   the  resur­ rection    took   place   on   the   day   after  the Sabbath, the   Lord's  Day    was   sometimes called   the  eighth day.   See  Jean  Danielou, The  Theology of Jewish Christianity (Lon­ don: Darton, Longman and   Todd, I964), pp.  396-99    (especially  the   quotation  from the  Epistle of Barnabas  I 5 : 3-8  and  nn.  g6-
37), and  pp.  I9,  28,  34  (n.   I23), 36,  I40, I76-78.
A final  implicatiton should be mentioned. Any  phase  can   be  resuscitated at any  later
period. Thus, seventeenth-century England was   Christian,   subscribing  to    the    main points  of  the  Gospel   and   Apocalyptic. But the  seventeenth-century monarchists' use of the Bible was coloured by a return to the precepts of the Old  Testament Monarchy, while  Milton, Cromwell, and  the   puritans returned for  their inspiration to  the  phases

189

OPINIONS AND NOTES



of Revolution, Law, and  Prophecy. Frye's situation of the  book  of Job,  a wisdom  book conversant with  the  crises familiar to the Monarchy and   Prophecy, is an  excellent example  of  a   biblical   book  that  straddles more  than one  phase.
3   Frye  criticizes the  "analytical and  historical approach"  to   biblical  studies   of   the   last century, which   has  led   to  a  "criticism  in which  disintegrating the  text  became  an  end in   itself"  (p.   xvii).  Similar dissatisfaction with  the  most  corrosive aspects  of  this  type of approach is now  being  voiced  among bib­ lical  scholars themselves. Brevard S. Childs's widely   used   text,   Introduction  to  the   Old Testament as Scripture  (Philadelphia:  For­ tress  Press,  1979), acknowledges its  debt   to analytical learning   ( pp.   I7,  40,  etc.), but concludes that  biblical scholarship has  come to  a "sterile impasse" (p.  16)   that leaves  a chasm   between critical  reconstruction  and  the  biblical text  that a  reader comes  upon, and   that  allows   for   no  resonance  of  lan­ guage  and   imagery  between  parts  of   the Bible    (pp.  40-41).  Unfortunately, Childs has  too  few  literary skills  to  produce a successful new  reading of the  Bible.
i In writing as suasive  as myth,  no  words  are chosen  gratuitously.  Whatever  images    do not fit perfectly are  drained of their received meaning and   filled  with  new  thematic  sig­ nificance. See  Roland Barthes's  seminal  es­ say  on  "Myth Today," Mythologies  (Frog­ more, England: Paladin, 1973), pp. 109-59. Childs  points  to  a  "fundamental dialectic" that  affects   the   composition  of   the   text: "the  literature  formed the   identity of  the religious community  which   in  tum  shaped the  literature" (Introduction, p. 41 ) .
5   In  Rev.     15 :6,   the    angels    are    usually "dressed in  linen." Three of  the  best  Greek manuscripts read  "dressed in  stone," a  vari­ ant    that  not   only   alludes  to  one   of   the author's favourite books  (Ezek. 28: 13), but also  parallels other patterns of  imagery in­  side  and outside Revelation.  In  the  English tradition,  the   angels   are  dressed   in   stone  only  in  the  Revised  Version  ( 1881 )  and  in the  Douay-Rheims  Bible  ( 1582), the  latter following a  pre-Clementine Vulgate  tradi­ tion.  The Clementine edition of the  Vulgate
( 1592)  reads  lino  ("in linen") ; lapide   ("in stone")  is  read   in   the  Vulgate of  Jerome
(ca.  A.D.   386)   and  Alcuin's edition of the Vulgate  (before Boo), in  both  fourteenth­ century Wycliffite   English  translations, and  in  the  Latin commentaries of Bede  (d.  735, se Migne, Patrologia  Latina 93·178), Beren-

I go
 gaudius  (d.   859,   PL   q.985), Anselm   (d.
1117,   PL  162.1555), Rupert  of  Deutz (d.
1129,  PL  169.1111), Richard of  St.  Victor
(d.    1173,   PL    196.821)  and    Martin   Le­
gionensis  (d.   1221,  PL  209.387).
6   Cf.  the  paradoxes of  The Thunder, Perfect Mind: "I am  the  whore and  the  holy one.  I I am  the  wife  and   the   virgin. I I am  the mother  and   the   daughter.... I I am   the barren one  I and   many  are  her  sons."  The Nag  Hammadi Library in  English, pp.  271-
72. See  further n. 2, paragraph 4 above.
7   Saturday, 6 August 1763  in James Boswell's Life   of Johnson (London: Oxford, 1953), p. 333·
s  A recent structuralist study makes  this  point effectively. See  Michael A.  Fishbane, "The Sacred Center:  The Symbolic Structure  of the   Bible," Texts  and   Responses: Studies Presented to  Nahum N. Glatzer, ed.  M.  A. Fishbane and   P.R. Flohr (Leiden, 1975), pp.  6-27.
9   Ancient editors did  not  expunge John 7:53-
8: 11,  since  the  passage appears in  only  one of  the  dozen extant  Greek   manuscripts  be­
fore  the  eighth century. (For technical  de­ tails  concerning the  crux, see  B.  M.  Metz­ ger,   A  Textual  Commentary on  the  Greek New   Testament  [New York: United  Bible
Societies, 1971], pp.  219-22.) Furthermore, the  passage  -as  stylistically different from John  as   the    Mills    are    from    Blake-is printed  in  all  modern  English translations with  a note  explaining the  textual difficulty. Frye  rightly complains about the  silent omis­ sion   of  the   trinitarian  formula in   1   John
5:7, particularly "considering the  historical importance  the   verse   has   had"  (p.   163). But  if  no  note   records the  omission   in  the Revised Version  ( r88r), Revised Standard Version ( 1946), New  English Bible  ( 1961 ) , Jerusalem Bible   (Reader's ed.,   1968)  and New  American Bible  (1970), an  annotation explains the  difficulty in the  Jerusalem Bible (Library ed.,   1966), New   American  Stan­ dard Bible  (1971), New  International  Ver­ sion   (1973) and   the  Oxford Study Edition of  the  New   English  Bible   ( 1976). Regret­ tably,  the   comment   that  the    trinitarian formula  "does not  explicitly appear  in  the  Bible  except  in   1  John 5: 7"   (p.   163)   is wrong: Matthew 28: 19,  a  passage without textual variation, has  an  unambiguous  ref­ erence  to  all   three  persons of  the  Trinity in  the  AV  and  in every  modern  translation.
10 Robert Alter, The Art   of Biblical  Narrative (New York:  Basic  Books,  1981). Although interested in general structures, Alter's criti-

OPINIONS AND NOTES



cism  is  firmly   anchored  in   the   cumulative particulars of specific  biblical texts.  Limited to   the   prose    narratives  found  in   Genesis through  2   Samuel,  the   book   investigates such   phenomena  as   type-scenes, dialogue, repetition,  modes   of  characterization, and point  of  view. 	ALEXANDER  GLOBE


RECENT  REFERENCE BOOKS include  Justin Wintle's biographical dictionary Makers of Nineteenth Century  Culture  1800-1914   (Ox­ ford, $55.50), a substantial guide to  the  ideas  of  the  period as  well  as  to  the  people;  hence, though  none   of  the   figures  indexed  is  Cana­ dian, Canadian  Culture  nonetheless  bears   the imprint  of  those   who   are.  Canada   on  Stage
1981-82 ( CTR, $44·95) is another in the series of  illustrated  theatre  performance yearbooks. Journal of Modern Literature (9,  no.  3-4)  in­ cludes  a  guide  to   criticism  of  a   number   of Canadian writers. In   Contemporary   Literary Criticism, vol.  23   (Gale, $74.00),  there   is  an IS-column  summary   of  commentary  on   Jack  Hodgins. Contemporary Authors New  Revision Series, vol.  8  (Gale, $74.00), contains an  arti­ cle  on  Frye  by Donna Olendorf; TCLC, vol. 9 (Gale, $76.oo),  summarizes W.  W.  Campbell criticism;  Dictionary  of   Literary   Biography, vol.   I5    (British  Novelists  1930-1959;  Gale,
$I48.oo),   contains  an    excellent   article   on
Lowry   by  Ronald  Binns,   and   vol.   I3   (Brit­
ish   Dramatists Since  World  War  II;  Gale,
$I48.oo)   an    article  on    Simon   Gray    that scarcely mentions Gray's Canadian  connection. Contemporary  Authors,   vol.  I 07    (Gale,
$7 6.oo), features  Buff y  Sainte-Marie. Robert
Dubuc has  published a bilingual Vocabulaire bilingue de  la   production  television  (Lemeac and  CBC,  n.p.); and  P. G.  Socken a computer Concordance de "Bonheur d'occasion" de Gabrielle   Roy     (Univ.   Waterloo   &   ECW,
$85.oo).
Recent   reprints   include   Gilbert   Parker's
romance of  Quebec history, The  Seats  of the
Mighty (Tecumseh, $9.95);  Frederick Philip Grove's collection of literary essays, It  Needs to be  Said   (Tecumseh, $9.95), with   a fine  intro­
duction by  W. J. Keith, which probes the  his­
torical ambiance and  moral purpose of  Grove's
literary rhetoric; Norman Duncan's story  col­
lection  The   Way  of   the    Sea     (Tecumseh,
$9.95), helpfully edited by Jack Adams; Jean­ Charles  Harvey's  Fear's   Folly   (Carleton  Li­ brary, $6.95),  with   an  excellent introduction by  John O'Connor;  The  Stories  of Elizabeth Spencer (Penguin, $6.95); Robertson Davies's The  Rebel  Angels   (Penguin,  $3.95);   Hugh Brody's Maps  and   Dreams  (Penguin,  $6.g5)
 and  lnishkillane    (Douglas  &   Mcintyre,
$10.95);  Guy   Vanderhaege's  Man   Descend­ ing   (Macmillan, $8.'95)  ;  and  several  volumes of  selected   poems,   by  Phyllis  Webb    (Talon­ books,  n.p.), Rachel Korn,  translated by  Sey­ mour    Mayne    (Mosaic/Valley,  $I2.95;   pa.
$6.95), John  Robert Colombo   (Mosaic/Val­ ley, 2 vols., $8.95  and  $9.95), George Johnston (Golden Dog,  n.p.), and  Fred Cogswell   (Guer­ nica,  n.p.).
Capilano Review, Nos.   24/25  ($6.oo), is devoted  to   the   art   and   comments  of  Gathie Falk,  with  a special page  devoted to the  artist's diagram  of  identity,  whereby  being    "artist" and  being  "woman" and  being  "lover of  rasp­ berry    jam"    are    all   shown   to   have   "signifi­ cance." Canadian Poetry, no.  I I   (Fall/Winter
I g82), is devoted to  A.  J. M.  Smith. Liberte,
no.   I45   ($4.00),  contains literary statements
by  the  most  prestigious of  contemporary  Que­
bec   writers.  And    North   Dakota  Quarterly, which  includes in  its  Spring 1982  number an appreciative and  instructive commentary by Sherman   Paul    on    recent  Canadian   "long poems" (or,  as  he  prefers, "serial poems"), intends  to   publish  a  special  Canadian   issue late  in  I98g.
NOTE:  In   C.L. g6,  footnote  6 I  was  inadver­ tently  left  off  the  end  of J. R. Nursall's article "To  Dare   to  Attempt  Impious  Wonders." It
should read:  "Raymond Souster, 'St.  Mary's Street: 3 A.M.'  (I954), in  Collected Poems  of Raymond Souster, p.  262."
Douglas Barbour's Two  Poems,   "Art  Objects for an  Inner Landscape:" (C.L. g6, pp. 58-59) should   have  divided after "it says:".
W.N.
LAST PAGE
l HAVE  BEEN TRYING to  read   Andre  Brink's A   Chain  of   Voices  (Oxford,  $Ig.g5),  with little  success.  Billed  as a masterwork about the race  cruelty of South African history, the  novel is  admirable for  its  conscience  more   than  its craft. It winds   together the  lives  of  two  boys, white   and   black, who  grow  up  to  grow  apart and   to  flare  into  violence -a  familiar theme in   South  African  writing.  The  prose   would have  us  believe in  several narrators  reflecting on  their own  connection with  the  main  events
-the white   boy,  the  black  boy,  an  old  black woman who is both  mother and  mistress,  others
-but unfortunately  it's   all   a   chain  of  one voice.  The  prose   style   does   not   differentiate them. And  the  novel  reads as  though it wants desperately to  be a movie  instead.
By contrast, Maurice Gee's fine novel  Plumb
(Oxford, pa.  $6.gs) is an  engrossing  fictional

NOTES



-written- experience,   inviting  readers   tq partake of  a  whole   society  by  requiring them to  partake of its  language. Told  from  the  per­ spective  of   an   aged   Nonconformist/pacifist/ politician-preacher, it  reveals  how a whole  cul­ ture   (New  Zealand)  has shifted  uncomfortably out  of its  Presbyterian  middle-classness. At  the same  time, it  records the  kinds  of sacrifice  that  has  entailed.  The  rebellious preacher, locking himself   away   with   his  own  conscience,  gives little   thought  to  how   his  reach   for  indepen­ dence  affects   his  family    (his   wife,  who   kills herself  in  servitude; his  children,  who opt  for safety   and   security wherever  they  can  find  it and   as  soon  as  they  can:  conservatism, mar­ riage,  America). In his last days, Plumb revisits  his   children  in   an   endeavour  to   make    his peace  with   them;  they receive  him  quizzically at   best-not   without  love,  but   not   without relief  when   he  finally  goes, either. If the  most alienated  son,  homosexual  and   bitter,  cannot forgive,  that   underscores  the   reality  of   the tension  established by  his  father; the  fact  that  as   readers  we   are    allowed  to   sec   through Plumb's  mask    of   self-satisfaction-and    yet with   understanding! -to the   meanness that lies beneath underscores the  technical dexterity of  an   admirable  novel.    The    Halfmen  of  0 (Oxford, $10.95)  shows  that  Gee  can  write   a captivating  adventure-fantasy for   children  as well.  A cross  between Persephone and  Tolkien, it  tells  of a child's capture by the  halfmen who live  underground, and  of  a  battle of  will  and soul  that  regains for  the  world  a  balance  be­ tween  good  and  evil.
Among recent Australian novels  and  stories, there is  more of  a  sense  of  hell   than evil,  a hell identified with  Brisbane, middle-classness, "okkerism," and  suburban life.  A  brittle wit  is the   typical  medium  for   such   critiques. The self-reflective  stories   of  Graham  Jackson's Square Crib   (Univ.  Queensland, n.p.)  regale themselves with  anecdotes of competitive drunkenness; Geoffrey Dutton's The Eye Opener (Univ. Queensland, $8.50) is a satiric sexual  romp, as though by Fielding out  of Tom Sharpe, through  the  art of  recent   mores,  and vice  versa; Gerard Lee's   True Love   and  how to  get  it  (Univ. Queensland, $12.95) parodies conventional  romance  by  conventionally   em­ bracing the   new-found freedom of  vernacular oaths. Rather better, funnier, and  more  serious  is  Peter Carey's Bliss  (Fitzhenry  &  Whiteside,
$18.25)   which    begins    when   a   man    named Harry   Joy,    who    has    been    dead    for    nine minutes of bliss, is electrified back  to his  life of punishment.  Declaiming  against   fate,   he   pa­ rades   in   tracksuit  and   sandshoes  through   his reclaimed days,  cataloguing the  ironies of  pre-
 sumed ordinariness:  sexual ambition among his peers,  drugs and  incest  among the  young, mer­ cantile  callowness  among  his   colleagues,  for which  he  is  rewarded  by  incarceration in  an  asylum. So far,  so bizarre. But  at  this  point the novel  vengefully chases  its  Message: that in  a siJC:ties-ish  Alternate  Lifestyle, replete  with   its ostensibly refreshing   obscenities,  is  the   truth that makes  us children free. Like  the other Aus­ tralian  publications noted   here,  it  reads  finally  like  a  book  from  twenty years  ago,  luxuriating in  the  release from   previous linguistic restric­ tions,  but  longing still  for  a  literary form  that  is  commensurate with  imagination's reach.
W.N.
