$1.25  per copy


CANADIAN
liTERATURE N°·34


Autumn, 196i


VIEWS OF LEON]IRD COHEN


Articles

BY DESMOND PACEY, PHYLLIS C;lWSSKl!RTH, SANDRA DJWA, CLARA THOMAS, JOHI-< 13. OWER

Chronicle

BY  WYNNE FRANCIS


Reviews

BY  JOHN ROBERT CULO\[TI(), ::\L\R'lA FL\:\fENGO,  KEITH  HARRISON, LOUIS DUDEK, DOROTHY Ll\'ESAY,  D. J· STEPHENS,  FRANK DAVEY, RALPH  GUSTAFSO.:-.:, PE'l LR  S l EVENS, FH  \NCES  FRAZER, \V. 1-1. NEW, ROBERT C.  WALTON,  GEORGE \\'UUDCUCK, RUY DANIELLS,
D. R. FORRESTER,  GERALD :\WRG.\X, R.  W. DUKNING




A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW








EXPANDING VISTAS














WE ARE    HAPPY  to  tell our  readers  that  Canadian  Literature has  received  a grant  of $4,800  from  the  Canada Council  to assist the  journal  in various  directions.   Among  other  things,  this  grant  will replace  the  maintenance subsidy  which   we  have  received  from   the  Koerner  Foundation  in  Vancouver since the foundation of Canadian Literature  in  I959,  and,  at the same time as we express  our   appreciation  of  the  Canada  Council's   present  support, we  would record  our  gratitude to the  Koerner Foundation for  the  help  it gave  during  the vital years of commencement and early publication.
The  Canada Council  grant  also provides for an expansion  of Canadian Litera­ ture in both  size and  scope.  From  the last issue we have increased  the size of the journal  to a regular  I 04  pages,  and  this length  will be maintained,  allowing  for a more  ample  review  coverage  of Canadian books.  \Ve are  also  enabled  to  pay writers  somewhat   more  generously  than  in  the  past,  and  this in  turn  will allow us to experiment more widely with both  contributors and  contributions.

* 	* 	*
IN OUR    LAST  ISSUE  the  ways  in  which  Canadian  publishing might  be strengthened were somewhat widely discussed. One  way is clearly the modification of the agency system by the increased  separate publication of foreign books in Canada. A good example  of what  can  be done is the newly issued book,


3

EDITORIAL



Eskimo Masks:  Art and Ceremony,  by Dorothy  Jean Ray,  with  photography  by Alfred  A. Blaker  (McClelland & Stewart, $I 5.00).  It is not in the narrow  sense Canadiana, since neither  the  author, nor  the  photographer, nor  the  objects  they deal  with  are  Canadian; the  masks described  and  illustrated are from  an Ameri­ can  collection  and  originated  in Alaska.  But our  own  concern  with  local  Eskimo art  gives this book  a strong  peripheral interest,  and  it is so admirably  produced  that   those  who  are  at  all  interested   in  North   American native  art  will find  it
worth   reading   and   thanks   to  simultaneous  publication  in  the  United   States, reasonable   for  what  it  is.  We  could  do  with  many  more  arrangements of  this kind.  Anything that  strengthens Canadian  publishing  is likely to  benefit  writers and  readers  alike.






































4


THE	PHENOMENON OF	LEONARD	COHEN



Desmond  Pacey













IN NAMING LEONARD CoHEN a phenomenon, I am motivated by  the  quantity, quality   and  variety  of  his  achievement. Still  only  thirty-three, Cohen  has published  four  books of verse and  two novels, and  has made  a national if not an international reputation by his poetry reading,  folk-singing, and skill with the  guitar. The  best of his poems have  lyrical  grace  and  verbal  inevitability; his two  novels are  as perceptive  in content  and  as sophisticated in technique as any that  have  appeared in English  since the Second  World  War; and  his voice has a magic  incantatory quality   which  hypnotizes  his audiences,  and  especially  teen­ age audiences,  into  a state  of bliss if not of grace.
In  this paper  I intend  to place the major  emphasis  on his second  novel, Beauti­ ful Losers  (  1g66), his most impressive single achievement, and  in my opinion  the most  intricate, erudite, and  fascinating Canadian  novel  ever  written. But since Beautiful  Losers is not  an  isolated  achievement, but  the  culmination of Cohen's career  to date,  I shall  begin  by seeing  how his other  books lead  up to and  enrich our  understanding of it.
The  title of Cohen's first book of verse, Let Us Compae
might  have  applied   almost  equally  well  to  his latest  novel,  which  among  other things  is an  exercise  in  comparative mythology.  From  the  first  Cohen  has been interested  in  mythology  and  magic,  in  the  imaginative means  which  men  at  all times and  in all places have devised to give interest, order,  meaning and  direction to their world. In  Let Us Compare Mythologies he was chiefly concerned  with the

5

PHENOMENON OF  LEONARD COHEN



similarities and differences between the Hebrew  mythology of his family and the Christian  mythology   of  his  environment, but  by  the  time  he  wrote  Beautiful Losers he had  become  much  more ecumenical.
The  first  poem  in  Let  Us  Compare Mythologies, "Elegy", exhibits  a number of  characteristics which  recur  throughout his work:   his almost  magical  control and  modulation of verbal  melody, his sensuous particularity, the empathetic reach of his imagination, and  his fascination with situations which  mingle  violence  and tenderness  to heighten  the effect of both.  We also see emerge for the first time the theme  of  the  quest -here  as usually in  Cohen  the  quest  for  a lost or unknown God,  mysterious,  elusive, but  compelling.  Cohen,  like his racial  ancestor  Spinoza (to  whom  he frequently alludes), is a man  drunk  with  God.
Almost  as  prominent in  Let  Us  Compare Mythologies as the  religious  theme is that  of sex. Indeed, in Cohen's work,  as in more  ancient  mythologies,  religion and  sex are  closely associated: this association  reaches  its culmination in  Beauti­ ful Losers, but it is embryonically  present in this first book of verse.
These  twin quests for God  and for sexual fulfillment are motivated by the recog­ nition  of the individual's vulnerability, by an agonized  sense of loneliness. Loneli­  ness and  the  means  of escaping  it -sometimes tragic,  sometimes  pathetic, some­ times at least temporarily successful-form one of the basic and recurrent themes in  Beautiful   Losers. It  is present  in  this first book of verse in  "Summer Night".

And the girl in my arms
broke suddenly  away, and shouted  for us all,
Help!  Help!  I am alone. But then  all subtlety  was gone and it was stupid  to be obvious before the field and sky, experts in simplicity.  So we fled on the highways,
in our  armoured cars, back to air-conditioned homes.

But thus  to emphasize  the serious and  tragic  aspects of Let Us Compare Myth­ ologies is to ignore  the wit and  humour which  here as in all of Cohen's work add variety  and  contrast  to his vision. Beautiful  Losers is, in one sense, a comic novel, a modern version of picaresque, and  among  the early poems are several examples  of Cohen's comic gift,  perhaps best of all, "The Fly".

In his black armour
the house-fly marched the field of Freia's  sleeping thighs, undisturbed by the soft hand
which vaguely moved
to end his exercise.

6

PHENOMENON OF  LEONARD COHEN



And it ruined my day-
this fly which never planned to charm her or to please
should walk boldly on that ground
I tried so hard
to lay my trembling knees.

The  Spice-Box  of  Earth  ( rg6r) reinforces  the  themes  of religious  and  sexual affirmation   and   their  frequent  identification in  Cohen's  work.  The   love  play celebrated  with  such hypnotic tenderness  in "You  Have  the  Lovers"  is compared to a ritual,  and  the  loss of self-consciousness in the sexual  union  become  a  para­ digm of a mystical epiphany. For Cohen,  the state of sexual fulfillment  is virtually  synonymous  with  the  state  of grace: the  fulfilled  lover feels himself to be a part  of a universal  harmony. As he puts it in "Owning Everything":

Because you are close,
everything that men make, observe or plant is close, is mine:
the gulls slowly writhing, slowly singing on the spears of wind;
the iron gate above the river;
the bridge holding between stone fingers her cold bright necklace of pearls.

With your body and your speaking you have spoken for everything, robbed me of my strangerhood, made me one
with the root and gull and stone, ...


(Incidentally, the  image  of  the  necklace,  in  line  8  above,  becomes  one  of  the thematic symbols of Beautiful  Losers.)
The  identification of religion and sex is also seen in "The Priest Says Goodbye", where  the  priest is the lover and  lust is said to "burn like fire in a holy tree,"  but its most conspicuous  occasion is the  poem "Celebration", where  the act of fellatio becomes  a  "ceremony" and   is  likened to  the   phallus worship  of  the  ancient Romans, and  where  the  man's  semen  becomes a "blessing." The  clearly affirma­ tive tone  of this poem surely gives the  lie to those critics of Beautiful  Losers who profess to find satire  and  disgust in the sexual scenes. An affirmation of all forms of sexual  activity,  however  "perverse" in  conventional terms,  provided that  they

7

PHENOMENON OF  LEONARD COHEN



do  not  involve  outright cruelty  or  murder, is surely  an  organic  part  of Cohen's philosophy.
But  if  tenderness  and  affirmation are  present  in  The  Spice-Box of Earth,  so also are  the darker  themes of human vulnerability and  loneliness and  of violence and  cruelty.  Cohen  is a romantic, but  he is not the type of romantic optimist  who ignores  or  denies  the  existence  of evil.
Bitterness  at the  indignities  and  false guises imposed  upon  the Jews dominates "The Genius", and  the bitterness  of a betrayed  lover "The Cuckold's Song."  This latter  poem is a good illustration of Cohen's  versatility of both matter and manner. It begins in anger  and  modulates into wit and self-mockery;  in style it substitutes, for  Cohen's usual  melodic  grace,   harsh colloquial diction   and  angry  speech rhythms.

If this looks like a poem
I might as well warn you at the beginning that it's not meant to be one.
I don't want to turn anything into poetry.
I know all about her part in it
but I'm  not concerned with that right now. This is between you and me.
Personally I don't give a damn who led who on:
in fact I wonder if I give a damn at all. But a man's got to say something. Anyhow you fed her 5 MacKewan  Ales,
took her to your room, put the right records on,
and in an hour or two it was done.

What really makes me sick
is that everything goes on as it went before: I'm still a sort of friend,
I'm still a sort of lover. But not for long:
that's why I'm  telling this to the two of you.
The fact is I'm turning  to gold, turning to gold. It's a long process, they say,
it happens in stages.
This is to inform you that I've already turned to clay.

A particular premonition of Beautiful Losers found  in The Spice-Box of Earth is the mechanical mistress in "The Girl Toy", which  points forward to the Danish Vibrator of  the  novel. This  poem  is also one  of the  first indications of Cohen's

8

PHENOMENON OF  LEONARD COHEN



fascination with  machinery, which  becomes  a thematic motif  in  both  his novels. In  the  poem,  as in  the  novels, Cohen's attitude towards  the  machine is  ambiv­ alent: it  is at  once  frightening and  alluring. "The Girl  Toy", in its  allusions  to Yeats'  "Sailing to  Byzantium"  ("famous  golden  birds",  "hammered  figures"), is also premonitory of the strong  Yeatsian  influences  present  in Beautiful  Losers.



SucH PREMONITIONS in the early  poetry,  however, fade  into relative  insignificance  when we examine Cohen's first novel, The Favourite  Game
( I963).  It positively  bristles  with  allusions,  images  and  thematic motifs  which were to be more fully developed  in the second novel. The Favourite  Game, which at first reading  one  is apt  to dismiss as just another if somewhat superior  version of  the  autobiographical novel  of  the  young  artist  growing  to  maturity, in  fact becomes  a  much  more  richly  resonant novel  when  it  is re-read   after  Beautiful Losers. For  example,   the  statement that   Martin Stark,  the  "holy  idiot" of The Favourite   Game, "stuck   his index  fingers  in  his  ears  for  no  apparent  reason, squinting  as  if  he  were  expecting  some  drum-splitting explosion"  is  apt  to  be passed  over  on  first reading  as a mere  omen  of disaster;  in  the  light  of the  dis­ cussion of the  Telephone Dance  in  Beautiful  Losers it becomes  a powerful sym­ bolic  allusion  to  man's   perpetual attempts to  find  connection with  the  cosmic rhythms.  When  we read  that  Wanda's face "blurred into the face of little Lisa ... that  one dissolved into the face of Bertha" we think of the transposition not merely in  terms  of  nostalgia  for  Breavman's lost loves, but  also in  terms  of  the  eternal  principle   of  femininity  which   in  Beautiful   Losers  sees  Isis,  Catherine,  Edith,  Mary  Voolnd,  the  Virgin  Mary,  Marilyn   Monroe  and  the  blonde  housewife  in the car  blend  into  one essential Woman or Universal Mother. A seemingly  casual statement that  "We  all want  to  be  Chinese  mystics living in  thatched huts,  but getting  laid  frequently" becomes  much  more  meaningful when  read  in  the light of  the  "go  down  on  a  saint" motif  in  Beautiful   Losers,  and  that  novel's  more fully  articulated  notion   of  the  desirability   of  combining   spiritual  vision  with physical  ecstasy.
The  quest  motif,  which  we have  seen adumbrated in the early  poems, is more fully  developed  in The   Favourite  Game, but  still remains  embryonic in  contrast with  the much  more intricate version that  occurs in Beautiful  Losers. Breavman's prayerful  invocation of God  in his journal  entry  (see p.  I 99) is a first sketch for the narrator's prayers in the second  novel, and  Breavman's wavering  between  that

9

PHENOMENON OF  LEONARD COHEN



quest  and  greed  for  secular  wealth  and  success is premonitory of the  recurrent pattern of aspiration and  rebellion  through  which  the narrator of Beautiful  Losers passes. Breavman also has a vision of the  ultimate  unity  of all things  which  pre­ figures the  narrator's visions of cosmic unity  in the later  novel:

Mozart  came  loud  over  the  PA, sewing  together  everything  that  Breavman observed. It wove, it married  the two figures bending over the records, whatever the  music touched,  child  trapped  in  London  Bridge, mountain-top  dissolving in mist, empty swing rocking like a pendulum,  the row of glistening red canoes, the players clustered  underneath   the  basket, leaping  for  the  ball like a stroboscopic photo  of a splashing drop  of water-whatever it  touched  was frozen in an im­ mense tapestry. He was in it, a figure by a railing.

The  idea  that  many  forms of popular culture, and  especially the hit tunes of the juke-box and  the  radio,  are pathetic but  not contemptible versions of this longing for  union,  this q11est for  harmony, is also sketched  in The Favourite  Game  (see, for example,  pp.  222-3), and  then  much  more fully worked  out  in such sections as "Gavin Gate  and  the Goddesses" in Beautiful  Losers.
A rather  similar  link between  the two novels is their mutual concern with magic and  miracles,  and  their  joint  acceptance of the  movie  as a contemporary form of  magic.  The  most  pervasive  thematic motif  in The Favourite  Game  is  Breav­ man's  conception of himself  as a sort  of magician, miracle-worker, or  hypnotist.  After  Bertha,  Breavman's childhood  girl-friend, falls from  the tree, he says:

"Krantz, there's something special about my voice." "No, there isn't."
"There  is so. I can make things happen."

And  after  his father's death,  he performs  a magic  rite:

The  day after  the funeral  Breavman  split open one of his father's  formal  bow ties and  sewed in a message. He  buried  it in the garden,  under  the snow beside the fence where in summer the neighbour's lilies-of-the-valley infiltrate.

He  also declares  that  "His  father's death  gave  him  a touch  of mystery,  contact with  the  unknown. He  could  speak  with  extra  authority on  God  and  Hell."  He studies  everything he  can  about  hypnotism, and  in one  of the  funniest  scenes in the novel hypnotizes  his mother's maid  and  causes her to make love to him. Breav­ man  sounds  very much  like F. in Beautiful  Losers when  he tells the girl, Tamara, "I want  to touch  people like a magician, to change  them  or hurt  them, leave my brand, make  them  beautiful." Again  reminding us of F.,  and  even  more  of the


10

PHENOMENON OF  LEONARD COHEN



narrator of Beautiful  Losers, Breavman longs for a miraculous transfiguration of himself:

In his room in the World Student  House, Breavman leans elbows on the window­ sill and watches the sun ignite the Hudson.  It is no longer the garbage river, catch­ all for safes, excrement, industrial  poison, the route of strings of  ponderous barges.
Can something do that to his body?
There  must be something written  on the fiery water. An affidavit from God. A detailed  destiny chart.  The  address of his perfect  wife. A message choosing him for glory or martyrdom.


When  he is enjoying  the love-affair  with Shell, and  writing  the love poetry which appeared in The  Spice-Box of Earth, Breavman feels that  he is creative  because he is "attached to magic." At the boys' camp,  he longs to be "calm  and  magical," to be  "the  gentle  hero  the folk come  to love, the  man  who  talks to animals,  the Baal Shem  Tov  who carried  children  piggy-back." But the closest approximation in  The   Favourite  Game  to the great  thematic passage  about  magic  in  Beautiful Losers comes when  Breavman watches  the  firefly and  thinks  that  it is dying:

He  had  given  himself  to  the  firefly's crisis. The   intervals became   longer  and longer  between  the small cold flashes. It  was Tinker  Bell. Everybody had  to  be­ lieve  in  magic.  Nobody  believed in  magic.  He  didn't   believe in  magic.  Magic didn't  believe in magic. Please don't  die.
It  didn't.   It  flashed  long  after  Wanda  left.  It  flashed  when  Krantz  came  to borrow Ed's Time  magazine. It  flashed as he tried to sleep. It flashed as he scrib­ bled his journal in the dark.

The  firefly there  is obviously  a symbol of an  ultimate  light,  a pulsing signal from the  eternal  rhythm, and  its  continued life, as time  (Time) is carried  away,  be­ speaks  the  persistence  of  Light.  This  symbolic  method   of  writing,  which  only occasionally  overrides  the  literal  method  in The   Favourite  Game, becomes  con­ tinuous  in  Beautiful  Losers, which  is a powerful  symbolist  novel from  beginning  to end.
A special form of the magical  theme is the emphasis  Cohen  places on the movies as the chief contemporary expression of the magical  process. References to movies occur  on  almost  every  page  of  Beautiful   Losers, but  the  emphasis  first  becomes apparent in The Favourite  Game. Near  the  beginning of that  first novel, Breav­ man  watches  a movie of his family  in the course of which  "A gardener is led shy and grateful into  the sunlight  to be preserved with his betters." Here, obviously the


I I

PHENOMENON OF  LEONARD COHEN



magical  quality  of movies is their  capacity  to confer  a sort of immortality. Later on,  Breavman imagines  himself and  the girl  Norma  as they would  appear in the camera  eye:


The  camera  takes them  from  faraway,  moves through  the  forest, catches  the glint of a raccoon's eyes, examines the water, reeds, closed water-flowers, involves itself with mist and rocks.
"Lie beside me," Norma's voice, maybe Breavman's.
Sudden  close-up of her  body part  by part,  lingering  over  the  mounds  of her thighs, which are presented immense and shadowed, the blue denim tight on the flesh. The  fan  of creases between her thighs. Camera  searches her  jacket for the shape of breasts. She exhumes a pack of cigarettes. Activity is studied closely. Her fingers move like tentacles. Manipulation of cigarette  skilled and  suggestive.  Fin­ gers are  slow, violent, capable  of holding anything.


Here  what  fascinates  Cohen,  as it  will again  in  Beautiful  Losers, is the  magical capacity  of the camera  to transfigure reality, to intensify experience,  and to suggest symbolic overtones  by its searching examination of the details of fact.  One  source of Breavman's magical  insight  is that  a "slow-motion movie"  is "always  running somewhere  in his mind."
This  in  tum  suggests  another way  in which  The Favourite  Game  illuminates one of the themes of Beautiful  Losers. In  the later novel, F. tells the narrator (and since  most  of  the  narrative is in  the  first  person,  I shall  hereafter  speak  of the narrator as "I") that  "We've got  to learn  to stop  bravely  at  the surface.  We've got  to  learn   to  love  appearances." On  other  occasions  he  directs  "I" never  to overlook  the  obvious,  to  "aim   yourself  at  the  tinkly  present", and  to "Connect nothing  ... Place  things  side  by  side  on  your  arborite table,  if  you  must,  but connect  nothing." Subsequently, in  a passage  which  out  of context  is rather  ob­ scure, he says:

Of  all  the  laws which  bind  us to  the  past, the  names  of things are  the  most severe.... Names preserve the dignity of Appearance.... Science begins in coarse naming,  a willingness to disregard  the  particular  shape  and  destiny of each  red life, and  call them  all Rose. To  a more  brutal,  more active eye, all  flowers look alike, like Negroes and Chinamen.

What   the  slow-motion   camera   does  is to  reveal  the  individuality of  things,  the sensuous  particularity of being. Cohen's belief is that  the truly magical  view is not attained by looking at the world  through  a haze of generality, or through  the still

12

PHENOMENON OF LEONARD COHEN



frames  of scientific categories,  but  by examining as closely as possible the particu­ lar  streaks  on  the  particular tulip.  In  this he resembles Wordsworth, who sought by close examination of the familiar to discover  the element  of  wonder  in it.  (If the  juxtaposition  of  Cohen  and  Wordsworth seems  odd,  it  might  be  useful  to recall  that  at  least  once  in  Beautiful  Losers there  is an  obvious  echo  of Words­  worth's "Tintern  Abbey"-"Five years with  the  length of five years.")  Hence  it is that  we get such  passages as the following in The Favourite  Game, passages in which  the search  for sensuous exactitude has been developed  into a fine art:

How many leaves have to scrape together  to record the rustle of the wind? He tried  to distinguish the sound of acacia from the sound of maple.
"If you tape  their  [birds' J    whistles, Shell, and  slow them down, you can hear
the  most extraordinary  things. What  the  naked ear  hears as one note is often in reality two or three  notes sung simultaneously. A bird can sing three notes at the same time."

There is another way in which  the use of movies in The Favourite  Game  points forward to  Beautiful  Losers. Breavman says to his friend  Krantz "we're walking into  a  European movie",  and  proceeds  to imagine  himself as an old army  officer in such a film. This  exemplifies another magical  power of the cinema: its capacity to enlarge  our  experience,  to provide  us with  vicarious  living. To  this F. alludes in  Beautiful  Losers when  he writes to "I", "You  know what  pain  looks like, that kind of pain, you've been inside newsreel Belsen."
Closely related  to magic,  and  serving  as a further link between  The  Favourite
Game  and  Beautiful  Losers, are  the  games  which  figure so prominently in both novels.  The  game  is a  kind  of  ritual  which  imposes  order  and  pleasure  on  the minutiae of daily living,  and  is thus in itself a kind of micro-myth or semi-sacred rite.  In  Beautiful   Losers,  F.  says, "Games are  nature's most  beautiful creation. All  animals   play  games,  and  the  truly  Messianic  vision  of  the  brotherhood of creatures  must  be based on rhe idea  of the game ... " When  F. buys the factory, he  does  not  exploit  it  for  commercial success,  but  turns  it  into  a  playground. Games  play a very large  part in The  Favourite  Game, as the title suggests:  Breav­ man  plays a game with Bertha  which leads to her fall from the apple-tree, he plays "The Soldier  and  the  Whore" with  Lisa  and  wrestles with  her  in  the snow,  he visualizes Krantz as "first  figure of a follow-the-leader game  through the woods",  he watches  a baseball  game  at  the  boys' camp  where  he works for  the summer, and  at the very end of the novel he remembers  "the  favourite game" of his child­ hood:

PHENOMENON OF  LEONARD COHEN



Jesus! I just remembered  what  Lisa's favourite  game was. After a heavy snow we would  go into  a  back yard  with  a few of our  friends.  The  expanse of snow would be white and  unbroken.  Bertha was the spinner. You held her hands while she turned  on her heels, you circled her until your feet left the ground. Then  she let go and  you flew over the snow. You  remained  still in  whatever  position you landed.  When  everyone had  been flung in  this fashion  into  the  fresh snow, the beautiful  part  of the game began. You stood up carefully, taking great  pains not to  disturb  the  impression you had  made.  Now  the  comparisons.  Of  course you would have done your best to land  in some crazy position, arms and legs sticking out.  Then  we walked  away, leaving  a  lovely white  field of blossom-like shapes with footprint stems.

The  dust-jacket of The  Favourite  Game  declares that  "the  favourite game itself is love".  This  seems  to me  a serious  misreading of  the  novel.  As Iread  it,  and especially the final paragraph, the favourite game is to leave an impression  on the snow,  to leave  behind  one  an  interesting design,  and  by extension  Itake  this to include   the  novel  itself,  which  is Cohen's design  of  his own  early  life,  and  by further extension  of all artistic  creation. The  game is beautiful for Cohen  because it  is  associated  with  the  innocence of  childhood   and  because  it  is a  successful attempt of  the  human imagination to  impose  order  upon   reality.  Two  of  F.'s ideas  in  Beautiful   Losers are  relevant  here.  At one  point  he declares  "Prayer is translation. A man  translates himself into  a child  asking for all there  is in a lan­ guage  he has barely  mastered." At another, we are told that  F.'s "allegiance is to the  notion  that  he is not  bound  to the  world  as given,  that  he  can  escape  from the  painful  arrangement of things  as they are."  "Escapism", so long a derogatory term  in  twentieth-century literary  circles, is for Cohen  a desirable  thing: movies, games,  radio  hit tunes,  art  and  prayer  are desirable things because  they lift us out of the  ruck of routine  and  above  the rubble  of  time.
There are  other  ways in which  The Favourite  Game  is premonitory of  Beauti­ ful Losers- the  incidental comments  on  Canada, on  Montreal, and  on  Jewish life and  values;  the humour; the alternation between  tenderness  and violence;  the wavering  between  self -glorification  and  self -doubt; the  hostile  allusions to scien­ tific  achievement; the  many  ambivalent references  to  machinery; the  stress  on sexual ecstasy and  especially upon  the oral forms of it and upon  masturbation; the contempt for  conventional bourgeois  behaviour and  attitudes; recurrent images which  give  to  the  novel  a  poetic  resonance; the  emphasis  upon  loneliness  and nostalgia -but  rather   than   take  time  to  develop  them  Ifeel Imust  point  out how this first novel differs from  its successor. It is a much  more subjective  novel, and  a  much  more  self-indulgent one.  Whereas  Beautiful   Losers is about  a  cast

PHENOMENON OF  LEONARD COHEN



of characters none of whom  bear  much  resemblance  to Cohen  himself or to mem­ bers of his family  and  his friends,  The  Favourite Game is quite  obviously  auto­  biographical.  Like  Joyce's   Portrait, it  is  a  novel  in  the  lyrical  mode,  whereas Beautiful Losers  is much  closer to the dramatic mode of  Finnegan's Wake. Much  of The  Favourite Game is taken  up  with  family  history -the  death  of Breav­ man's   father, the  neurotic   possessiveness and  ultimate psychosis of  his  mother, the  pathetic respectability of his uncles. These scenes, and  those dealing  with the author's own  youthful  memories,  are  the  strongest  part  of the  book:   the  author is still at the stage  of recording  rather  than dominating and  transforming reality. When,  in  the  Shell-Gordon interlude,  he  tries to get into  the  minds  of a young New  England   woman   and  her  husband, most  of  the  life  and  particularity go out of the style.




SINCE The  Spice-Box of  Earth   was  also  a  very  personal book,  Cohen  seems to have  felt  that  he must  break  out  of the  prison of self and attempt a more objective  art. The  significance  of his third  book of poems, Flowers for Hitler   ( r g64), at  any  rate in relation  to Beautiful Losers,  lies in its strenuous effort  to broaden and  deepen  and  objectify  its author's interests  and  sympathies. In  a rather  too flamboyant but still basically  honest  note  to the  publisher,  which is printed  on the dust-jacket, Cohen  declares  of Flowers   for Hitler:

This  book moves me from the world of the golden-boy poet into the dung pile of the front-line writer. I didn't  plan it this way. I loved the tender  notices Spice-Box got  but  they embarrassed  me a little.  Hitler  won't  get the same hospitality from
the  papers.  My sounds are  too  new, therefore  people will say:  this is derivative, this is slight, his power has failed. Well, I say that there has never been a book like this, prose or poetry, written  in Canada.  All I ask is that  you put it in the hands of my generation  and it will be recognized.

I have not read  carefully the reviews of Flowers  for Hitler, so I cannot say whether Cohen's  fears  were  justified.  I do  know,  however,  that  the  charge  of  derivative­ ness has  been  levelled  at  Beautiful Losers,  and  that  it  has  been  compared  (very vaguely,  as is the safe  way)  to the  writing  of Sartre,  Genet,  Burroughs, Thomas Pyncheon,  John  Barth,  and  Allen Ginsberg.  One  important object  of my present exercise is to show  that  Beautiful Losers  can  best be seen  as  the  culmination of Cohen's  own  artistic  development, not as the imitation of  someone  else.

PHENOMENON OF  LEONARD COHEN



Flowers  for Hitler  is not  quite  as different  from  its predecessors as Cohen's dust-jacket  statement  might lead us to  believe. As the title suggests, there is still the  juxtaposition of beauty and ugliness, tenderness and violence, which we have seen to have been a feature of his work from the beginning; there are still a num­ ber  of love  poems which  combine  wit, tenderness, and  passion;  there  are still poems of humourous self-mockery and ironic ballads of everyday life. But the new element is there, and it predominates. It takes, largely, two forms: disgust at and revulsion from the greed, hypocrisy, and cruelty of  twentieth-century politics, and a newly urgent longing for a religious transfiguration  which will rid the poet of his self-absorption.
In  the political poems, he expresses the idea that  the horrors of our age make
those of  previous generations seem insignificant;  that  Canadian political life is sordid and dull; and that History is merely an opiate:

History is a needle
for putting men asleep anointed with the poison
of all they want to keep

(This passage, incidentally, turns up again in Beautiful Losers, in slightly amended form, as "F.'s  Invocation  to History in the Middle Style".)  Canada  is "a  dying animal"  to which he refuses (adapting a line from Yeats)  to "be fastened". Everywhere he looks he sees guilt and corruption,  and  he feels his own involve­ ment in it and  repulsion from it.
This  part  of Flowers for Hitler points forward  to F.'s  political involvement in Beautiful Losers; F. is a French-Canadian nationalist, a Separatist, a Member of Parliament,  a  revolutionary  leader,  and  his final political gesture is to blow up the  statue  of  Queen  Victoria  on  Sherbrooke  Street.  But  F.  himself recognizes that  the sense of involvement with other men which leads to his kind of political activity is only a stage on the way to the final break-through  which he hopes "I" will achieve. "I" 's final apotheosis transcends politics: it involves transfiguration, not an improvement  of time but a leap into eternity.
The final answer of Beautiful Losers, the loss of self in the pursuit of sainthood, is also adumbrated in Flowers for Hitler. The process begins in confession of guilt; in the very first poem, "What  I'm  Doing Here," Cohen confesses that he has lied, conspired against love, tortured,  and  hated,  and  he ends by calling upon "each one of you to confess." Confession leads to humility, as in "The  Hearth" where he learns that  his lust "was not so rare a masterpiece",  and to self-abnegation in

x6

PHENOMENON OF  LEONARD COHEN



which  he vows to forget  his personal style and surrender to the mysterious silence, become a vessel for renewing  grace:

I will forget my style
Perhaps a mind will open in this world perhaps a heart will catch rain
Nothing will heal and nothing will freeze but perhaps a heart will catch rain....
He  longs for  purgation and  discipline  leading  to a new life: There is a whitewashed hotel waiting for me
somewhere, in which I will begin my fast and
my new life.

Oh to stand in the Ganges wielding a yard of intestine.

Let me renew myself
in the midst of all the things of the world which cannot be connected.

This  idea  is perhaps   best  expressed  in  "For   Anyone  Dressed  m  Marble", m  a passage which  also finds its way into  Beautiful Losers:

I see an orphan, lawless and serene, standing in a corner of the sky,
body something like bodies that have been, but not the scar of naming in his eye.
Bred close to the ovens, he's burnt inside.
Light, wind, cold, dark-they use him like a bride.

The  "saint" is a lawless orphan because  he has detached himself from  the claims of family  and  society;  he stands  in a corner  of the sky because  he has transcended earthly  values;  he has a body because  he is still human, but  he has overcome  the human fault  of missing the particular in the general  by the use of "coarse  names"; aware  of human violence as expressed  in the gas ovens of Nazi Germany, he has been  purged   by  his closeness to it  and  has  become  a kind  of empty  vessel into which  the eternal  powers may  pour  themselves.



WrH ALL    THIS  AS    BACKGROUND   and   context,   Beautiful Losers (I g66)   becomes  relatively  easy to appreciate and  understand. I say  rela­ tively easy, because  it remains  a difficult and  sometimes  baffling book.

17

PHENOMENON OF  LEONARD COHEN



First, the title. Beautiful  Losers are those who achieve the beauty of "sainthood" (and  it is necessary to put  that  word  in quotes  because  Cohen  uses it, as we shall see in a moment,  in a special sense)  by losing, or rather  by voluntarily surrender­ ing, their selves and  the ordinary world.  In the eyes of the world, they are "losers",  for  they  are  victims:  Catherine dies in agony of slow starvation and self-torture; Edith  is  crushed  by  a  descending  elevator; Mary  Voolnd  is  mauled  by savage police  dogs;  F.  dies in  an  asylum  for  the  criminally  insane;  "I" is at  the end  of the  novel a ragged,  stinking,  "freak  of the woods."  But sub  specie aeternitatis, or in  the  eyes of God,  these  characters are  not losers at  all:  Catherine deliberately  surrenders herself  to  be  the  Bride  of Christ,  is canonized,  and  becomes  a mira­  culous  healer; Edith   commits  voluntary suicide  to  teach  "I" a  lesson which  at first he  ignores  but  which  ultimately   leads  him  to his  apotheosis; Mary  Voolnd surrenders herself to the sexual  pleasure  of F. when  he is at his unattractive worst and  brings  him the good news of his recognition  as first president  of the republic; F.  deliberately  casts himself in  the subordinate  role  of teacher  and  guide  of "I" and  shows him  the way to the  Promised  Land; "I" achieves final apotheosis  and in  the  last  paragraph of the  novel is seen  playing  the  role of Mediator between God and  Man,  or of the Suffering  Servant who has gone through agony to achieve compassiOn:

Poor men, poor men, such as we, they've gone and fled. I will plead from  elec­ trical  tower. I will plead from  turret  of plane. He will uncover His face. He will not  leave me  alone.  I  will spread  His  name  in  Parliament.  I will  welcome His silence in  pain.  I  have come through  the  fire of family and  love.  I  smoke with my darling,  I sleep with  my friend.  We talk of the  poor men,  broken and  fled. Alone with  my radio  I lift  up  my hands.  Welcome to you  who  read  me today. Welcome to  you who put  my heart  down. Welcome to  you,  darling  and  friend, who miss me forever in your trip to the end.

Voluntary loss of self for some higher  cause is, then,  the main  theme of  Beauti­ ful Losers,  but  it is developed  in great  complexity  and  intricacy  against  a back­ ground  of mythological  ecumenicity  and  is supplemented by a variety of secondary themes.
At a climactic  moment  of the novel, Edith  breaks into  Greek  to declare  "I am Isis born,  of all things,  both  what  is and  what  shall  be, and  no mortal  has ever lifted my robe."  We may recall here that on the first page of the novel "I" declares that   he  wants   to  "know   what   goes  on  under   that   rosy  blanket" of  Catherine Tekakwitha: so  Catherine is also  Isis.  Indeed   all  the  women  of  the  novel  are essentially  the same  woman,  or  the same goddess,  just as Isis gradually took over

18

PHENOMENON OF LEONARD COHEN



all the  other  goddesses in  the  ancient  world.  The  greatest  significance  of the Isis cult,  which  developed  in  Egypt  in  the  seventeenth   century  B.C.  and  gradually spread   throughout the  whole  Mediterranean world,  lay in  her  role of Universal Mother   and  her  agency  in efi'ecting immortality of the soul and  renewal  of life. She  included  in  herself the  virtues  of all other  goddesses, and  she offered  to her devotees  forgiveness,  purgation, communion and  regeneration. Her  mythological role in piecing  together  the fragments of her husband  Osiris symbolized her mira­ culous  healing  power.  Once  one  becomes  aware  of Edith's role as Isis,  many  of the  jigsaw  pieces of the  novel fall  into  significant  patterns: it  is in  her  Isis role of  Universal   Mother   that   Edith,   with   her  phenomenally large  nipples,  gives herself to "I" and  F., comforts  the stranger on the beach  at Old Orchard, Maine,  and  even  cradles  the  "famous head" of the  presumably  forgiven  Hitler  against her  breasts.  By her voluntary suicide in the elevator  shaft, Edith  effects a restora­  tion  of  her  husband  similar  to  Isis's  restoration of  Osiris.  When   we  read  the description   of  Edith's   coating   herself  with  "deep  red  greasy  stuff"   and  saying to "I" "Let's be other  people",  we recall  that  one  of Isis's roles was that  of the bringer-forth of  the  indwelling  self, of  the  agent  of  miraculous transfiguration. "I" notes  that   Edith's "kisses  were  loose,  somehow  unspecific,  as if her  mouth  couldn't choose  where  to  stay" -and  this  we can  relate  to  the  concept  of the mouth  of Isis as full  of the  breath  of  life, issuing forth  to heal  the soul and  re­ generate   the  dead.   We  recall  also  that   Mary  Voolnd,   another Isis figure,  is a nurse,  and  that  Edith  is several  times referred  to as a nurse.
The  second  major  mythological framework of Beautiful Losers is that of Christianity. This  is an  apt  juxtaposition since the  cult of Isis rivalled  the cult of Christ  in  the  Mediterranean world,  and  sometimes  blended   with  it.  Isis herself was  frequently identified  with  the  Virgin  Mary,  and  this identification is made anew  in Cohen's novel. Catherine is the Iroquois  Virgin,  and  models herself upon the  Virgin  Mary; by  renouncing the  ownership  of her  own  flesh she achieves  a mystic vision:

And as she thus disclaimed the ownership of her flesh she sensed a minute knowl­ edge of his innocence, a tiny awareness of the beauty of all the faces circled round the crackling fires of the village. Ah, the pain eased, the torn flesh  she finally did not own healed in its freedom, and a new description of herself, so brutally earned, forced itself into her heart:  she was Virgin.

But since  Edith  and  Catherine are obviously one person in different  guises, Edith is  also  the  Virgin   Mary:  although she  is not  physically  a  virgin,  she  plays the

19

PHENOMENON OF  LEONARD COHEN



role of intercessor  and  comforter. So also does Mary  Voolnd,  although her  way of expressing  compassionate love may seem the very antithesis  of virginity.
The  men  also are  loosely associated  with  Christian figures. F. refers to himself on various occasions as Moses, who has led his friends within sight of the Promised Land   but  cannot  take  them  there; at  other  times  he speaks of his role in  terms which  recall John  the Baptist.  "I", on the other  hand,  develops eventually  into  a Christ-figure. In  the  final  paragraph, as we have  seen,  he  becomes  the  compas­ sionate  mediator, pleading  from  his tower.  (In  this connection, it is worth  noting that in the poem "Suzanne" Cohen speaks of Christ  being on his "wooden  tower", the  Cross.)   Previous  to  that,  "I" has  stayed  for  a  prolonged  period  in  a  tree­ house in the woods, paralleling  Christ's  sojourn  in the wilderness. Even the body­ builder  Charles  Axis is linked  with  Christ: "Charles Axis is all compassion,  he's our sacrifice !", and  his name  suggests that  he too is an  axis or link between  God and man.
A number of other  mythologies  are  worked  into  Beautiful Losers, but  there  is
space  here  only  to glance  at  them.  There are, as we might  expect since "I" is a folk-lorist,   anthropologist,  and  student of  the  North   American  Indians,  many references  to and  indeed  detailed  descriptions  of Red  Indian myths  and  rites­ rainmaking  ( p. 3 I ) , mythical  cosmogony  ( p. 85), the  wrestling  match  between the  White  one  and  the  Dark  one  ( p. 88), Klooskap   ( p. 8g),  the  Oscotarach or Head-Piercer's Hut   (pp.   II4, I33,   I84), and  the  Andacwandet  or  Fuck-Cure (pp.  I 28-I 32). Greek  mythology  is represented, significantly,  by  Icarus  ( p. 2 I 2) and  Prometheus  (p.  237), both  of whom  fit the  novel  well  since  they sought  to unite  heaven   and   earth,   God   and  man.  There are  apt  references  to  Oriental Indian mythology  and  religious rites:   to the  mandala (p.  2I4), yoga  (pp.   I6o,
2 36), Asoka's  Circle,  and  Tantric love perfectionists.  The  Jewish  Kabala is men­
tioned,  as is the  Chinese  "holy  mountain" and  the  wisdom  of Kung.
These   more  or  less ancient   mythologies  are  supplemented  with  more  recent myths  and  magical  manifestations: the magic of Houdini ( p. 38), the mythology of  the  comic  strips  and   radio   programmes, the  magic   rituals  of  the  Masonic Order  (p.  145), the  myth  of  astrology  (see, for  example,   the  reference  to  the Virgo disease, p. I62), the magic of firecrackers and guns and rockets. But the contemporary  mythology   and   magic  which  are  most  stressed  are  those  of  the movies. There are several references  to the goddesses of the silver screen,  Marilyn Monroe  and  Brigitte  Bardot,  and  a host of references  to the magic  powers of the film  to  heighten   reality,  preserve  the  past,  record  the  present,  create  imaginary worlds,  expand   the  consciousness, enlarge  the  awareness,  arouse  the  conscience,

20

PHENOMENON  OF LEONARD COHEN



stimulate the  passions,  or  excite  the  imagination. The  System  Theatre  becomes the  contemporary temple  or  cathedral, into  which  only  initiates  are  allowed  to pass after  negotiating the  barrier  of the  ticket collector in the outer  courtyard or foyer.
All of these  references  to mythology  and  magic  reach  their  culmination in the passage which  announces the secondary  (some might argue  that  it is the primary) theme  of Beautiful Losers:   that  magic and  religion not science and  politics are the real  powers in the world.  In  what  F. describes  as the "sweet  burden  of my argu­ ment," he proclaims:

God is alive. Magic is afoot. God is afoot.  Magic is alive. Alive is a foot. Magic never died. God never sickened. Many poor men lied. Many sick men lied. Magic never weakened.  Magic never hid.  Magic always ruled.  God is afoot. God never died. God was ruler though his funeral lengthened. Though  his mourners thickened Magic  never fled.... Though  laws were carved in marble  they could not shelter men.... Magic  is  afoot.... But  Magic  is  no  instrument.   Magic  is the  end.... This  I mean my mind to serve till service is but Magic moving through  the world, and mind itself is Magic coursing through  the flesh, and flesh itself is Magic danc­ ing on a clock, and time itself the Magic Length of God.

As I  have  said,  there  are several  subsidiary  themes  running through   Beautiful Losers.  Perhaps the  third  most important is that  which  announces the close asso­ ciation  of  religion  and  sex. One  of the  apparent paradoxes of this  novel is that its main  characters, all of whom  are  "heroes" in the sense that  they  are to some degree  at  least  being  held  up  to  our  admiration, have  such  divergent attitudes towards  sex. Catherine renounces  the flesh altogether  and  remains  a virgin;  Edith, on the other  hand, is a relatively compliant wife to "I" but without  compunction commits  adultery  with  F. on six or seven occasions. F. is completely  promiscuous, admits   that   he  has  chased  women  wherever   they  have  led  him,  glories in  his sexual  "scores"  with  both  sexes, and  even in his dying moments  has his hand  up the  skirt  of l\fary  Voolnd.  "I" has  had  homosexual  relations  with  F.,  has had  a rather  frustrating sexual  life with  Edith  (she is not compliant enough  for him - he  has  rather  special  tastes),   and  spends  a great  deal  of time  in  masturbation. All the sexuality  in the  novel, of course,  comes to a climax  in the orgy which  F. and  Edith   perform  with  the  so-called  Danish  Vibrator or  Sex  Machine. What are we to make of all this? Is Cohen  upholding virginity or promiscuity, sexual abstinence  or sexual orgies?
The  clue  to the  resolution  of the  paradox is in  Cohen's  special  conception of sainthood. Recalling  F.'s  advice  to "go  down  on a saint", "I" speculates:

21

PHENOMENON OF  LEONARD COHEN



What  is a saint?  A saint is someone who has achieved a remote human possibility. It is impossible to say what  that  possibility is. I think it has something to do with the  energy of love. Contact  with  this energy results in  the exercise of a kind of balance in the chaos of existence.

To "go  down on a saint", then, is at second-hand to make contact  with the energy of love, as well as to combine  physical ecstasy with spiritual vision. Catherine is a saint  because  she  has  achieved  the  remote  human possibility of making  contact with  the energy  of love, that  is God,  through  the renunciation of the flesh;  Edith is a  saint  because  she  has  made  contact   through   her  maternal role towards  all men;  F. is a saint  because  he has  made  contact  with  divine  energy  through  sex and  because  he commits  himself to the remote  possibility of a revolution  in  Que­ bec;  "I" becomes  a saint  at  the  end  of the  novel  because  by exiling  himself  to the wilderness he has purged  himself of pride  and selfishness and  made of himself an  empty  vessel into  which  divine  love can  pour.  A saint,  if you like, is an  ex­ tremist.  For  Cohen,  truth  is not  in  the  mean  but  in the extremes.  F. declares  "I was  never  drunk  enough,  never  poor  enough,  never  rich  enough." Catherine in the extremity  of her flagellations  is closer to Edith  and  F. in the extremity  of their orgy with  the Danish  Vibrator than  she is to a member  of the bourgeoisie leading  a  respectable  and  moderate life.  Is it too fanciful  to suggest  that  in  referring  to the sex machine by its initials,  D.V.,  Cohen  is suggesting  that  the surrender to it is not so very different  from  the surrender to God's  will?
A closely related  subsidiary  theme  is that  of what  we might  call pan-orgasmic sex. F.  declares  that  "all  parts  of the  body  are  erotogenic. All flesh can  come!" and  he maintains that  almost  any  contact  can  lead  us into  "the  nourishing  ano­ nymity of the climax." (Here, incidentally, is another of the links between religion and  sex-sex  leads  to  anonymity, into  that  loss of self-consciousness  which  is the  prerequisite of religious  response.)
Rather than   deal  further with  the  minor  themes  of  the  novel,  I should  like now  to  say something   about  its  technique. In  structure it  resembles  a symbolic poem:   it  is divided  into  the  traditional three  parts,  and  its parts  are  woven  to­ gether  by recurrent thematic motifs and  thematic images or symbols. Among the motifs  are  references  to "I" 's constipation  (a  symbol  of the self  locked in  upon itself)   to  his  masturbation  (a  symbol  of  his  lonely  self -absorption and self­ indulgence), to games  (symbols  of life as free choice), to  radio  music and  radio  serials  (symbols of attempts to reach contact  with some outside force or message), to  baptism   (symbol  of purification and  the entry  into  a new life),  and  above  all to  movies,  films, cinemas  and  film-stars   (symbols,  as  we  have  seen, of contem-

22

PHENOMENON OF  LEONARD COHEN



porary  magic  and  escape from  this world) . Among  the  thematic images  are  the blanket  or veil  (symbol of mystery and  the hoped-for  apocalypse), birch  and  pine trees  (symbols  of natural growth, beauty,  and  the fragrance of natural things), rivers, springs  and  pools  (symbols of purification and  divine  grace), birds  ( sym­ bols of the ingression of the divine upon  the human), altars  and  temples  (symbols or  worship,  aspiration and  sacrifice), stars  (associated  with  Isis and  symbols of divine  perfection  and  protection), the  elevator   (an  ambivalent  symbol, suggest­ ing  both  the  ascent  to heaven  and  the descent  into  hell), mountains (symbols of contemplation and  detached wisdom), machinery  (another  ambivalent symbol, suggesting  the "eternal machinery" of cosmic process and  the destructive machin­ ery of warfare and greed), the necklace  (symbol of multiplicity  in unity, the many in  the  one), crystals,  snowflakes  and  the  rainbow   pictures  seen  through them (symbolic  of  divine  order,  intricacy  and  vision), soap  and  especially  F.'s  "soap  collection"   (symbols  of purification  through suffering), rockets, firecrackers,  and "fiery  journeys"  (symbols  of the  attempt to penetrate the  veil of heaven), fishes (symbols of Christ  and  of divine grace), candy  (symbol of pleasure and perhaps of God's  mercy), the  factory  which  is converted  into  a  playground  (symbol  of the transfiguration of labour into play, as in the last stanza  of Yeats' "Among School­ children.")  Each  of  these  motifs  or  images  recurs  frequently, and  in  each  case the  symbolic  suggestion  is intended:  the  result  is a novel  more  intricately  inter­  woven  than  any  Canadian novel of my experience.
An  associated  feature of the  technique of this novel is its clever  manipulation of chronology.  We move  back  and  forth  from  the  present  to the  near-past  to the distant-past  of  Catherine Tekakwitha, the  seventeenth-century  Iroquois   virgin, and  yet the  transitions, though  often  abrupt and  frequent, are  never  misleading or confusing.  Similarly,  although we shuttle  back and forth  between various points of view, we never get confused between  the different  characters: each is consistent (if only in inconsistency), distinctive,  and  credible.
Beautiful  Losers, the  riches  of which  I  have  only  touched   upon,  is the  chief
accomplishment of Leonard Cohen  thus  far,  and  the  culmination of all his  pre­
vious work. But it is not likely to be the end of the phenomenon of Leonard  Cohen.


THE SMILE ON
THE FACE OF THE TIGER



A Profile of Leon Edel




Phyllis Grosskurth













AFTER BECOMING DEEPLY  INVOLVED m his life of Henry
James,   Leon  Edel  made   a  shrewd  observation  about   the  greatest  danger   that
threatens a biographer. "I am sure," he stated,  "that if someone  were to attempt to study  the  psychology  of  biographers he  would  discover  that  they  are  usually impelled  by deeply  personal  reasons  to the  writing  of a given  life-reasons not always  conducive  to objectivity  and  to truth." Edel  then  went  on to analyze  the biographer's dilemma:  "He  must  appraise  the life of another by becoming  that other  person,  and  he  must  be scrupulously  careful  that  in  the  process the  other person  is not  refashioned  in his own image."
It  seems  to me  that  the  hazard  of which  Edel  speaks is confined  to the  biog­ rapher  who  has to reconstruct a human being from  documents-letters, diaries, books, and  so forth.  The  danger  is implicit  in the fact  that  the reconstruction, no matter how firmly substantiated by paper  evidence,  must  necessarily be the  crea­ tion  of  the  intuitive  imagination. The  biographer must  penetrate so deeply  into his subject  that  he virtually  becomes his subject  for the duration of the writing  of the biography.

PROFILE OF  LEON EDEL



The  biographer who  writes about  one  whom  he knew intimately is faced  with no such  delimma. Boswell and  Froude were so keenly aware  of the  otherness of Dr.  Johnson and  Carlyle,  of  the  external  idiosyncrasies  of  their  temperaments, that   they  were  not   threatened  with  the  dangers   of  imaginative  identification. Boswell and  Froude  knew  and  loved  the  Dr.  Johnson  who  pounded his cane  on the  floor  or  the  Carlyle  who  brooded  over  his pipe  in  the  garden, but  they  did not  know  what  it  felt  like to  be Dr.  Johnson impatiently pounding his cane  or Carlyle  puffing  at his pipe.
Surprisingly  enough,  Edel  takes  a conventional and  somewhat wistful view of such  biographies. "Boswell, Froude, Lockhart, Forster," he says, "repose  upon our shelves  with  vividness  and  mass  and  authority which  later  biographers cannot possess." It seems to me curious  that  at this point  Edel does not recognize that  his method   and  aims  are  essentially  different   from  these  writers,  and  every  bit  as valuable.   Precisely  because  Boswell,  Froude, et  al,  knew  their  subjects  so  inti­ mately,  they were able to capture the solid presence of a man  smoking or banging  his  cane.  They  wrote  of  the  impact   their  subjects  made  on  them,  and  the  fact that  their subjects  happened to be writers  does not mean  that  Boswell or  Froude  produced  literary  biography.  The  creation  of a literary  biography, a study of the mind  inside  the  man  who held  the  pipe or  the  pen, is Edel's  achievement. Later  I shall  discuss this aspect  of his work in more  detail.
As for his devoted  labours  to James,  suffice it to say that  Edel considers him one of the greatest  of writers.  It would  be an impertinence to speculate  on the "deeply personal  reasons"  which  might  have  impelled  him  to devote  such  dedicated  con­ centration to James.  Surely  admiration and  sympathetic rapport for James might be the  most important  considerations.
Certainly  there  was nothing  in the  patern  or circumstances of Edel's  early life to  warrant any  patent   self-identification. Many   people  have  been  surprised  to learn  of Edel's  thoroughly Canadian background. Brought  up in Yorkton, Saskat­ chewan,  a  prairie  boy's  life would  bear  little  resemblance  to the  worldly James  children's peregrinations back  and  forth  across the Atlantic.
At McGill  in the early 2o's Edel became  associated with what  has since become known  as the  "Montreal group." He  has frequently made  the  nostalgic observa­ tion  that  he  could  write  a  book  about  those  years, and  he  was  particularly de­ lighted  to  hear  Professor  Northrop Frye  refer  to this  period  of  his life when  he introduced him as Centennial Professor at the University  of Toronto last January. In  his sophomore year  Edel  became  managing editor  of  the  Fortnightly Review  founded  by A. J. M. Smith,  Frank  Scott, Allan Latham, and  A. P.R. Coulbourn.

PROFILE OF  LEON EDEL



Remarkably successful for  an  avant-garde magazine, The  Fortnightly published the work of the young poets A. M. Klein,  Leo Kennedy, E.  J. Pratt, and  Robert Finch.   Out   of  this  association  came  the  volume,  New  Provinces,  which  was  a
landmark  in  Canadian  literature in  its  espousal  of  modernity. Of  this  group, Edel was the only critic and non-poet.
In  1928,  after  receiving  his  M.A.  for  a  dissertation on  what  was  then  con­
sidered  a  very  modern  subject,  the  stream  of consciousness  novel,  Edel  went  to Paris on a scholarship. At the Sorbonne he became  a close friend  of E. K. Brown. Both attended the lectures of Emile Legouis and Etienne Gilson, and they lunched together  almost  daily in a little  cremerie on the boulevard Saint-Michel.
He  has  described  himself  during  this  period  of literary  expatriates as "a  kind of  junior  Left  Banker," one  who  moved  on  the  periphery of  the  James  Joyce entourage. His  outstanding impression  of Joyce  was of his total  withdrawal into himself, even when surrounded by a chattering group  of friends.  Despite an early book he wrote on Joyce, Edel has found  himself becoming increasingly  antithetical towards  Joyce  through the  years.  He  contends  that  Joyce  is a far  inferior  artist to Henry  James; that  Joyce's  self-absorption made  it impossible for him to create character, and  that  Ulysses consists simply of a series of disembodied voices.
After  receiving his degree from the Sorbonne, Edel returned to Montreal where he  worked  as a  newspaper   reporter   covering  the  arts,  as well as contributing to the  Canadian Forum  where  he remembers with satisfaction that  he wrote admir­ ingly of A. M.  Klein.  During  this period  he also did some  part-time  teaching at Sir George  Williams  College. The  depression  had  barred  him  from  the academic life he wanted, but  after  returning from service overseas in psychological warfare, he went  to New York University  as a visiting professor in  1950 and  1951. In  the spring   of  1953  he  gave  the  Christian  Gauss  Seminar  at  Princeton, and   that autumn  he  was  appointed  associate  professor  in  Washington Square  College, N.Y.U., and full profesor in 1955.
Apart  from  his work on Henry  James,  Edel's  books include  The Psychological
Novel  and  ]ames  joyce:  The   Last  journey. In  1951 his old friend  E. K. Brown died,  leaving  the  last  section  of his biography  of  Willa  Cather unfinished.  Edel undertook to finish the  book, a  job he has described  as the  most difficult he ever tackled.   Working  from  Brown's  detailed   notes,  Edel  managed to  make  certain changes  in the  completed  text  and  to adapt his own style in the final chapters  so closely to  Brown's  that  it  is almost  impossible  to  distinguish  Brown's  style from Edel's.  This  chameleon-like  capacity  later  proved  invaluable when  he  came  to write  the  biography  of Henry  James.

PROFILE OF  LEON EDEL




EDEL's PROFOUND INTEREST  in  James  extends back to the end of the war when he brought out a critical edition of James's plays. Since then he  has  edited  The   Ghostly  Tales  of Henry   fames,  and  is at  present editing a twelve-volume edition of The  Complete Tales of Henry  ]ames. He is also the editor of The  Selected  Letters  of Henry  ]ames and is now at work on what he considers will be the definitive edition of the correspondence, which will not be a complete edition, but  a representative selection of significant letters.
Of the James biography, so far Edel has completed Henry  fames: The Untried Years  (I 953), The  Conquest  of London ( 1962) ; and The Middle Years  ( 1962) · For these he was awarded  the Pulitzer Prize and honored by the National Institute of Arts and Letters for "creative writing in biography." He has almost completed The   Master, and  although  he is contemplating  an  even further  volume, he is quick to point out that,  taken together, the total volumes do not add up to exces­ sive length.  From  the outset he deliberately avoided a chronological sequence in the interests of form, a system which has worked to his advantage  so that  he is now free to add  another  volume if it seems necessary.
In appearance  Edel is a small, contained man with a narrow bespectacled face and an unobstrusive moustache. Widely cultured, in recent years he has confined his interests almost exclusively to Henry James.  He lives quietly with his wife, a psychologist, and  two enormous  cats, in  an  apartment  on  Central  Park  West. One  is immediately struck  by the impersonal  orderliness of his apartment. Un­ cluttered  rooms,  books arranged   methodically  on  the  many  shelves  lining  the walls, filing cabinets, an  almost bare  desk. Nevertheless, Edel claims  that  when he is writing, his study becomes a welter of files and  notes, and  frequently  time is forgotten as he works far into the night.
He finds it  possible to live a dedicated  scholarly life even in  the din of  Man­ hattan.  A bus takes him directly to Washington  Square  (with all its James asso­ ciations),  where  he  has  recently  been  named  Henry  James  Professor at  New York University. His classes are almost exclusively graduate seminars on James. When addressing other  universities, he speaks on aspects of  James or on the art of biography. When travelling abroad,  the quest is always in search of additional  James material.
In  1956 Edel was invited  to deliver the Alexander Lectures at the University of Toronto.  These were later published under the title, Literary  Biography, from which I  drew  the remarks quoted  at the beginning of this paper.  Here  was the rare case of a biographer speaking up for his art as a branch  of literature  which

PROFILE OF  LEON EDEL



has been unjustly  neglected.  Here  also was a rare  case of one theorizing  about  his own art, drawing  largely on conclusions which had emerged  from practical experi­ ence.  A very real sense of responsibility  sustains  all his reflections, particularly in his  analysis  of  the  dangers,   difficulties,  and   temptations of   understanding  too much  and  too well. Edel describes biography  as "a  kind of  alchemy of the spirit." "To succeed," he says, "the  biographer must perform  the unusual-and the well­ nigh  impossible-act of incorporating into himself the experience  of another, or shall  we say  becoming  for  a while  that  other  person, even while remaining him­ self." The  appraising, distancing eye must  maintain a constant guard: "He  must be warm, yet aloof, involved,  yet uninvolved. To  be  cold as ice in appraisal, yet warm  and  human and  understanding, this is the  biographer's dilemma."
I stated  earlier  that  it seemed  to me  next  to impossible  in  the sort  of literary biography   Edel  is writing  to create  a three-dimensional James.  He  makes  many references  to  James   attending dinner   parties,  James  writing  letters  at  a desk in his  club,  James   riding  on  the  Campagna, James   walking  about   the  streets  of London. Nevertheless,  we do not  receive any concrete  impression  of James kinet­ ically involved  in  any of these activities.  We are  aware  of eyes seeing, of  a  mind responding, of the writer  as observer  in most of these situations. Lessing's distinc­  tion  between  the  provinces  of the  various  arts  might  almost  serve as an  analogy for  the  functions  of sundry  types of biography. If one is interested  in a writer  as a  writer  primarily, surely  Edel's  method  is the  only  effective  one.  A  biographer cannot   have  the  best of  both  worlds;  or,  more  precisely  he  cannot  convey  the inner  and  the  outer  man,  because  they  are  two different  people. It is  a problem  that   almost  all  biographers, including  Edel,  refuse  to  face.  If they  admit  that  they  are  concentrating on  a sensibility,  they  are  inevitably  fearful  that  substan­ tiality  will be attenuated. Edel's  biography  is that  of a literary sensibility, not of a man  whose occupation was writing.  The  man  Henry  James has become  a name on  a  page;  but  a  responsive intellect  continues  to vibrate from  Edel's  pages.
Edel  has  spoken  of the  biographer's task as a "passionate quest." For  a  biog­ rapher who could  never have known  his subject,  it is clear that  Edel has regarded James  as a quarry to  be hunted  down.  Frequently he has spoken  of  the "road­ blocks"  that  James  seemed  to  erect  to foil his pursuers.  There is an  undoubted triumph in Edel's  remarks  on the evidence that James  found impossible to hide­ namely,  his works.  If Edel  could  not  re-invoke  a Dr.  Johnson or  a Carlyle,  he could  convey  a sense of the  influence  moulding the  creative  mind,  of the  world as  it  impinged  on  James's consciousness,  and  the  connection  between  life  and its transformation into  art.

PROFILE OF  LEON EDEL



I  have  refrained   from  saying  that  James  has  shown  us the  creative  mind  at work.  He  could  not  do this, nor  could  any other  biographer. One  can  speculate on  the  process,  as  Edel  frequently does,  but  one  can  never  capture the  elusive mystery  of  another man's  imagination. At  times,  indeed,   Edel  strains  too  hard to draw  connections  as in his hypothesis about  the original  elements of "The Turn of the  Screw"  (The Conquest  of London, p. 266).
Above all else, Edel's life of James  is a reconstruction of the world as ]ames saw it.  Edel  has  entered  into  James's mind  to the  degree  that  he has imagined  how people,  places,  and  events  appeared to James's curious  eye. It  is my  belief  that he has  functioned as such  an  effective  alter  ego because  his responses are  extra­ ordinarily similar  to  those of James. Mutedly  gregarious, Edel  loves the  atmos­ phere   of  clubs  with   their   comfortable, unhurried  conversation. Edel's  under­ standing of why James  enjoyed  them  so much  is reflected  in his evocation of the nineteenth-century  London   clubs  to  which  James   belonged.  Again,  Edel  loves Washington Square  and  he  would  have  been  even  more  enchanted with  it  in the  I 8so's;  hence,  his  appreciation  captures   its  genius  loci  so  vividly  in  The Untried  Years.
When  it  comes to the  deeper,  more  ambivalent levels of James's psyche, Edel advances   various  hypotheses  but  generally  draws  back  from  unambiguous  per­ sonal committal. Edel believes firmly that  the biographer is responsible for present­  ing all possible alternatives to his reader. The  tense nature of William and  Henry  James's attitude to each  other  threads the biography, but  the  reader is not asked to understand the relationship any more than  Henry  did himself. William  appears  as  an  abrasive,   providing   an  obsessive  theme  for  Henry's  fiction.  Edel  traces Henry's recurrent backache to his uneasy  relationship with  William.  This  ailment  (or  the  "wound", a  word  which  James  offered  gratuitously to  hungry   critics) has usually been  attributed to a castration complex, a theory of which  Edel seems on  the  one  hand  contemptuous, although  he does not firmly shut  the door  on it. As  far   as  interpreting  James's  sexual  motivations,  Edel  traverses   a  wavering  course.  In The Untried  Years  he clearly associates the types of women  created  by the  novelist with  James's own uncertain feelings towards  women:

Henry  James  feared  and  worshipped  them,  and  hesitated  to express his feelings lest he be turned  away. For him women could be as chaste and  beautiful-and unattainable-as  Diana;  or else they were another  kind  of huntress, harsh  and predatory,   literally  dedicated   to  the  chase-the  chase  of  the  husband-and thus to be fled.



29

PROFILE OF  LEON EDEL



Leon  Edel undoubtedly knows more about  Henry  James  than  any other  person alive. Yet it seems to me that  in this passage he is straining too hard  to accommo­ date  fiction  to  fact.  The  later  volumes  record  deep,  enduring  friendships   with women,  and  I  do  not  recall  Edel  describing  any  encounter  from  which  James  really  "fled"-at  least,  not  to  my  satisfaction. In  Volumes  II and  III James  appears  as pleasantly  neutral  in all his relationships, unstirred  by the passions that disturb   human beings,  even  artists,  from  time  to  time.  I  understand that  Edel is going  to turn  to this aspect of James's life in the forthcoming volume.
In  a seminar  on  biography  held  at  the  University  of Toronto last winter,  Pro­
fessor Edel  made  the  remark  that  knowledge  of the subject's sexual  life was not necessarily important for a literary  biographer if it did not have any particular relevance  to his books. However, as a biographer, Edel's whole underlying premise is that  a writer  reveals himself in his creations,  that  the style and  content  are  the man.  For  the epigraph to The  Middle Years, Edel selected James's statement that "the  artist  is present  in every  page of every book from  which  he sought  so  assid­ uously  to  eliminate   himself."   My  own  impression  in  that  suppressed  passion  is present  in  a  very  disturbing way  in  James's work.  Edel,  usually  so  anxious  to relate  life and  work,  never  explores  this feature of James's work -or  life. Has he  waited  until  the  fourth   volume  to discuss James's sexual  drives  precisely be­ cause  they  were  so ambivalent; or  because  he is saving  some  revelation  for  the end?
I  raised  this  point  because  it seems to me curious  that  so important a part  of most people's lives could be disregarded through three volumes of a biography. Professor  Edel  would  probably  defend  his position  on  the  grounds  of "form", a word  which  recurs  constantly  in  his conversation when  discussing  biography. I can  understand how he could  compress James's experience  of London  clubs into a single  chapter, but  I do  not  comprehend how  one is justified in handling love in  this  manner. However,   undoubtedly  Professor  Edel  will  prove  me  wrong  if the  complete  biography emerges  as the work of art  it promises to become.
All  this  brings  me  back  to  the  original  warning cited  by  Professor  Edel.  No human  being,  no  matter   how  sympathetic, shares  the  same  proclivities,  tastes, or drives  as another. One  can  only assume  a single layer of another's skin tissue, and  even  then,  the  biographer's own  attitudes cannot  be stifled completely. Pro­ fessor Edel  has  probably  got  as close to Henry  James  as anyone  ever will, but  I suspect  that  Henry  James  will have  the last laugh  on us.
Although  the  biography offers  an  embarrassment of  riches,  I  have  concen­
trated  on only one,  and  perhaps  a relatively  unimportant, reflection that  has been

PROFILE OF  LEON EDEL



forced  upon  me.  I  could  have  waxed  enthusiastic about  its grace,  its elegance, its urbanity, all conveyed  in a leisurely pace  highly reminiscent  of James  himself. I am  convinced  that  this is a biography that  will someday  be referred  to with  the same  authoritative assumptions  with  which  one links Boswell and  Froude.


LEONARD COHEN


Black Romantic




SandraDjwa






WRmNG  ON   "The  Pmblem  of a Canadi"" Literature",
E. K.  Brown  pokes fun  at  the genteel  conservatism  that  characterizes Canadian
writing:

Imagination   boggles at  the  vista  of  a  Canadian   Whitman  or  a  Canadian   Dos Passos. The   prevailing  literary  standards   demand  a  high  degree  of  moral  and social  orthodoxy;   and  popular  writers  accept  these  standards  without  even ... rueful complaint.'

If Brown  considers a Whitman or a Dos Passos improbable, a Canadian Genet,  a Canadian  Burroughs, or  a Gunter Grass  is clearly  beyond  expectation. Yet it is in precisely this tradition, that  of the contemporary Black Romantics as we might call them,  that  Leonard  Cohen  appears  to belong.
Cohen's poetry  reads  like  an  index  to  the  history  of  European  romanticism; from  the  epigraph to Let Us Compare  Mythologies  ( 1956)   through The  Spice­ Box of  Earth  ( 1961)   to  the  "lady" of "garbage flowers"  in  Flowers for  Hitler
( 1964), his progress  is from  Keats  and  Lawrence through Baudelaire to Genet. In  brief,  this is a  movement  from  a  qualified  acceptance of the  romantic ideal as it is embodied  in art  ("For ever wilt thou  love and  she be fair") to the deca­ dent  romanticism of a  fin de siecle <esthetic in which  the ugly replaces  the beauti­ ful as the inspiration for art.
Reading through Cohen's work  we become  aware  of an  unsatisfied  search  for an absolute.  In  his world  there  are no fixed values, spiritual  or sensual,  that stand

BLACK ROMANTIC



beyond  the  transitory   moment,   and  the  moment   itself,  experience  made  myth, blends  imperceptibly with  other  moments  and  other  mythologies,  so that  in  the shifting  the values  change,  leaving only the value of experience  made  art:

Those  days were just the twilight And soon the poems and  the songs Were only associations
Edged  with bitterness
Focussed into pain
By paintings  in a minor  key Remembered on warm  nights When  he made  love to strangers
And he would struggle  through old words
Unable  to forget he once created  new ones
And fumble  at their  breasts with  broken hands.

Cohen's  dominant theme,  the relationship between  experience  and  art,  and  more specifically  the  suggestion  that  the  value  of experience  is to  be found  in  the  art or  "beauty" distilled  from  it,  is a  familiar   motif  of  the  late  romantics.   It  first appears  in  Cohen's work  as an  epigraph to Mythologies taken  from  "The Bear" by William Faulkner:

'She cannot  fade  though  thou hast not had  thy bliss', McCaslin  said:  'For  ever wilt thou love and she be fair'.
'He's  talking  about  a girl', he said.
'He  had  to talk about  something', McCaslin  said.

This  preface  to  a  poet's  first book suggests  an  amused  recognition  of a certain attitude to experience; the rationale is that  of love for art's  sake. But if this atti­ tude  is familiar, the  irrational neo-gothic  world  from  which  the  poet  takes  this stance  is not  at  all familiar, at  least in  Canadian poetry.  Particularly in his two later  books,  Flowers  for Hitler and  Beautiful  Losers ( 1g66)  Cohen  would  seem to  be  closest to  the  European tradition of Baudelaire, Sartre and  Genet,  and  to their  American  affiliates Henry  Miller  and  William  Burroughs.
In contrast  to the later  European tradition from Baudelaire to Genet,  Canadian
writers  have  not  wandered very far  from  first generation romanticism. Strongly influenced  by  Wordsworthian natural piety and  reinforced  by the Calvinist  urge towards  moral  uplift, the native line in English Canadian poetry might  be charac­ terized  by  the  straightforward statement and  explicit  morality  of a D.  C. Scott,
an  E. J. Pratt,  or  an  Earle  Birney. Despite  Lampman's flirtation  with  the Syrn-


33

BLACK ROMANTIC



bolists and  Marjorie Pickthall's coy apprenticeship to Swinburne, imagistic  tech­ nique  was not fully recognized  as such  in Canadian poetry  until  the thirties, and the  Decadent  sensibility  with  its  attendant  themes  of  masochistic  death, self­ flagellation  and  religious inversion,  is reflected  only  faintly  in  Carman's work  of the  nineties,  recurs  briefly  in  the  thirties  with  Leo  Kennedy's  The  Shrouding,  and   does  not  appear   again   until   just  recently  in  the  late  fifties.  Notably,   this Decadent sensibility is most explicit  in the works of  the  younger  writers  Leonard Cohen,  Daryl  Hine,  and  Mordecai Richler,  all of  whom  have  come into  contact  with  the  European tradition.
Consequently Cohen  does  have  some  grounds  for  asserting,  as he does on  the
back cover of Flowers for Hitler, that  his "sounds" are new in Canada and  possi­ bly subject  to critical  misinterpretation. Admittedly, he does stress the same  reli­ gious,  sexual  and  social  protest  as  do  Klein,  Layton   and  Dudek,  and  he  does take  the  same  missionary  delight  in  the  poetic  vocation  of the  Montreal Group pour epater le bourgeois. But  Cohen's technique is  considerably  more  complex than  that  of Layton  or  Dudek,  and  the  vision and  sensibility  which  he expresses are sufficiently  different  from  those of Klein  to suggest that  he has moved into  a different  tradition. In this connection we might compare the world view of Klein's  Hitleriad  (r944)  with  that  of  Cohen's  Flowers  for Hitler  (rg64). Along  with the  structure  and   style   of  Pope's  Dunciad,  Klein's   Hitleriad  is invoking   the rational Neo-Classical  world where human folly can be effectively chastised  by the wit of a righteous  indignation:

Let anger take me in its grasp; let hate, Hatred  of evil prompt me, and dictate.

Cohen,  on the other  hand, insists upon  the relativity  of evil; Hitler  is "ordinary", Eichmann, "medium". In  this perspective,  irrational evil is accepted  as a normal part  of the human  make-up  which  can even come to have a certain  attractiveness:

It  happens  to everyone. For those with eyes who know in their hearts that  terror is mutual,  then  this hard  community  has a beauty of its own.

This  reference  to  the  strange  "beauty" which  can  spring  from  a community of evil and suffering invokes Baudelaire's Fleurs du mal. And it is Baudelaire's flowers of evil grafted   with  those  of Genet  which  Cohen  uses to  provide  the structural myth  of Flowers for Hitler. In  this book,  the moments  of beauty  which  the  poet attempts  to  create,  like  those  of  his  protagonist  Kerensky,  "when   poems  grew like butterflies  on  the garbage of his life",  are  moments  which  cannot  come into

34

BLACK ROMANTIC



being  unless evil is first admitted. Like his mentor, the T.  S. Eliot of The  Waste Land, and  for  that  matter  like Klein  also, Cohen  wants  to bring  a guilty  world into  recognition   of  itself:   "I waitjfor each  one  of  you  to  confess."  But  unlike Klein, and  again  following  Eliot, the confession that  Cohen  demands is one which accepts  personal  responsibility  for  evil as the  natural corollary  of being  human. Having   accepted   this  awareness  of  evil  as  does  the  protagonist of  "The  New Leader", the  individual is then  released  from  the  negative  virtue  of "threading history's  crushing   daisy-chain   with  beauty   after  beauty" and  face  to face  with the ugliness of self :

Drunk  at  last, he hugged  himself, his stomach  clean, cold and  drunk,  the sky clean but only for him, free to shiver, free to hate, free to begin.

This  would  seem  to  be  a  basically  post  World  War  II position: the  romantic voyaging  "I", bereft  of religious belief and  Hegel's  cosmic rationalism ("the sky clean")  sets  out  to  discover  his world.  And   as  in  Sartre's Nausea  or  Heller's Catch-22, this involves  the  attempt to come  to terms  with  existence itself. Faced with  a world  which  he sees as irrational, evil and  grotesque,  an evil and  an  ugli­ ness which  he shares because  he is human, with only a momentary hope of  vision and  that  perhaps  delusive,  the  modern anti-hero accepts  evil as part  of  existence and  immerses  himself within  it, both  in terms of the external world  and  through  the journey into self.



Lns IMMERSION  in destruction, often  accomplished  through  a combination of alcohol,  drugs  and  sex, would  seem to be meta-physical in nature
in that  it is an attempt to find a new answer  to the human predicament by going down  instead  of  up.  In  this sense it  might  be  considered  the  modern  romantic myth.  Where  Wordsworth and  Coleridge  attempt the  transcendental leap, Baudelaire, Rimbaud,  Huysmans, and  the  modern  Genet,  Sartre and  Burroughs all spend  a  season  in  hell.  Experience is the  distinguishing mode  of the  Byronic hero,  the  later  Victorian Decadents and  their  twentieth-century descendants, the Black Romantics. For  the  past  twenty  years, the subject  of the modern  romantic has  been increasingly  the fascination of evil and  its relationship to the  process of destructive metamorphosis. Cyril  Connolly,  in a recent attempt to define "modern­ ism"  finds its essence in this quatrain by Baudelaire:

35

BLACK ROMANTIC



Only when we drink poison are we well­ We want, this fire so burns our brain tissue, To drown in the abyss-heaven or hell
Who cares? Through  the unknown we'll find the new."

As this excerpt  makes clear,  the value of the abyss is not only the pleasure of new sensation   but   the  possibility  of  a  new  revelation   beyond   the  experience   itself. The  danger  inherent in  this  credo  would  seem  to  be  the  temptation it offers  to mistake  catalogued sensation  for  new revelation.
In  Cohen's work,  this  possibility  of  a  new  revelation  is specifically  associated with  the  myth  of descent  culminating in the  creation  of art.  In  his first book  of poetry,  Let  Us Compare  Mythologies, the structural myth  is that  of the death  of the  poet-god  Orpheus and  the  possibility of his  resurrection in  art.  Like  Eliot's Waste  Land  the  book  moves  through   cycles of winter  death  followed  by spring re-birth, and  the  poet-victim  as a part  of this cycle moves between  the extremes of innocent and  destructive  love. In  terms  of the  controlling Orpheus myth,  the figure  of the  beloved  woman  suggests Eurydice  while  the madwoman evokes the Bacchanals. In  the poem "Letter", the poet-victim,  aware  of his impending death, addresses  the  madwoman directly:  "How  you  murdered  your  family/  means nothing  to me/   as your  mouth  moves across my body".  The  poems of this cycle would  seem  to  make  a  strong  case for  submission  to  a  destructive love  which, unlike  the  romantic escapism  of such  poems as "On Certain Incredible Nights", can  lead  to a new  beauty  and  a new order.  Consequently the  poet embraces  the "real", sacrifice goes on  ("Hallowe'en Poem") and  the poet's brain  exposed, "the final  clever  thrill  of summer  lads  all dead  with  love",  becomes  a "drum" to be "scratched with  poetry  by Kafka's machine". The  rationale for this disintegrative experience  is explicit  in the  poem  "Story". Only  by allowing  the madwoman full sway is it  possible for  the  poet  as victim  to find his place in art: "to  understand one's part  in a legend".
It  is  this  myth  of  art  which  seems  to  provide  the  basic structure in  Cohen's work. In  his first book the myth  of descent is presented  primarily  as the desolation of  Eliot's  Waste   Land.  In  The   Spice-Box   of Earth  this  longing  for  the  old  lost ideals  is re-worked  in  terms  of a neo-Hassidic myth.  No longer  able to accept  a despotic  God,  the  poet  as priest is forced  beyond  Genesis into  a desolation  which is  "unheroic,  unbiblical". Lawrence Breavman, the  poet  as lover,  finds  himself in  the  same  position  in  Cohen's next  book,  The   Favourite   Game. Breavman's alienation grows  throughout the  novel  until  he is finally stricken  with  panic  and loneliness; it is then  that  he realizes that  a new experience  awaits:

BLACK ROMANTIC



He stumbled and collapsed, tasting the ground. He lay very still while his clothes soaked. Something very important  was going to happen in this arena. He was very sure of that.  Not in gold, not in light, but  in this mud something  necessary and inevitable would  take place. He  had  to stay to watch it  unfold.

The  experience   that   waits  for  Breavman is a  recognition   of  the  evil  and  irra­ tionality   symbolized   by  Baudelaire's  mud-flowers.   In   Flowers    for   Hitler   this recognition  is presented  as a disintegrative experience  which  is both  frightening and  pleasurable. This  descent  into  evil is savoured  in much  the same way  as the young  Breavman  en joys  his  adolescent   satanism   ( "Fuck   God"),  yet  the  very process of daring the  abyss is a propulsion  into  an  irrational, frightening world. Similarly,  the narrator-historian of Beau-tiful  Losers is forced  through the motions of Sartre's nausea  in  a grimy  sub-basement room  that  gradually fills up  with  his own  excrement.
In  Cohen,  as with Baudelaire and Sartre,  the value of this disintegrative process is given as the  creation  of art.  "Elegy", the first poem in Let  Us  Compare  Myth­ ologies, expresses this myth of descent in the death  of the poet-god  Orpheus:

He is descending through cliffs
Of slow green water
And the hovering coloured fish
Kiss his snow-bruised body
And build their secret nests
In his fluttering winding sheet.

From  the  disintegrating body  of  the  dead  god  comes  art; the  "secret  nests"  of "hovering" fish.  In  a  later  poem  "These Heroics", the  poet  explains  that  it  is because  he  cannot   be  "fish"  or  "bird" that  he  makes  dreams  and  poetry  from love.  The   association  of  poet  and  bird  is common   to  Horace, Baudelaire and Rilke, and  in each  case the bird symbolizes the poet's aspiration. Cohen's addition of a "fish"  to this complex  with  primary  associations of disintegration, points  up his  belief  that   the  creative  process is one  which  moves  between  aspiration and disintegration. Associated  with  the  poetic,  sexual  and  religious  aspiration which forms one  pole of Cohen's system is the  dove, the  beloved  and  Catherine Tekak­ witha; clustered  about  the other  pole, the  process of disintegration, is the fish, the Black  Mass,  the   Bacchanals, "F"  and   Edith.   Through  art-the  "nests" of "Elegy", the  "kite" of  Spice-Box, the  "butterflies" of  Flowers   for  Hitler-the poet  attempts to  reconcile  the  two.  For  example,  the  exiled  poet-priest  of Spice­ Box  finds  that  neither  religious  belief  nor  physical  love  can  fill up  the  void  be-

37

BLACK ROMANTIC



tween "a  ruined  house of bondage and  a holy promised  land". This  reconciliation of the spirit  and  the flesh is only to be found  in the fairy-tale land  of art:

Out of the land of heaven
Down comes the warm Sabbath sun
Into the spice-box of earth

or in the artifact itself; the spice-box, one of the symbols of the Jewish  Havdallah service  marking the  Sabbath's end,  becomes  a  metaphor for  the  human  form divine.
A similar  conclusion  is reached  in  Cohen's later  books;  Breavman learns  that
although love is a "creation", the  favourite game  is not love alone  but  the  flesh made  art:
When  everyone had  been flung ... into  the fresh snow, the  beautiful  part  of the game began. You stood up carefully, taking great care not to disturb  the impres­ sion you had made. Now the comparisons.
Of course you would have done your best to land in some crazy position, arms and legs sticking  out.  Then  we  walked  away, leaving  a  lovely field of  blossom-like shapes with footprint stems.

In  Flowers  for Hitler, Cohen  takes  the  blackness of the  human capacity  for evil and  from  it  attempts to extract  the  flowers of art.  In  this  perspective,  the  poet emerges as recorder: "neither/ father nor child/ but one who spins/  on an eternal unimportant loom/  patterns of  war  and  grass/   which  do  not  last  the  night". Similarily,   all  the  four   main   characters  of  Beautiful  Losers  find  themselves to  be  both  artist  and  pattern. Through the  experience  of failure,  the  narrator, his  Indian wife  Edith,  his guide  and  lover  "F"  (d. Pyncheon's "V")  and  the Iroquois  saint,  Catherine Tekakwitha, are each precipitated on a journey into self which  results in the recreation of existence:

Not the  pioneer is the American dream.... The  dream is to be immigrant  sailing into  the misty aerials of New York, the dream  is to be Jesuit in the cities of the Iriquois,  for  we do  not  wish to destroy the  past and  its baggy failures, we only wish the  miracles to demonstrate  that  the  past was joyously prophetic,  and  that possibility occurs to us most plainly on this cargo deck of wide lapels, our kerchief sacks filled with obsolete machine  guns from the last war but which will astound and conquer  the Indians.

Because it is Cohen's thesis that  the experience  of failure  is indispensable for the creation  of art,  the  book  becomes  a  case study  of the  fieur du mal "beauty" of such  losers. Through a  pop-art   catalogue of sensation,  the  narrator proceeds  to

BLACK ROMANTIC



the superior  "magic" represented  by Catherine Tekakwitha (I 656- I 68o). Tekak­ witha  functions  primarily  as an  artist  of religion, her name  is defined  as meaning  "she   who,  advancing,  arranges   the  shadows   neatly". As the  narrator  further explains,  a saint is associated  with the "energy" of love:  "contact with this energy results in a kind of balance  in the chaos of existence". Through her influence  as it is manifested  directly  and  through the other  two characters, the narrator-historian passes through   nausea  (like  his prototype, Sartre's Roquentin)  to the  point  that  it is suggested  that  the  novel is produced  from  his experience.



DESPITE THE  CONTRIVANCE of Cohen's central  myth, Spice­ Box and The  Favourite  Game  are impressive well-written  early books, and perhaps largely because of the glimpses they offer of realized experience.  Flowers  for Hitler and  Beautiful   Losers are  less rewarding, not  only because  they  are  more domin­  antly  written  to formula, but  also because  of the  increasingly  self-conscious  atti­  tude  of  the  poet  as  persona  in  relation   to  the  codification  of  his central  myth. What  I miss in  Cohen's later  books is the  sense that  the  writer  is attempting a subjective  re-interpretation of evil or failure  as the case might be. Instead, Cohen's successive books offer variations  on a theme  within other  men's  myths. This  tech­ nique   has  the  advantage of  structural  neatness  and   there are  few  Canadian readers  who  have   not  expressed  delight   at  Cohen's   technical   virtuosity,  but  it also has  the  serious  disadvantage of  sacrificing  organic  growth  and  original  dis­ covery  to  a  pre-determined  formula.  Little  can  happen in  Flowers  for Hitler  or Beautiful   Losers  because  Cohen   has   already determined  what  will  happen even  before  the  experience  takes  place.  Furthermore, because  he  is committed  to a view of life  and  art  which  is essentially that  of religious  aspiration followed by sexual inversion,  Cohen  is further limited  in his presentation of experience  and his  delineation of character. Experience and  characters can  only come from  the Yellow  Books of  the I 88o's  and  go's.  The case  study of  the  young  hero  and his saison en  enfer,  the  division  of the  romantic  femme   fatale into  her  opposite but  complementary aspects of innocent and  destroyer  (d. Catherine and  Edith) are  familiar  features  of Decadent literature as is the  presentation of the satanic, often  homosexual, friend  and  alter-ego  ( "F") .
The   limitations of  this  vision  would  seem  to  be  the  limitations   of  Decadent literature in general; it substitutes  a narrowed, bizarre  area  of human experience at the expense of the ordinary human  average,  and it negates the dignity of ordin­ ary human encounter to a hierarchy of art.  Because this vision, although limited,

39

BLACK ROMANTIC



is of primary importance to the  author, his characters are subordinated to it. As types, they depend  on increasing  doses of sensationalism  to be effective. In this connection it is possible to trace  the increasing  sensationalism  associated  with  the figure  of  the  friend  as  he  is presented  from  The  Favourite Game  to  Beautiful Losers. Like the mentor  of Oscar  \Vilde's Por·trait  of Dorian Gray, "F" is memor­ able  for  his epigrams   rather  than  for  a sense of character in  depth. Part  of the difficulty  involved  in  Cohen's perception of character would  seem  to  be related to the fact  that  his characters are  conceived  as part  of an internal myth.  Cohen, for example, is both poet-writer and persona and the two often merge. This can sometimes  be effective  as in  the  poem  "You  Have  The  Lovers"  from  Spice-Box where  the  poet-lover  and  poet-spectator are universalized  but  more often  the trio of  two  lovers  and  a  spectator   leads  to sensationalism   or  the  plain  voyeurism  of the sun-bathing sequence  in Beautiful Losers.
The  sensibility which  reports  the sensationalism  of the disintegrative experience is quite  different   in  kind  from  that  which  we  usually  associate  with  Canadian poetry.  Faced  with  an  absurd  world,  Cohen  is no longer  able  to call on  Klein's humane  rationalism for  the  redress  of  evil.  Instead, there  is some  attempt  to exorcise  evil by filtering  it  through the  comic  mode.  This  Black Humour is  ap­ parent  in Cohen's description  of Nazi concentration camp  atrocities:

Peekaboo Miss Human  Soap
Pretend it never happened

I say let sleeping ashes lie.

Here  the  brutal  is introduced as a witty  aside and  the  particular frisson nouveau of the  poem seems to arise from  the  juxtaposition of the erotic, infantile  world of Bathing  Beauties,  "peekaboo" and  "let's  pretend", with  the  horror  of real  con­ centration camps  where  soap  is made  from  human fat  and  ashes. At first glance,  Cohen  appears to  be  having   a  nasty  laugh  at  the  expense  of Jewish  suffering.  Alfred  Purdy,  in  fact,  describes  the  subject  of  Flowers  for Hitler as  little  more than   the  after-dinner  talk  of  "a  good  conversationalist who  had  to  say  some­ thing".3  But  on  closer inspection  it might  be suggested  that  this is an  attempt to come to terms with  a painful  experience. Through  the medium  of  Black Humour it is possible to see the selection of a Miss Human Soap  as the fun  and  games of an  absurd  world.  And  because  Cohen  has presented  horror  as an absurdity, there is a  possibility of  moving  on  to  a new  affirmation  in  a way  that  is not  open  to Klein  in  his Hitleriad. But  at  the same  time  (and  it is this which  makes  Purdy's

BLACK ROMANTIC



comments  relevant)  the  dichotomy   between  the  epigraph to  Flowers   for Hitler, which  is an  excerpt  from  Primo  Levi warning against  the  disintegration of  per­ sonality,  and  the sensationalism  of the book itself, leads us to question  the integrity  of Cohen's  visiona question  which  does not arise in connection with  the Black Humour of Selby's  Last  Exit  to  Brooklyn or Grass's The Tin Drum.
Coming   to  terms  with  this  view  of  experience  is as tricky  as  the  attempt  to
decide  whether  or not  pop-art  is a contradiction in terms. Yet it can  be said that the qualities  which  make  Cohen's  work fairly easy to describemyth as literary structure, central  persona,  a consistent  view of life and  artare also those quali­ ies
find  Cohen's   poetry  often  too  derivative  to  be impressive,  and  the  mythic  tech­ nique,  once  the  key has been supplied,  too simple  to be suggestive in the largest sense. Cohen  does play the game very well; his mythologies are clever, often witty, sometimes  very moving, yet even at its best, Cohen's favourite game is still Eliot's or  Baudelaire's or  Sartre's. But  Cohen  is  attempting to  write  of  contemporary themes  in  a contemporary way. His  concern  with  alienation, eroticism  and  mad­  ness, together  with  the  experimental techniques  of Flowers  for Hitler  and  Beauti­ ful  Losers,   unlike  the  dominantly  early  nineteenth-century romanticism   of  the Montreal Group, are  the  concerns  of  post  World  War  Two  writing.  For  Cohen,  as for  Heller,  Burroughs, Grass  and  Selby,  the  old  rules  of  religious  rationality and  romantic idealism  exist to be  questioned. The  last twenty  years has seen the codification  of a new group  of  writers  whose focus is on the  disintegrative vision and  it is in  their  footsteps  that  Cohen  is following.  Because this new vision, like that  of the  Decadents, is an inversion  of traditional romantic "myth" and  moral­  ity,  and  because  it  is  often  presented  with  the  irreverent wit  of  the  new  Black Humourists,  we  might  be  justified  in  calling  this  attitude to  experience,   Black Romantic.



WrrHIN THE  WORLD of the  contemporary Black Romantic, the  disintegrative experience  is presented  not  only  through the  journey  into  self but  also through the form of the work. Both, in turn,  are microcosms of the reduc­ tionist  cycle of the larger  world.  The  form  of Beautiful Losers  with  its disjointed  inner  monologues  interspersed  with  snippets  of history  and  clippings from  comic books  is substantially the  "cut-up" technique of William  Burroughs  alternating with  one of the stylistic tricks from  Sartre's Nausea  which  might  be distinguished  by  the  fact  that   Every  Word  Begins  With  A  Capital.  Both  techniques  suggest

BLACK ROMANTIC



the  merging  of values  which  cannot  occur  without  a breakdown in the structure of the  world  which  they represent. In  Beautiful  Losers, as in Celine's  ]ourney To The   End  Of Night, it is the  universe  itself which  is breaking down,  proceeding gradually  but  inevitably   through  the  process  of  entropy. Cohen  illustrates   this process and  then  attempts to reverse it when  the  once  glorious  "F" disintegrates into a smelly old man  but then escapes from the novel page  (and, incidentally, the human predicament) by metamorphosing himself into  a movie  of Ray  Charles. This  is a  flippant  example,  but  it  is another   reminder that  the  Black Romantic justifies his presentation of disintegration by insisting  that  the  breakdown of the old  "false"  categories  leaves the  way open  for  both  reader  and  author  to create new  order.  In  Cohen's  work,  this  justification  is more  impressive  in  theory  than in  practice.  Techniques such  as Cohen's "pure list"  or  Burrough's "cut-up" are successful only  when  there  is some direction  suggested  for  the  movement  beyond recorded  disintegration, and  it is this larger  revelation  which  is most absent  from extended   passages of Beautiful  Losers.
For these reasons, I suspect that  Leonard  Cohen is more important in Canadian
writing  for the contemporary movement which he represents  than  for the intrinsic merit  of his work to date. The  world of the Black Romantic may not be a particu­ larly  pleasant  one,  but  its awareness  of the darker  side of human consciousness is a helpful  counterbalance to a literary  tradition that  professes an ignorance of the human animal  as complete  as any of the  Pollyanna  Glad  Books. As early as rg28
we can  find  A. J. M. Smith  insisting:  "the  Canadian writer  must  put  up  a fight
for freedom  in the choice and  treatment of his subject". Suggesting  that  desperate conditions   require   desperate   remedies,   he  concludes:    "our   condition   will  not improve  until  we have  been  thoroughly shocked  by the  appearance in our  midst of a work of art that  is both successful and obscene." 4 Beautiful  Losers, as success­ ful  pop-art, may  just provide  the function Smith  has in mind.  At the same  time, I am  sorry  to see Cohen   join  Layton  in  the  role of public  educator,  because  if he  does have  a future as a serious  writer-if  he wants  one -it is  back  in  the writing  of The  Favourite  Game  before Cohen,  persona,  solidified.


FOOTNOTES
•   E. K.  Brown, "The  Problem of A Canadian  Poetry," Masks  of Fiction.  Toronto,
rg6r.
° Cyril Connolly, The  Modern Movement. London, rg66.
3  Alfred Purdy, "Leonard  Cohen:  A Personal Look," Canadian Literature  23  (Win­
ter rg65).
4   A. J. M. Smith, "Wanted,  Canadian  Criticism," Canadian Forum  gr  (April rg28).

42


HAPPILY EVER	AFTER



Canadian Women in Fiction and Fact




Clara Thomas










w.O CAN FIND A  VIRTUOUS WOMAN?  fo< hcr price is fa< above  rubies",   said  Solomon,   and  forthwith sketched   her  in  some  detail.   His definition  has constituted the ideal,  and  divergencies  in fact  and fiction have been merely  variations from  his standards. Fictionally,  the  model  pattern has been  the representation of the modest,  capable,  energetic  wife and  mother, bearing sorrows with  fortitude and  earning   joy in  her  family's  devotion  and  the  achievements of her  home-making. The  most  familiar   variation of  the  pattern, still well within the structure of "virtue", has been  the  romantic rebel, revolting  against  her  pre­ destined  "place", but so charming, or gifted, or both,  that  sometimes  an indulgent Providence has allowed her a happy  ending.
In  Canadian fiction, Sara  Jeannette Duncan's The  Imperialist establishes memorable portrayals of the types in Mrs.  Murchison and  her daughter, Advena. Mrs.  Murchison is the  wife  of  John  Murchison, a  benignly  patriarchal,  hard­ working,  modestly prosperous  manufacturer of stoves, a pillar of the small Ontario town  of  Elgin.  She  is introduced in  her  kitchen  disposing  of  the  affairs  of  her household,  her  husband, and  her  children  with  entire  competence  and  a charm  that  is partly  rooted  in our  nostalgic  memories  of grandmothers who seemed  just like that,  and  partly  in Miss Duncan's combination of affection, acute observation and  impeccable skill in her  portraiture.

43

HAPPILY  EVER AFTER



On  such  occasions  as the entertaining of Dr.  Drummond, the clergyman, Mrs. Murchison's pride  in her  housewifery  finds its own  triumphant manifestation:

The  chicken  salad  gleamed  at  one  end  of  the  table   and  the  scalloped oysters smoked delicious at  the other.  Lorne  had  charge of the cold tongue  and  Advena was entrusted with the pickled pears. The rest of the family were expected to think about  the  tea  biscuits and  the  cake, for  Lobelia  had  never  yet had  a successor that  was any hand with company.... It was a table to do anybody credit, with its glossy damask  and  the  old-fashioned  silver and  best china  that  Mrs.  Murchison had  brought  as a  bride  to  her  housekeeping-for, thank  goodness, her  mother had  known what  was what  in such matters ... Mrs. Murchison  came of a family of noted housekeepers; where she got her charm  I don't  know.

And  all  who  read  must share  her  satisfaction, both  in  the sheer  physical  appeal of the  laden  table  and  in  the  more  formal  appreciation of a ritual  occasion,  the company   dinner. Mrs.  Murchison is cut  perfectly  to  the  proverbial pattern  of virtue,  with  skilful  adaptations to  her  Canadian place  and  time,  and  she  is  re­ warded   traditionally-her children   and   her   husband  "rise  up  and  call  her blessed."
Daughter Advena, however,  cracks  the  mould.  She  reads  when  she should  be cooking,  retires  to the  roof of the  house and  pulls the ladder  up after  her in  pro­ test to taking  music-lessons, cannot  be counted  upon  to manage a day's preserving of cherries or strawberries, or indeed,  for anything requiring the talents and  appli­  cation  of  the  traditional housewife.  A  radical  to the  role of women, she puzzles and  frustrates her mother  who looks upon  her enterprises with an  uneasy mixture  of forbearance, impatience and amazement:

Advena, indeed, might have married and removed no prop of the family economy. Mrs. Murchison would have been "sorry for the man" -she maintained  a candour toward  and  about  those  belonging to  her  that  permitted  no illusions-but  she would have stood cheerfully out of the way on her own account....
Advena  justified her  existence  by taking  the  university course  for  women  at Toronto,  and  afterward  teaching  the English branches to the  junior forms in the Collegiate  Institute,  which  placed  her  arbitrarily  outside  the  sphere  of domestic criticism. Mrs. Murchison was thankful  to have her there-outside-where little more could  reasonably be expected  of her than  that  she should  be down in time for breakfast.

When  Providence, in  the  form  of Dr.  Drummond, arranges a happy  ending  for Advena   and  the  Rev.  Hugh   Finlay,  Mrs.  Murchison can  be sure  that  one  un­ worldly  person  has  been  well  mated   with  another. But,  in  all  practicality,  she must still be a little "sorry for the man."

44

HAPPILY  EVER AFTER




IN   THE STRICKLAND  SISTERS, Catherine  Parr  Traill  and Susanna   Moodie,  Canada had  remarkable prototypes,  in fact,  for  Mrs.  Murchi­ son's  and  Ad vena's  fictional  types. In  the  decade  between  I 830  and  I 840  Mrs. Moodie  and  Mrs.  Traill  came,  settled,  endured  and  prevailed-but each  in her own  distinctive  way. To  neither  was emigration in any  way a radical move. The  Stricklands were  a  solidly  middle   class family;   when  their  father  retired  from his position  as manager of the Greenland docks, in London, he bought  a country  house  in  Suffolk  and  devoted  himself  first  to  the  education of  his large  family and  then  to the  various  cultivated  pursuits  of an educated  country  gentleman of the  early  nineteenth century.   It was  to  perpetuate  this  kind of living  that  both the  Traills  and  the  Moodies  emigrated. For  Catharine Traill, the decision  was a willing one :

Canada  is the land  of hope; here everything is new; everything is going forward;
it is scarcely possible for arts, sciences, agriculture, manufacturers to retrograde....
Children  should be taught  to appreciate  the devoted love that has induced their parents  to overcome the natural  reluctance  felt by all persons to quit  forever the land  of  their  forefathers ... that  their  children  may  be placed  in  a situation  in which, by industry and activity, the substantial comforts of life may be permanently obtained,  and  a landed  property  handed  down  to them  and  their  children  after them.                                                                                         (Backwoods of Canada)

On  the  contrary, Susanna  Moodie  rebelled  at the thought of leaving  England, particularly its  congenial   company   and  intellectual  pursuits,  for  she  and  John Moodie  were strongly  disposed  toward  a literary  life, and  she describes  her  hus­ band  as "the  poet, the author, the musician,  the man of books, of refined  taste and gentlemanly habits." She  was  dismayed  and  appalled at  an  economic  situation which  made  emigration the  only  prudent course,  yet she  recognized  that  "the  half-pay  of a subaltern officer, managed with  a most rigid economy,  is too small to supply  the  wants  of a family;  and  if, of good family,  not enough  to  maintain his original  standing in society."  (Roughing it in the Bush).
To  marriage and  to the Canadian plans, Catharine brought all the capabilities, the  calm  optimism, and  the common  sense of a nature which  was essentially and strongly practical, empiric  and pragmatic in its bent. She saw their early Canadian situation   as  a  "Robinson Crusoe"  sort  of life;  she  welcomed  the  challenge,  ac­ cepted  the situation, and  adapted to it with  astonishing  aptitude and  grace.  Be­ yond  that,  she wrote -patterns  for  living for other  Canadian  women,  the  Mrs. Murchisons  of the future. The  Backwoods  of Canada, a record of the Traill's first

45

HAPPILY EVER  AFTER



three   years,  published   in   1936   in  Charles   Knight's  "Library  of  Entertaining Knowledge", is  exactly   what   it  announces  itself  to  be:   it  gives  "information regarding the  domestic  economy  of a settler's  life"  and  it affords  "every  possible information  to  the  wives  and   daughters of  emigrants of  the  higher  class  who contemplate seeking a home  among  our  Canadian Wilds."  More  than  a third  of the  book  describes  the  Traill's long  journey  to their  land  and  the  rest describes the  flora  and  fauna, the  Indians, and  the customs  and  conditions  that  all settlers must  expect  to meet.  Catharine's love of nature was, from  the first, an  absorbing hobby   and   a  major   sustaining interest   which,  when  she  embarked  on  a  pro­ gramme of self-education, carried   her  finally  beyond  the  status  of  an  amateur enthusiast and  made   her  something of  an  international  authority on  Canada's plants  and  flowers.  It was  typical  of  the  outward-going nature of  her  interests that,  in The  Backwoods, she devoted  two paragraphs only to the attack of  cholera  which  nearly  killed her on arrival  in Montreal, but she required  more than  forty pages  to describe  the  birds, small  animals  and  particularly the  flowers which  she observed  around their  holding  near  Peterborough.
She  was frankly  delighted  to be rid of the  pretentiousness which  she deplored in  English  society:  "We  bush-ladies  have  a wholesome  disregard  of what  Mr.  or Mrs.  So-and-so  thinks  and  says.  We  pride  ourselves  on  conforming to  circum­ stances." In  her  writings,  she  was  an  eminent  instructress on  the  skills  of con­ formity: The  Backwoods'  final appendix of thirty-five  pages of  useful information of all  kinds,  including a collection  of recipes for  making  maple-syrup, soft-soap, candles  and  vinegar,  processes which  might  be  unfamiliar  to an  Englishwoman­ settler,  is only  a small  beginning toward  her  Female  Emigrant's Guide  of 1855, a complete  compendium of pioneer  housewifery.
Catharine Traill is  the  Mrs.  Beeton  and  the  Fanny   Farmer of   nineteenth­ century  Canada, but she goes beyond  either  of these worthy  pattern-makers. The  pioneer  wife's  knowledge  and  capabilities  had  to  extend  far  beyond  the  home, the  kitchen  and  the  promotion  of gracious  and  thrifty  living-ideally, she must also be competent in  the  garden, the  fields, with  the animals, as nurse  and  mid­ wife,  as manufacturer of clothing  and,  in  emergencies, she  must  have  hands  as strong  and  head  as clear  as a  man's.  To  wear  out  was frightfully  common  for the  female  pioneer; only  the  incorrigibly  slovenly  could  rust  out.
All the  sections of the  Guide  ring with  the  authenticity of personal  experience and  the  conviction  of  one  who  can  instruct   the  newcomer, because  for  twenty years she  has herself been  evolving  the  pattern for  maximum usefulness. Beyond that,  her writing  style provides a large bonus of enjoyment to the reader,  for when

HAPPILY EVER  AFTER



Catharine Traill  wrote  of what  she  knew,  she  commanded her  language with  a Jane  Austcnish  clarity,  precision  and,  sometimes,  wit. On  the dangers  of fire, for instance,  she writes:

Help from our neighbours we could not obtain. When we sent a messenger for one, he and all his family were battling with the fire on their own clearing; to a second, his fences were on fire-all  hands  were employed in saving the  crops;  a third, the  barn  was in  danger;  and  so we were forced  to  rouse every energy that  we could  to  overcome  the  danger.  Ourselves, women  and  little  children-all  had to  help;  and  this  continued  day  after  day.... The  Autumn  rains  finally  extin­ guished  the  fires all over the  country,  and  the  dread  of their  ravages  was  at  an end for that year. ...
In  cases of  emergency, it  is folly to fold  one's  hands  and  sit down  in abject terror;  it is better to be up and doing.
(Female  Emigrant's  Guide)





MANY OF  THE SKETCHES for Susanna Moodie's  Roughing it in the Bush were written  contemporaneously with Catharine Traill's Backwoods. Though some of them  had  been  published  in  Mr.  Lovell's  Literary  Garland, the Montreal  publication  which,   from   r838-r85r,  catered  to  the   demands  and desires of the female  reader,  Roughing it was not published  as a book until  r 852. In its conclusion  Susanna Moodie  announces an intention in direct  contrast  to her sister's:   "If these sketches  should  prove  the  means  of deterring one  family  from sinking their property and shipwrecking all their hopes, by going to reside in the backwoods  of  Canada, I  shall  consider  myself  amply  repaid   for  revealing  the secrets  of  the  prison-house,  and  feel  that  I  have  not  toiled  and  suffered  in  the wilderness  in  vain."
Susanna was, in fact,  not  a diarist,  not  a writer  of calm  expository  prose, cer­ tainly not an instructress  of prospective  emigrants, but a gifted recorder  of  charac­ ter,  dialogue  and  incident, especially of a humourous nature. Like her sister, she had  written  and  been  published  before coming  to Canada, but  her early life here made  a great  impact  on  her,  extending talents  of  character-drawing and  the  re­ cording  of incident  that  she had  exercised  before,  and  releasing  another  that  she had  scarcely  practised-the ability  to see  with  a humourist's slant  and  to com­ municate, by description and  dialogue, her  amusement to others.  She never lived comfortably  with  her  comic  vision,  however,  or lost her embarrassment at its in­ corrigible  presence.  She  deplores  her  "perverse inclination to laugh  in the wrong

47

HAPPILY  EVER AFTER



place;  for  though  one  cannot  help  deriving  from  it a wicked  enjoyment, it is a very troublesome  gift, and  very difficult to conceal."  (Life in the Clearings) .
In  Canada, Susanna was thrust  into  the company  of all sorts of people, few of whom  were of her  own social class and  many  of whom  she found  reprehensible, but  almost  always  amusing.  She  could  write  of them  without inhibition and  she captured a whole  gallery  of them,  in the  very  accents  in  which  she heard  them speak.  From  the ship's  captain, through a long list -Satan, Tom  Wilson,  Betty Frye,  John   Monaghan, to  the  "little  stumpy  man", Roughing it in  the  Bush  is alive  with  their  presences.  And  in  her  sketches,  no  person  comes  as fully  alive as Susanna, their  authoress,  for,  first  among  our  writers,  she  had  the  novelist's impulse   and   talent   to  demonstrate the  changes  and   modifications   effected  by experience on personality-in this case, her own. She is recklessly self-revealing:
a prejudiced, class-conscious, ill-equipped pioneer, sometimes  the butt  of her own stories,  sometimes  the  heroine,  passionately  revolting  against  her  circumstances, while slowly and  uncomfortably adapting to them.  Catharine Traill  quietly states the  achievement, while  Susanna dramatizes the  struggle  with  herself  the  storm centre,  and  her self-characterization has the energy and  the contained variety of a successful fictional  characterization.
In  many  ways she was, and  she saw herself as, the rebel to her place and  role, the  Canadian ancestress of all the Advena  Murchisons who step out  of woman's accepted  place  because,  temperamentally, they must,  and  who  adapt to women's conventional place  painfully,  or  not  at  all.  In  fact,  Susanna was no less gallant than  her  sister:  she endured primitive  conditions  for far  longer  than  Catharine, because  John  Moodie,  unlike Thomas Traill, was neither  a prudently wise nor  a successful settler;  she bore several  children  while  living in the  bush  and  she won a succession  of battles  over fear  and  pride.  Finally,  the  Englishwoman who  had been  the  joke of her neighbours because she could not bake bread,  could say with satisfaction: "I  have  contemplated  a  well-hoed  ridge  of  potatoes  on  that  bush farm  with  as much  delight  as in years long past I had  experienced  in examining a
fine painting in some well-appointed drawing  room." (Roughing it in the  Bush) .
In  Canadian fiction,  there  is no more  convincing  descendant of the Susanna - Advena  line than  Penelope  Wain, in Hugh  MacLennan's Barometer Rising. Penny is doubly  branded. She has moved  away from society's moral standard for women by  having   an  affair  with  Neil  Macrae before  he  went to  war, and  she  is the mother  of a daughter whose birth  she has kept secret from  him. Socially, she has moved  from  her  place  to  the  man's  world  of the  shipyards. She is a successful ship-designer   and   that   rarest  of  fictional  creatures,  a  "career woman" treated

HAPPILY EVER  AFTER



with  great   insight,   understanding  and  sensitivity  by  her  creator. The  steps  in Penny's  journey  from  the  cold control  that  has  become  her armour, through  the acceptance as inevitable of a renewal  of her life with  Neil, to finally,  a tentative but  grateful  welcoming  of his love, are  told with imaginative comprehension and great  delicacy  of shading:

She was tied to this man, and the realization made her shiver. She was a prisoner of his maleness because once she had  wanted  him and  he had  refused to forget it....
Then  she knew  that  it  was inevitable  for  him and  Jean  and  herself to go on together,  even  if  they could  do  nothing  better  than  preserve themselves blindly for a future  she felt to be epitomized by the events of the past few days....
Suddenly  Penny required  his tenderness so greatly that  it was as though all her
life she had  been starving for it ... but the habit of restraint,  the cold control she had  trained  herself to acquire, was still unbreakable....
Tears  welled up in  her eyes and  receded  without  overflowing, and  her fingers
closed over his.




t:ERE IS A  THIRD TYPE among  Canada's virtuous  women abundantly foreshadowed in the nineteenth century  and  well characterized in the fiction of the  twentieth  -the woman  who  could  not  prevail  over  circumstances, who  did  not  have  the  sympathetic attention of Providence to  provide  her  with the rewards  due  to her efforts. In  December  of  r 836, when  Catharine Traill  and Susanna    Moodie   had   already   served   their   pioneer   apprenticeships  and   were planning soon to move to relatively civilized areas, Anna Jameson, an Irishwoman­ authoress,  arrived  in Upper  Canada. Her  husband, Robert  Jameson, was Upper  Canada's Attorney  General, soon  to  be  appointed  Vice-Chancellor; though  his wife  had  come  over  with  some  degree  of hope  for  mending their  long-standing separation and  estrangement, it must  be admitted  that  she was more  hopeful  of writing  a  book  about  her  observations  of  life in  Canada,  particularly women's  life, and  perhaps, even, more  determined to do so.
Her  comments  range  over  the  whole  of society, from  the  tight  little  oligarchy of Toronto to Chippewa Lodges  at  Sault  Ste  Marie,  for her Winter  Studies and Summer  Rambles  in Canada  is a  journal  of her  entire  stay,  the  winter  of  I837 in Toronto, and  a three  month  trip in the summer, to Sault  Ste Marie  and  back. Anna  Jameson  did not meet Catharine Traill  or Susanna Moodie and their achievements are  triumphs in the  face  of her  conclusions,  at  the same  time sup-

49

HAPPILY  EVER AFTER



porting   her  opmwn   that  it  is  women  of  their  class and  of superior   mind  and talents  who  are  most apt  to adapt well to Canadian conditions.
I  have  not often  in  my life met  with  contented  and  cheerful-minded  women, but  I  never  met  with  so many  repining  and  discontented  women as in Canada. I  never met with one  woman  recently settled here, who considered herself happy in  her  new home  and  country:   I  heard  of one, and  doubtless there  are  others, but they are exceptions to the general rule....
I  have observed that  really accomplished women, accustomed to what is called
the  best society, have more  resources here, and  manage  better  than  some women who have no pretensions of any kind.
Can  you imagine  the  position of a fretful,  frivolous woman,  strong  neither  in
mind  or frame,  abandoned  to her own resources in the wilds of Upper  Canada? I do not believe you can imagine anything so pitiable, so ridiculous, and, to borrow the Canadian word, "so shiftless." (Winter Studies)

She  records  many  sad examples  of ruined  families:   a man  designated  as "C", who  "must  sell all off, or see his wife perish  before his eyes";  "Mrs. A. and  Mrs. B., who came  out  here, as I well remember, full of health  and  bloom-what  are they  now?  premature old  women,  sickly, careworn, without   nerve  or  cheerful­ ness."  Most  pathetic of all is her  sketch  of the  young  woman  whose  husband is helpless  from  drink,   the  "Canadian  nectar", as  Catharine Traill  called  it: "a very  young,  very  pretty,  sad-looking  creature, with  her  first baby  at her  bosom, whose husband  was staggering  and talking drunken  gibberish at her side." Susanna Moodie  and  Catharine Traill   joined  Anna  Jameson in  designating free-flowing "spirits" as the  greatest  single hazard  to the growth  of  civilized society in  Upper  Canada; true  to her  remarkable common  sense, Catharine Traill  enlarges  on the comparatively benign  qualities  of beer  and  offers simple  recipes for its brewing.
Anna  Jameson does find hope for the future,  however, in such settlements  as the Scottish  one north  of Port Talbot on Lake  Erie where  the "Highlanders ... bring hither   all  their  clannish  attachments, and  their  thrifty,  dirty  habits-and  also their  pride  and  their  honesty." The  ragged  brood  of ten  children, speaking  only Gaelic,  with  whom  she is surrounded at  Campbell's Inn,  do represent  a genera­ tion which  may well better  itself, for these people can already  be considered  pros­ perous  and  fortunate in  their  new  country: "They have  a  property  of two hun­  dred  acres  of excellent  land,  of which  sixty are  cleared,  and  in  cultivation: five cows and  forty sheep."  (Winter Studies, II). She finds hope,  indeed,  in all those who  were  "born here,  or  brought   here  by  their  parents." They  "seemed  to me very happy,  and  many of them  had  adopted  a sort of pride in their country  which I  liked much." (Winter Studies, I).

so

HAPPILY  EVER AFTER



In  The  Imperialist, Mrs.  Crowe, who  sells vegetables in  the  Elgin  market every week,  is a  type  of  the  latter, and  a vindication of Anna Jameson's hope.  As she waits   in  her   farmhouse  parlour  which   smelled   of  "varnish  and   whatever  was inside  the  'suite' of which   [she]   occupied the  sofa" for  the  men  who  are  coming to  supper before   the  political meeting in  the  local  school-house, Sara Jeannette Duncan sees in  her,  and  quite truly  so, "the sum  of a certain measure of  oppor­ tunity  and   service,   an  imperial figure   in  her   bead   trimming if  the  truth were known." 1\fiss Duncan has  romanticized Mrs.  Crowe by that  last epithet, but  her de;cription is infallible in  its detail and  its  utterly convincing  realism  gives  Mrs.  Crowe both  the  dignity and  the  pathos which  is her  due.

She  sat  on  the  sofa in  her  best  black  dress with  the  bead  trimming on  neck  and sleeves, a  good  deal  pushed  up  and  wrinkled   across  the  bosom  which  had  done all  that  would  ever  be required  of it  when  it  gave Elmore  and  Abe their  start  in life. Her  wiry hands  were crossed in her lap  in the moment  of waiting: you could tell by the look of them  that  they were not often crossed there.  They were strenuous hands; the  whole  worn  figure  was strenuous, and  the  narrow  set mouth, and  the eyes which  had  looked  after  so many  matters  for  so long,  and  the  way  the  hair was drawn  back into a knot in a fashion that would have given a phrenologist his opportunity.

This is the  Canadian verbal parallel to Grant Wood's visual  "American Gothic", both  representations of enormous conviction, finely balanced between a sense of achievement and  of the  price  it has  exacted.
In   Fruits   of  the   Earth,  Frederick  Philip Grove deepened  and   darkened the portrait to  near-tragic intensity. Abe  Spalding with  his  wife  Ruth, moved  from settled   Brant country, in  Ontario, to  take  up  land  in  Manitoba. Abe  is a  fine, even  heroic figure,   of  whom   many   of  us  must  say  with   pride, "here is an  an­ cestor." But  his drive  to work  the  land, to make it produce and  to make  his com­  munity a  decent and  prosperous oasis  in  the  vastness  of  the  west,  leaves  him  no time  for  marriage as  partnership. To   the  land   and  its  demands Ruth  must  be sacrificed, physically exhausted and  emotionally starved by  her  life:

Abe  had  been  dimly  aware  of  changes  going  on  about   him.... Slow  work,  the work  of  the  farm! Every  step  took  a  year.  But  the  last  step  had  been  taken.  He could afiord  to look back.
Yes, there  in  the  door  of  the  kitchen,  stood  Ruth. That was  how  she  looked;
not  a sight  to  make  a man's  glance  linger.  Between  her  heavy  bust  and  her  wide massive  hips,  the  last  trace  of a  waistline  had  vanished.  In  the  short,  wide  face, the  wrinkles  furrowing cheeks and  forehead showed  a thickness  of skin such  as to

HAPPILY EVER  AFTER



preclude  any  delicacy  in  the  mouldings   which   increasing   years  were  bound   to bring.  Her  expression  betrayed  a sense of disappointment with  life.

There are  thousands of such  women in Canada's history. For  them, as for Grove's Ruth, no  effort  was  enough, there  were  no  rewards of  achievement or  leisure  to anticipate, because the  land  was  insatiable in  its  demands, and  so were  the  men whose  lives  were  dominated by  it:

Ruth sat  down  at  the  table.  The  silence was full  of unexpected meanings.  "Abe", she  said,  looking  first  down  then  straight at  him.  "I don't   know -" And  tears ran down  her cheeks.
Uncomfortably he leaned  back in his chair.
"This crop,"  Ruth went on:  "it means a future. Why build?" Abe gasped. "Why  build?  What  else?"
"We  have enough  to live on. Move to town." "Do  you mean  retire?"
"Perhaps."
"Do  you know that  I am not yet fifty?"
"Well"-Ruth moved a dish with nervous fingers. "I feel sixty."




HAGAR SHIPLEY, in  Margaret Laurence's The  Stone Angel, is the  culmination of all  the  Ruths in  our  fiction. Corroded and  distorted by her environment and   the  self-willed   tragedies of  her  life,  physically grotesque in  the ugliness  of  old  age,  yet  Hagar is never  quite dominated. Unloving and  unlove­ able,  yet  wanting above  all  else to  be loved,  she  is a  total,  completely  believable, tragically mistaken human  being.  And   before  death, through the  agency  of  the little  clergyman whom  she  despises,  but  reluctantly admires as he  sings  a  hymn for  her,  she  comes  to her  moment of truth and  self-knowledge:

This  knowing  comes upon  me so forcefully, so shatteringly, and  with such a bitter­ ness as I have  never felt before.  I must  always, always, have wanted  that-simply to  rejoice.  How  is it  I  never  could?  I  know,  I know.  How  long  have  I  known?  Or  have  I  always  known,  in  some  far  crevice  of my heart,  some  cave  too deeply buried,  too concealed....
Pride   was  my  wilderness,  and   the  demon  that   led  me  there  was  fear.  I  was alone,  never  anything else,  and   never  free,  for  I  carried   my  chains  within  me, and  they spread  out and shackled  all I touched.

Hagar is tragic, but  above  all,  Hagar is real,  with  the  energy  of  presence of  the completely successful  fictional characterization. Her  reality can  pierce  any  armour

52

HAPPlLY  EVER AFTER



that  her  reader  may  assemble;  stunning is the  recognition  that,  though  we look to  the  Mrs.  Murchisons of  our  past  with  complacence, the  Hagars have  been there all the time, desperately  needing  our understanding, while just as desperately repelling  it.
Finally  and  predictably, given some knowledge  of Susanna Moodie's tempera­ ment  and  talents,  we look back  to her  work  for  the  first  portrait-vignette in our literature of the  Mrs.  Crowe -Ruth -Hagar  figure, and it is with  a nice sense of the  fitting  that  we find it.  In  her  passage from  rebel  to the  competencies  and the  satisfactions  of the  housewife-mother,  Susanna  had  experienced the  changes that  a hard  life made  in  a woman,  and  her  fictional  talent,  its limitations  them­  selves a  part  of the  restrictions  of her  life, impelled  her  to  record  them.  As she leaves the bush,  finally, to begin a long-desired  life in the comparative civilization of the  town of Belleville, she describes herself as the life has made  her:

For seven years I had  lived out  of the world entirely:  my person had  been  ren­ dered  coarse by hard  work and exposure to the weather,  I looked double  the age I really was, and  my hair was already  thickly sprinkled with grey. I  clung  to my solitude.

















RIChaRb asel &  company,  1nc.


Scholarly Books in the Arts and Sciences



PORTLAND, SAN   FRANCISCO, LOS  ANGELES,  DENVER, CHICAGO, NEW YORK



53


ISABELLA VALANCY CRAWFORD


The Canoe


John B. Ower







EVEN THE CASUAL  READER  of  th' best po'try  of lsab,lla Valancy   Crawford can  hardly  fail  to  be  impressed  by its  boldness,  vigour  and orginality.  In  passage after  passage, he will meet  with  an extraordinary energetic imagination which, while obviously neither uneducated nor insensitive to literary influence,   has  succeeded   in  creating   an  art  that   is  as  distinctively  individual and  "Canadian" as  anything in  our  literature. The  aim  of  the  present  limited study  is not  so much  to  praise  these  obvious  virtues  of Crawford's best work  as it is to suggest,  by means  of a relatively  detailed  study  of her lyric "The Canoe", that  in  her  finest pieces we have  a poetry  which  is not only vital and  distinctive, but  also rich  in  symbolic significance  and  sophisticated and  subtle  in  technique. James   Reaney,   in  his  brilliant   pioneering   essay  on  Crawford's  poetry'   has  of course  outlined   a  symbolic  myth  and   a  "grammar of  images"  which  seem  to form  the  backbone of her work.  However,  although Reaney  has certainly  told us a great  deal  about  her  art  as a whole,  I fed  that  Crawford is a poet of sufficient substance   to  warrant a  closer scrutiny  of some  individual pieces. It  is also only through   a  relatively  close analysis  of  individual poems  that  it  is really  possible to show  the  virtuosity  of Crawford's technique.
A  convenient starting   point  for  an  analysis  of  "The Canoe" is the  fact  that the  poem  constitutes,  both  in  the viewpoint  of its narrator, the canoe, and  in her account  of her  "masters twain", a study in the psychology of the primitive  mind. Particularly  notable  is  Crawford's  remarkable awareness  of  the  animating and

54

ISABELLA VALANCY CRAWFORD



myth-making proclivities  of primitive  man.  That is, as is evident  in some of the most striking  similes and  metaphors in "The Canoe", the poet is familiar  with the tendency  of  the  primitive  to sec everything  in  terms  of life, and  of  human   life in particular:

Thin, golden  nerves of sly light curl'd Round  the dun  camp,  and  rose faint zones, Half  way round  each grim  bole knit,
Like a shy child that  would  bedeck
With  its soft clasp a Brave's red neck;

Sinuous,  red as copper  snakes,
Sharp-headed serpents,  made  of light, Glided  and  hid themselves in night.

Another  significant  aspect  of Crawford's treatment of the  primitive  mentality is her  romantic sense of its primal  and  direct  character. In  "The Canoe", as in D.  C.  Scott's  "At  Gull  Lake:   August  I 810",  the  poet  evidently  finds in the  be­ haviour  of  the  "savage" Indian  a sort  of  psychological  apocalypse  of the  basic forces  of  human  nature. This  is particularly evident  in  Crawford's lyric  in the love-song  of the  two  braves,  with  its frank  expression  of impulses  and  emotions which  at first appear scarcely less elemental than  those of the hounds who dream  of "the  dead  stag  stout  and  lusty":
My masters  twain sang songs that  wove
(As they burnish'd  hunting blade and rifle) A golden  thread  with a cobweb trifle­ Loud  of the chase, and  low of love.

"0 Love, art  thou  a silver fish? Shy of the line and shy of gaffing,
Which  we do follow, fierce, yet laughing, Casting  at thee the light-winged vvish.

Even  if  "The  Canoe" were  simply  a  poetic  study  in  the  psychology  of  un­ civilized man,  it would still do considerable credit  to Crawford's powers of  insight and imagination. However,  as Reaney  has shown, Crawford is not merely a clever poetical  dilettante, but  an  artist  with  a vision of sufficient dimensions  to  come to grips  with  the  great  questions  of human existence.  It  is therefore  reasonable  to assume  that  her  remarkable re-creation of the  primitive  mind  in  "The Canoe" is not simply an  anthropological study,  but  possesses a wider frame of human  refer­ ence.  One  obvious  possibility follows from  the  supposition  that  Crawford sees in the  primitive  the  direct  expression  of man's  primal  psychic impulses.  This  is that

55

ISABELLA VALANCY CRAWFORD



she  is  using  the  mentality  of  the  Indian in  essentially  the  same  way  as  Words­ worth  employs  that  of the  peasant: to exemplify  or explore  in the workings  of a simple  and   uninhibited  mind  certain   basic  principles  of  man's  psychic  activity which   are  normally   buried,  suppressed  or  modified  in  the  case  of  the  civilized person.   In   terms  of  modern   psychology,  Crawford  might  be  dealing  in  "The Canoe" with  those  forces  which  in  the  European normally  belong  to the  realm of the  subconscious,  but  which  nonetheless  exert  a  pervasive  influence  upon  his life. It would  then of course be possible that  the external world as it is seen through the  myth-making and  animating focus of the  primitive  mind  becomes a symbolic projection  of the  psychological  realities with which  the poet is dealing.
An  analysis of "The Canoe" along  the  lines just proposed  may begin with  the love-song  of the  two braves.  This  lyric occupies  a central  position  in Crawford's poem,  and  we may  divine  that  it is intended to stand  out  as a kind of climax  or core,  to  which  the  preceding   and  following  lines  function essentially  as  a  pro­ logue  and  epilogue.  It is accordingly  significant  for our line of argument  that the song is concerned  with  a paradox involving  one of the  fundamental impulses  of man's  psychic life. The  paradox, which  under  normal  circumstances would  exist only in  the subconscious  of civilized man,  is that  human love in its sexual  aspect is also  violence,  and  is destructive as well  as creative,  death-dealing as well  as
life-giving:

0 Love, art thou a silver fish?
Shy of the line and shy of gaffing,
Which we do follow, fierce, yet laughing, Casting at thee the light-wing'd wish,


0 Love! art thou a silver deer,
Swift thy starr'd  feet as wing of swallow, While we with rushing arrows follow; And at last shall we draw near,
And over thy velvet neck cast thongs
Woven of roses, of stars, of songs?

The  darker  aspect  of sexuality  is expressed  in the song  of the  braves  in terms  of the  pursuits  of fishing  and  hunting. These  images  of force  and  slaughter  are  of course offset in the song by what  Reaney  would term the "golden  daffodil" images of laughter, song, lily, rose, gold, silver and gems.' However, the manner  in which the  song  is  introduced  ironically   undercuts  the  positive  implications  of  these Images:

s6

ISABELLA VALANCY CRAWFORD



My masters twain sang songs that wove
(As they burnish'd  hunting blade and rifle) A golden thread with a cobweb trifle­ Loud of the chase, and low of love.

Similarly,  the  predominance of  "golden daffodil" symbols  in  the  second  stanza of the lyric is implicitly  offset by the imagery  of violence and death  in the line immediately following.  In  the primitive  or sub-conscious  context  of "The Canoe", the  creative   and  life-giving  aspects  of  sexuality  are  thus  paradoxically  accom­ panied,   and  even  overshadowed, by  a  dark  lust  for  destruction and  death. In terms  of the symbolic scheme  outlined  by Reaney,  "The Canoe" is  thus a "black  daffodil" poem,  in which  the  chase  of love is still essentially the  dark  line of the rush  to annihilation. It  is only  near  the  conclusion  of  Crawford's  poem  that  we receive symbolic hints that  this black line is becoming the "black  circle" in which evil is ordered  and  redeemed.3
The  dark  vision of sexuality  in the love-song of the braves is reinforced  by the imagery  in  the  passages which  precede  and  follow it. Thus, the  almost  domestic tenderness  of the  "erotic" treatment of the  canoe  with  which  Crawford's, poems open  is  ironically   undercut  by  the  grim  references  to  the  hunting and  fishing activities  of  the  braves,  which  involve  numerous images  of  shooting,  stabbing, binding   and  hanging. We  should  particularly notice  in  the  lines  preceding   the love-song  the  description of a deer,  which  has been shot,  bound  and  hung  from
boughs:
My masters twain the Slaughter'd  deer
Hung on fork'd boughs-with thongs of leather. Bound were his stiff, slim feet together-
His eyes like dead stars cold and drear ...

The  psychological  paradox just outlined, with its emphasis  on the dark  aspects of  human sexuality,  is also reflected  in  the  animating and  myth-making images of "The Canoe", of which  there  are several striking  examples  in the lines preced­ ing  the  love-song  of  the  braves.4 It will  be  noted  that  the  relevant  similes and metaphors are  all  images  of  light.  The  source  of  this  light  is in  each  case  the campfire  of the  two braves,  whose designation as a "camp-soul" indicates that  it serves  as  a  symbol  of  the  source  and  centre  of  primitive  consciousness  in  the psychic  activity  of the  "savage" mind.  In  the images  under  consideration, either the light of this "camp-soul" or what  is revealed  by it carries sinister implications of malignity.  Thus,  the  extended  simile concerning the "faint zones" of light cast by the  campfire  on  the  trunks  of pine  trees  (I I. I 2-20)  expresses the  frightened

57

ISABELLA VALANCY CRAWFORD



paralysis  of human innocence  and  love in the face of the  dark  powers of cruelty and  violence that  reside in man.  A similar sense is conveyed by the image in which the  firelight  becomes  a human figure  who lays an  "anxious" hand  on the foam­ flecked shoulder  of a hanging  deer,  and  peers into  his dead  eyes. In  this strange metaphor,  we  evidently   have  a  recognition   of  the  consequences   of  a  lust  for violence  and  slaughter in  which  there  is a  child-like  mixture  of  fascination and fear.  The  two  images  just mentioned thus  depict  an  essentially  naive  conscious­ ness suddenly  becoming  aware  of the innate capacities  for evil in the human soul. However,  in  neither  of them  is the  firelight  itself seen as something  sinister,  as it is when  it becomes "Thin, golden  nerves of sly light", or "Sharp-headed" snakes slithering  into  the  darkness.  In  both  of these latter  images  there  is a suggestion, not of the naivete  which  we find elsewhere in "The Canoe", but of the subtlety  of the serpent  who tempted  Eve.
Seen  with  regard  to the traditional value of light  as a symbol of goodness, love and  life,  the  above  images  with  their  sinister  implications apparently involve  an ironic  reflection  of  the  psychological   paradox which  Crawford is treating  else­ where  in  "The Canoe". In  connection with  "primitive" sexuality,  and  perhaps the  whole  of man's  fundamental psychic life, creativity  is overshadowed  by des­ tructiveness,  and  love  by bloodlust  and  violence.  On  a symbolic  level,  the  light of the "camp-soul" which  represents  the psychic life of the  primitive  is thus really akin  to darkness.  This  paradox of a light  which  embodies  blackness  is suggested symbolically  by  the  redness  of  the  firelight  in  three  of  the  above  images.  This colour  has  of  course  appropriate associations  with  blood  and  burning, together  with  its connotations of  violence,  lust  and  death.  This  "demonic crimson"  is in turn  probably intended to be contrasted with the silver fish and  the silver deer of love which  we find in the song of the two braves.
The   symbolic  pattern  which  runs  through   the  myth-making and  animating imagery  of the  "prologue" to the love-song is of course  carried  on into  the "epi­ logue"  in  the  radical  simile  in  which  "slaughter'd" fish, reddened   by  the  light of  the  campfire, are  compared  with  scimitars  stained   with  the  blood  of  "new­ dead" wars.  However,  in  the  final  myth-making image  of "The  Canoe", there is a reversal  of the symbolic  values of the images  just discussed:

The darkness built its wigwam walls
Close round the camp, ...

This  metaphor is of  course  an  image  of  darkness  rather   than  of light,  but  the darkness  in  this  case is evidently  that  of the  "black  circle,"  in  which  the line of

sB

ISABELLA VALANCY CRAWFORD



evil  and  destruction has  become  the  whirl  from  which  the  golden  daffodil  will ultimately  re-emerge.  This  positive connotation is implicit  in the  reference  to the weaving  of a wigwam  wall, which  is not only an image  of an  upward gyration,5 but  also one  of creation  rather  than  of destruction. Thus, in symbolic opposition to  a  light  which  is  really  darkness,  we  have  in  the  last  myth-making image  in "The Canoe" a darkness  from  which  light  and  order  are  beginning  to be born, just  as they  are  in  the  first stages  of  the  Creation in  Genesis.  The  nascence  of light  from  blackness,  and  of cosmos from  chaos,  is likewise suggested  in the  last two lines of the poem by the white shapes, albeit still "thin-woven and  uncertain", which  press at  the  "curtain" of shadows.  In  psychological  terms,  we presumably see in the  closing images  of "The Canoe" a representation of the first stages of a transformation of the dark  side of man's  nature into sweetness and  light".
"The Canoe" thus  evidently  constitutes  a symbolic  exploration of the  human psyche. However,  there is another  of Crawford's poems which indicates that  "The Canoe" has  a further dimension  of symbolic significance.  This  is the  "Epilogue" to  "Gisli,  the  Chieftain", in  which  the  poet  evidently  conceives  of the  universe as a whole in terms of the same inextricable union  of good and  evil, creation  and destruction,  darkness   and  light,  which  we  see in  the  primitive   mind  in  "The Canoe." 6 This  suggests that  for Crawford the  psychological  paradox explored  in "The Canoe" is really  a microcosmic  reflection  of a metaphysical situation, and that  she therefore  sees a definite  analogy  between  the constitution of man's  psyche and  that  of the cosmos which  he inhabits. This  correspondence would follow as a consequence from  the  origin  of both  man  and  nature  in  the  same  great  cosmic flower.
Whatever its  basis, such  an  "analogical" vision would  have  important  impli­ cations with  regard  to the symbolic value of Crawford's poetry. The perception of a  radical  correspondence between  the  internal and  external  worlds  would  make it  possible for  her  to  write  a  "double-barrelled" poetry,  in  which  metaphysical and   psychological  questions  were  treated   in  one  and  the  same  set  of symbolic images.  The  action  of  a  poem  like  "The Canoe" could  in  this  case  take  place within  the  human mind,  and  yet at  the same  time  extend  to  embrace  the whole of  the  cosmos.  Crawford's poetry  would  thus  involve  a  double  apocalypse,  in which  the  depths  of man's  mind  and  those of the universe surrounding him were simultaneously revealed.
These  presumptions about  the  nature of  Crawford's poetry  are  supported in
the  case of "The Canoe" by the way in which  certain  of the images in the poem override  the  logical  distinction   between  man  and  the  world  which  he  inhabits.

59

ISABELLA VALANCY CRAWFORD



Thus,  we have  the similes and  metaphors in which external  phenomena are repre­ sented  in  anthropomorphic terms,  together  with  those of  the song of the  braves in  which  human love  becomes  a  fish and  a  deer,  and  a wish  is  represented   as "light-wing'd". Such  imagery  of course  implies  that  for  Crawford  man's  psyche and  the  external  world  are  in  some  manner analogous, and  therefore  imagina­ tively  interchangeable.  The   same   implication  is  also   conveyed,   although  less directly,  by the images  in "The Canoe" which  confound  the extensions  of man's  personality  in the world  of art  with  the "untouched" realm of nature. The  poet's representation of fire-lit fishes as  swords  and  scimitars,  and  the  play of shadows around   the  camp   as  the  weaving  of  wigwam  walls,  have  already   been  noted.  Such  representation of  the  outside  world  in  human terms,  and  vice versa,  point towards   a  poetry  in  which  a  close correspondence is seen  between  man's  inner  life  and   the  external  universe,  and   which  could  therefore   deal  simultaneously with  both.  Thus,   the  outlook  of  the  primitive  in  "The Canoe" may  very  well involve  not  only  a  psychological  projection, but  also  a  metaphysical vision.  It would  then  represent  an  insight  into  an  external  world  which  displays the same paradoxical  union  of good  and  evil, death  and  life, light  and  darkness  which  we have  in  the  depths  of man's  mind.
If "The Canoe" really  does function  symbolically  on  two  levels, what  would be  the  significance  of its dual  revelation  in  terms of the  frame  of reference  pro­ vided  by  Crawford's overall  vision  of  man  and  the  universe?  How  could  the double   apocalypse   of  the  poem  fit  into  the  Biblical  pattern of  Creation, Fall, Redemption and  Apocalypse  which  Reaney  sees as the  backbone  of Crawford's poetic  system? 7   To   put  a  further question  which  is  closely related  to  the  first two,  what   message  could  "The  Canoe" be  meant  to  convey to  the  civilized European who  is  the  poet's  intended audience?   On  the  psychological  level, we have  already  indicated that  the  primitive  outlook  of  "The Canoe" is intended to illustrate   a  sinister  paradox in  the  fundamentals  of   human psychology,  which would  in turn  be of basic importance for civilized  man,  even if in his case it were suppressed  or  buried  below the level of his normal  consciousness. In  terms of the Biblical schema  which  Reaney  sees as  providing  the  "bigger  subjects" of poetry, this inseparable union  of creativity  and  destructiveness, good  and  evil, in  man's  basic  mental  activities  may  be seen  as the  psychological  aspect of his fallen state,  with  its frightening ramifications of  his life. For  Crawford, this fallen  condition is presumably shared  by the savage and  the civilized man  alike. In  the case of the European at  least,  its negative  side  may  be repressed  or sublimated through  the censorship  of morality,  but  this  control  is at  best imperfect, and  for Crawford it

6o

ISABELLA VALANCY CRAWFORD



will never  bring  humanity back  to heaven.  The  good  and  evil, creation  and  des­ truction, which  are so intimately linked  in the depth  of the human  psyche are in fact complementary aspects of the "golden  daffodil" unity which is man's spiritual  goal,  and  both  are  necessary for its attainment. vVhat is needed is not for man  to attempt to suppress  the  evil side of his fallen  nature, but  rather  to  organize  and transform it  by  means  of his powers  of creativity  and  love. In  order for  him  to do so, it is necessary for  him  to plunge  into  its darkness,  as  Dante descends  into the  Inferno on  his way  to God.8  Only  by so doing  will  man's  nature  finally be redeemed,  and  return   to its  unfallen  unity.  The  Indian  braves  of "The Canoe" may  be seen  as pointing  out  this dark  journey  which  must  be taken  by all men, including the  European, in order  to achieve  redemption. The  emphasis  in  "The Canoe" falls upon  the  negative  aspect  of this  process although, as we have seen, there  is a symbolic  suggestion  at  the  end  of  the poem  of the ordering and  trans­  muting  of the evil in man.
The   significance   of  "The  Canoe" on  a  metaphysical  level  can  be  best  ap­ proached  by a consideration of the  wilderness  landscape of the  poem  as it is seen by  the  primitive   mind.  In  all  probability, the  forest  whose  trees  become  grim warriors  in the light of the "camp-soul" represents for Crawford what  Blake terms "Eututhon Benython": the  dark  wood  into  which  the  Garden of Eden  has de­ generated as a consequence  of the  Fall.9 Nature, instead  of being subordinate to man  as it was in the  prelapsarian world,  is now an independent enormity  which surrounds humanity and  threatens  to overwhelm  it.  Like the evil within  his soul, this  menacing Leviathan  must  be  redeemed   through   a  process  of  organization and   re-creation. As  Reaney   points  out  in  connection with  "Malcolm's Katie", Crawford sees the  task of the  European in the  New  World  as  being  the redemp­ tion  of the  dark  wood  by converting  it into  a garden  once  again.10   However,  in order  to "save" the wilderness,  he must  first plunge into it like the Indian braves of  "The  Canoe", and   temporarily  experience   the  terrors  of  its  darkness.  This preliminary step  in the  process of redeeming nature is of course analogous  to the psychological  plunge  into  his own  fallen soul which  is an  essential  part  of man's  return   to  the  golden  daffodil.  In  fact,  Crawford  undoubtedly sees the  two  pro­ cesses as  being  inseparably related  in  actual  practise.  The  settling  of a  country  like Canada would  involve  for  her  a  simultaneous redemption of both  the outer and  inner  worlds.  In  "The Canoe",  Crawford emphasizes  the  essential element of evil and  terror  which  is involved  in  this re-creative  process, with  only sugges­ tions  towards  the  end  of the  poem  of the  rebirth  of light  and  order  from  dark­ ness and chaos.

6r

ISABELLA VALANCY CRAWFORD



In  the  course of this analysis, it has been indicated that  the poet's "myth" and imagery  have  in  "The Canoe" both  a  psychological  and  a  metaphysical  refer­ ence, exploring  simultaneously the spiritual secrets of man's  mind  and those of the universe.  This  symbolic  richness  is  accompanied  in  "The  Canoe"  by  a  subtle sense of paradox and  a skilful use of irony which make the poem seem surprisingly  modern, and  which  might  not  be expected  from  an  artist  as thoroughly romantic as is Crawford. These  merits of "The Canoe" should serve to indicate that  at her best the  poet deserves neither  the apologetic  tone which Reaney  sometimes adopts  towards  her,Il  nor  yet damnation with faint  praises.


FOOTNOTES
' See James  Reaney,  "Isabeiia  Valancy  Crawford,"  m  Our   Living  Tradition,  ed. Robert  L.  McDougall  (Toronto:  University of Toronto  Press, I957).
2   Reaney, op. cit., pp. 276-279.
3  Ibid., pp. 276-277.
4   "The  Canoe,"  I I. I 2-20, 24-26 and 3 I -38.
5   Reaney, op. cit., pp. 277-278.
6  Ibid., 279-280.
7   Ibid., p. 275.
8  Ibid., pp. 279-280.
9  Northrop  Frye, Fearful  Symmetry  (Princeton: Princeton  University Press, I947),
p. 380.
10  Reaney, op. cit., pp. 286-287.
II Ibid., pp. 270-27 I.





LITERARY UNDERGROUND

Little Magazines in Canada


U)nne Francis





TAHCIONADOS it is no news that  about  twenty Little  Maga­ zmes  are  now  being  published  in  Canada. Other readers  less familiar  with  this type of periodical  are likely to confuse it with several other  kinds of literary  maga­  zine.  For  a truer  appreciation of what  the  Little  Magazine is, therefore, we may first consider what  it is not.
The  Little  Magazine is not  a small  magazine hoping  to become  a Big  Maga­ zine.  Big  Magazines are  commercial enterprises  thriving   on  advertising,  public sales and  wide  circulation. They  appeal  to a large  segment  of  the general  public whose opinions  they tend  to reflect and  perhaps to mould. Their range of material  is broad,  with  an  emphasis  on  current affairs.  Their interest  in literature is mini­ mal  or  peripheral, exploiting  the sensational or  human interest  angle of the con­ temporary world  of letters.  Occasionally they include  original  creative  pieces but these tend  to be selected  as bait  for  public controversy  or  because  the writer  is a celebrity. Today, in Canada, the most interesting  Big Magazine (I am concerned  only with  those displaying  some literary  pretensions)   is Parallel, now in its fourth  issue and  still trying  its bright  and  earnest  best to be really big and  really good. Impressive  as it may  be in its own category,  Parallel  represents  almost everything the Little  Magazine holds in anathema.
Nor  does  the  Little  Magazine, if it  is true  to its calling,  hanker  to  become  a Small  Magazine, though  the  dividing  line  here is sometimes  wavering  and  faint. As distinct  from  the  Big Magazine, the  Small  Magazine appeals  to a more select segment  of readers.  These  are  most often  college-bred  with  a developed  taste for "the  Arts" and  for "Literature" in particular. The  Small  Magazine comprises two

6g

LITERARY UNDERGROUND



types:  the scholarly or critical  journal  which is academically oriented  and the independent periodical  which  mingles  contemporary imaginative writing  of  vari­ ous kinds with  criticism  and  reviews. Both  types are  professionally  produced, the academic journal  being subsidized  to this end  by the  university, the independent journal  relying heavily on grants  from the Canada Council  and other  foundations. Neither   type  could  subsist  on  advertising  (which  in  their  case  is mostly  of  the goodwill  brand) or on subscriptions.
Of  these two types of Small  Magazine the independent journal  is closer to the Little  Magazine but  there  are still some very basic distinctions.  The  independent Small  Magazine is run  on  a business basis. Once  established,  it pays its contribu­ tors, it actively campaigns for subscriptions and  it appears regularly  as scheduled. The   tone  of such  a  magazine is mature, urbane,  liberal; its  policy is  clear  and consistent;  its material is drawn  from  the  best established  contemporary writers. Though it occasionally  publishes  the work of an  unknown it displays an uncanny ability   to  pick  up-and-coming  talents  on  the  eve  of   their  public  success.  The  longer  it lives the  more such  a magazine tends  to  acquire an  air of wisdom,  dig­ nity  and  stability  and  the  less likely it is to  reflect the sensibility  and  aspirations of the young or the avant-garde.
Canada has several  good,  well-established  Small  Magazines. Of  the  academic type,  Queen's  Quarterly and  Canadian Literature  may stand  as liberal  examples. Among   independent  journals,   Tamarack  Review   and   The   Canadian  F arum (despite  differences in format  and  coverage)  are of undisputed superiority. Taken as a whole,  however,  the Small  Magazine reflects the sensibility of the intelligent liberal  bourgeois  and  as such  it constitutes  The  Establishment-a veritable  bete noire of the Little  Magazine world.
We are now gaining  a perspective in which  to view the Little  Magazine proper, but  we must  first take  note of a common  error  which  is the source  of much  con­ fusion.  The  term  "Little Magazine" is often stretched to include  several  kinds of periodical   which  in  fact  exist  in  a  literary   limbo  between   the  authentic Little Magazine  and   the  independent  Small   Magazine. It  is  actually  in  this  limbo, suspended   between  two  worlds,  that  we find  most of  Canada's literary  journals.  By limbo  I mean  that  state  in which  a literary magazine is uncertain of its direc­ tion,  is unsure  of the  nature  and  potential extent  of its public  and  therefore  dis­ plays a wavering,  eclectic or ambivalent policy. The  affluence of Canadian society may  be  responsible  for  the  appearance  in  the  last  few  years of  a large  number of such  magazines,  several  of them  quite  handsome productions. And  perhaps  it will  take  an  economic  recession  to  reduce  the  number   to one  in  more  realistic

LITERARY UNDERGROUND



proportion  to the  actual  size of the  reading  public. Meanwhile such periodicals remain  insecure  and  ambivalent.  Since  they  are  professionally produced,  they require money and thus find themselves in competition with each other and with the Small  Magazines for subscribern, advertising and grants. On  the other hand, they are sympathetic  to young, new and  experimental  writern and  their lists of contributorn partially overlap those of the Little Magazine. As financial pressures increase, however, these magazines in limbo have only this choice:  to perish, or to conform  more strictly to Small  Magazine standards -which  means in effect to abandon  their flirtation with the world of the Little Magazine. Examples of Canadian   magazines  currently  existing  in  literary  limbo  are  Edge,  Evidence, Cyclic, Quarry and the new Wascana  Review and West Coast Review. Several of these have demonstrable potentialities as Small Magazines-particularly Edge­ but it hardly seems likely that Canada  can support them all. None of them, except perhaps  Evidence, should  be confused with  the Little  Magazine.



E	is radically different from anything we have so far  considered. Money -though  it does require some -is  the least of its concerns. It is not  a  business enterprise  and  it is characteristically  run  in  a most unbusiness-like fashion. Frequently  it is typed  (and  reproduced  by  mimeo­ graph  or some such inexpensive means)  on cheap paper, its pages being roughly stapled  together  without  a cover. The  production  of an issue is a  labour of love on the part  of the editor and  the volunteers he is able to gather around  him. The magazine  is usually begun  with intent  to publish regularly  but it  typically lives precariously  from  issue to  issue and  is apt  to be  "published  whenever".  Little Magazines  do  not  attract  and  rarely seek paid  advertisements. They  do  rather faithfully  advertise each other  and  the  publications of Little  Presses, on an  ex­ change  basis, without  any money  changing  hands. The  charge for subscriptions is minimal-hopefully enough  to  pay for office materials  and  postage. But the normal  financial  state  of a  Little  Magazine is that  it is in  debt  and  the editor and  his friends are broke. A few  editorn, fortunate  enough to have rich relatives or  fairy  godmothern, manage  to  afford  paper  covers for  their  mags, and  may even get them into print by way of  a hand-press which they have purchased and learned  to operate. Occasionally  Little Mags are sent out to professional printern, though  this is a costly risk. On  the one hand,  reputable  printern and type-settern frequently  refuse to print the  contents of such periodicals. On  the other, when a Little Magazine  becomes  appearance-proud, it is tempted  to seek paid advertise-

LITERARY UNDERGROUND



ments,  subscriptions and  grants  to meet  its printer's bills. It is then  on its way to limbo,   gradually  shedding   its  Little   Mag   character  and   moving   towards   the category of the Small  Magazine.
Physical  appearance is not  a significant  feature of the  Little  Magazine. Titles on  the  other  hand, are.  They  are  carefully  chosen -sometimes  with  intent   to signify  policy-Moment, Island, Delta, Contact, Yes, Now-sometimes merely to avoid  the obvious, the  traditional, the respectable,  and  sometimes,  with tongue in  cheek  to  baffle and  discourage the  uninitiated. Tish  sounds  innocuous  enough until  you realize it is a scrambled word;  Blew Ointment   (deliberately misspelled) has  obscurely  repugnant  connotations; Civ j n is  cryptic   (an   Ezra  Pound   code word  for  civilization); Intercourse and  Up  the Tub  With  One  I Open  are  titles most  readers  would  hesitate  to ask for in a library  or a bookstore.
Little  Mags  are  not,  of course,  usually  found  in  bookstores  and  libraries,  and "most  readers" never  come  across  them.  Little  Mags,  on  principle,  do  not  seek public  exposure.  In  fact,  they  are  most  often  antipathetic to the  public.  Neither do  they  often  engage  in  vigorous  campaigns for  writers  or  readers.  Their  sub­ scribers  and  their contributors, often interrelated, characteristically form  a private, intimate audience with a small  regional  cluster but extending to a thinly-scattered minority  across the  continent  and  perhaps  even abroad. Moreover, it is a "given" audience, more  often seeking  than  sought  out by the magazine. The  Little  Maga­ zine,  in  other  words,  has  no  problem  identifying  its  audience-its  readers  are self-initiated  members   of  a  cult  who  recognize  each  other  by  certain   attitudes and  enthusiasms   which  prevail  in  Little  Magazines  circles.
In fact,  the entire  Little  Magazine movement, including the Little  Presses often associated  with  it, constitutes  an  underground literary  culture which  extends,  by an  intricate and  tenuous  network,  throughout most of the Western  World.
This  literary   underground  had  its  origins  in  the  cenacle  publications which began   to  appear before  the   turn of  the  century   in  Europe. Such  periodicals emerged  in resistance  to the debasement of literary  values imposed  by the popular commercial press. The  function   of the  cenacle  periodical  was to ensure  freedom for  the  creative  imagination, to  provide  outlets  for  experimental writing  and  to foster  the  talents  of  new  or  unknown   writers.  The   idea  spread   rapidly  to  the United   States  and  such  periodicals  from  both  sides of the  Atlantic were  clearly responsible  for  the  launching of  the  Modem movement in literature. The  early careers  of such  masters  as  Eliot,  Pound,   Lawrence, Joyce,  Stein,  W"illiams and many   another  were  intimately  bound   up  with   magazines   like  Blast, Vortex, Criterion, Poetry (Chicago), Dial, Exile.

66

LITERARY UNDERGROUND



The  Little  1\1agazine  as a successor  to  the  cenacle  magazine is less attractive in appearance, less durable  physically,  but  more  ubiquitous, plentiful  and  power­ ful.  It  is the  result  of  what  may  be  called  the  mimeograph  revolution-an in­ expensive  technique of  reproduction  which   released  editors  from  the  financial  onus  born  by the printed  cenacle magazines. The subsequent increase  in numbers of  Little  Magazines has  been  phenomenal. In  the  United  States  alone  there  are said  to  be between  four  and  six hundred.  Exact figures are  hard  to come by be­ cause  of the  ephemeral nature  of these  publications. But  as the  magazines  multi­  ply so do  the  numbers of readers  and  writers  who  discover  in  this genre  both  a means  of  resisting  the  surface  culture  and  an  opportunity to  release  thwarted creative energy.
The  Little  Magazine is essentially subversive-not in a narrow  political sense
but  by its  profound   and  radical  aversion  to  prevailing  cultural values.  It  is sig­ nificant   that   its  proliferation  has  been  concurrent  with  the  spread   of   modern  urban   culture-the  type  of  society,  that   is,  wherein  commercialism,  mass­ production and  middle-class  conformity combine  to corrupt and  inhibit  the crea­ tive  imagination. Little  Magazines emerge  in  defiant  relation  to such  a culture wherever   it  is  established.   Their   function -indeed  their  mission  in  regard   to it-is  at  once  subversive  and  redemptive.
It is not surprising that  a literary  movement with these origins and  aims should be characterized by radical  experiments with language. Up  to the present at least, language  has been the  prime  vehicle of culture.  As a man  lives so will he write­ and  read. Thus  the Little  Magazine, striking  at the roots of the prevailing  culture,  spends  some  of its  energy  attacking the  rhetoric  of that  culture  and  the  rest in exploring  the  untapped resources  of language, and  the  potential  of other  media of communication in the hope of discovering  new values and  new idioms in which to express them.
Such  preoccupations account  for  the "far-out" nature of the contents  of many
Little  Magazines. Much  of the  material is not  offered  as "literature" -a word which  connotes  established  and  conservative modes. It  follows that  such  contents cannot  often  be  judged  by traditional literary  standards. Some  Little  Magazines are  not so radically  avant-garde, of course,  but  all of them  are  alert  to the  need for  new values and  the search  for fresh modes. That is their function; that  is why they  attract  young  writers,  experimental and   unconventional writers;   and  it  is why they seldom seek or find readers  unsympathetic to these aims. They  also, unfortunately, attract a variety  of malcontents, professional  beatniks  and  middle­ aged  teenagers.   These   provide  whatever   notoriety   accrues  to  Little  Magazines

LITERARY UNDERGROUND



but  they should  not be mistaken  for the main constituency of the genre. The  Litde Magazine as an international phenomenon is sustained  not by clowns, fools or dilettantes but  by  sober  and  dedicated seekers  after  radically   new  premises  for human  worth.
Not  all  these  generalizations apply  to every Litde  Magazine, of course. Some Mags  are  frivolous;  some are  anarchic; some are surprisingly  conservative; some are  partisan; and  every  one  naturally feels that  it is unique,  as well as being  a link  in  the  international  network.   The   generalizations here  offered  have  been intended to distinguish  the Litde  Magazine as a genre  from  other  literary period­ icals and  to prepare  us thereby  to view some Canadian Little  Magazines in their
proper  perspective.



bE LITTLE   MAGAZINE  made  its  first
 

genuine   appearance  m

Canada in  the  early  Forties-at a  time,  that  is, when  this  country  began  to
exhibit  clearly  the  characteristics of a modern  urban  society. It was the function, then,   of  Litde   Mags  like  Contemporary  Verse,   Preview,   First  Statement  and Direction  to subvert  the  prevailing  literary  values of a lingering  genteel  Roman­ ticism  and   to  establish   Modem  poetry  in  Canada.  (Northern  Review, which emerged   at  the  end  of  that  decade  is an  example  of  a  Little  Magazine which forsook its avant-garde mission and  was eventually  transformed  into one of Can­ ada's  important Small Magazines.)
During  the  Fifties  another   rash  of Litde  Mags  erupted-Contact, Civjn, Combustion, Moment,  Delta,  to  name  a  few.  All of  these  played  their  role  of keeping  Modem literature alive in  Canada, of fostering  new talent,  and  of  steer­ ing  Canadian letters  into  the  contemporary international stream.   (It is  perhaps worth  noting  that  it was mainly  in  the  pages of such  magazines  that  the  talents of Irving  Layton, Raymond Souster  and  Alfred Purdy  were fostered, but it would be  a grave  mistake  to  deduce  from  this  that  the  Little  Mag  is a  mere  stepping stone to fame and fortune.)
All the  magazines  so far  mentioned   are  now  defunct, including Delta,  which has  been  recently  absorbed  by Yes.  But  the  Sixties have  provided  Canada  with another   bumper   crop  of Litde  Mags.  Their  addresses  range  from  coast to  coast with  high  concentrations in Ontario and  British Columbia. But though  they may be regional  in origin,  they  are international in scope.  No authentic Litde  Mag  is
nationalistic in  purpose,  though  it may  naturally give greater attention to writers

68

LITERARY UNDERGROUND



in its own  country.   (However, a very new one called  Now  may  prove  the excep­
tion-its advance notice  has a lot to say about  Canadianism.)
From  eastern  Canada come, curiously enough,  the less radical  examples. Fiddle­ head  (New  Brunswick)   and  Yes  (Montreal) both retain  a hold on the traditional literary  sensibility  while  welcoming  fresh  renditions  of it.  Their   role  lies not  so much  in the experimental area  as in encouraging new writers and  in giving atten­ tion  to older  writers  whose  work  has so far  been  ignored  or  insufficiently  publi­ cized. An example  is the current issue of Yes devoted  to the work of John Glassco. It  is interesting to speculate  as to whether  the  policies of  Yes  will be modified  by its absorption  of Delta  which  used to be considerably  more  avant-garde. As they stand  now,  Fiddlehead  is eclectic  in  policy  and  modest  in  format, while Yes  is given  to dramatic covers, experimental format  and  numerous illustrations. From Montreal also  comes  Intercourse, conservatively  modern in  a  rough,  tough  way but with a refreshing  note of  humour. It views both itself and its readers ironically.
The   Western   magazines   are   much  more partisan  and  experimental. Tish
(Vancouver)  has  been  largely  responsible  for  introducing "New   Wave" poetry into  Canada. It is preoccupied  with  a radically  new  poetics derived  from  the so­ called   Black   Mountain  poets  Olson,   Duncan  and   Creeley.   Imago   (Calgary) fosters a modified  version of the Tish  :esthetic  and  is dedicated to the long poem or series of poems.  Island, Ganglia  and  Weed   are  carrying  the  Black  Mountain gospel to central  and  Eastern  Canada. (Island  has  just spawned  a wee one called Is, dedicated  to the Occasional Poem.)
Open Letter  (Victoria) is an  intimate in-group mag  circulated mainly  among
Tish   alumni. It is designed,  however,  as an  open  forum  for  debate  on  poetry. Readers  who  are  at  ease in  the  Black  Mountain idiom  may  wish to participate. The  magazine is free on request.
Blew  Ointment  (Vancouver)  is the  most  radically  experimental of Canada's
Little  Mags.  Neo-Dadaist in conception, it often  uses the typewriter as a drawing pencil.  It exhibits  a  typical  avant-garde tendency   to strain  against  the  limits of language as we know it, and  to subject  it to graphic and  film techniques  in order to release its visual potentialities.
Perhaps   the  most  original   Little  Mag  in  Canada is Alphabet (London,  On­
tario). Subtitled  as "dedicated to the iconography of the imagination," Alphabet explores  the  mythic   dimensions  of  literary  expression  and  the  calligraphic and ideographic potentialities of language.
The   avant-garde in  recent  years  has  tended  to favour  forms  of expression  in
which several arts are mingled. The  affinity of Beat poetry and  jazz is an example;


6g

LITERARY UNDERGROUND



and  more  recently the mixing of folk-singing and  poetry. The  latest Little Mag in Canada  seems to have something like this in mind. It combines an interest in pop art  with a literary folksiness of the Bobbie Dylan variety. It is appropriately called Pop-See-Cul.
















CANADIAN LITERATURE  PUBLICATIONS


A CHOICE  OF CRITICS

Selections from  Canadian Literature, edited  with  a criti­ cal  introduction  by  George   Woodcock.   Essays  on  the Canadian  literary   landscape and  on  individual  writers, including Margaret  Avison,  Earle   Birney,  Morley  Cal­ laghan,   Robertson  Davies,   A.   M.   Klein,  Hugh   Mac­
Lennan,  Jay   Macpherson,  E.  J. Pratt, Gabrielle   Roy,
A.  J. M.   Smith,   Raymond  Souster,   Anne   Wilkinson.
Published   by  Oxford   University   Press  in  co-operation with  Canadian Literature. Cloth  $5.00, paper  $2.50.

CANADIAN LITERATURE I LITTERATURE CANADIENNE

Edited  by Inglis  F. Bell and  Susan  W.  Port.  A listing of Canadian  creative   and  critical   writings  in  English   and French   for   the   period   1959-1963.  Cloth   $5.50,  paper
$2.50.

Obtainable  from
PUBLICATIONS  CENTRE, UNIVERSITY  OF  BRITISH  COLUMBIA
VANCOUVER 8, BRITISH  COLUMBIA





WARD'S ISLAND

BY RAYMOND SOUSTER








A swept cloud of seagulls rose, then shattered down  the beach.
In the pause that hung in the turbulence, two mallards with  wing-stroke of patience, strength of all
continent-crossers, arrowed down evening-empty sands,  leaving summer which  had hardly been
inevitably over.







J?u"bson's1Ba11, <lrompan11,
INCORPORATED 2ND  MAY 1670
presents this  work  as one of a new series written by Canadian poets


71


review articles


AVISON AND 	WEVILL

John Robert Colombo


MARGARET AVISON,  The  Dumbfounding. George J. McLeod.  $5.75  (cloth).
DAVID  WEVILL, A Christ  of the  Ice-Floes. Macmillan of Canada. $3.75.


I.I    MARGARET AvisoN  is sit­ ting  in  a  park.  Her  attention  is  caught  by  the  newly-painted park  benches  and by  the  sparrows   leaving  their   marks  in the   dust   of  the   bird-baths.  Only   then does her  eye  catch  the  sight  of  the  man in the park  who is wearing  a striped  shirt and  reading a newspaper. Avison has ex­ cellent eyesight and  is able to note he is reading an  account of an  astronaut who feels (in the words of the newspaper) "excellent  under  the conditions  of weight­ lessness."  For   a  moment,  for   her,   the newspaper-reader is  a  "newspaper-astro­ naut."  Both   read   on  further:  "At   the time of this report he/ was smiling."  She discerns  a  smile  on  the  man's   face  and guesses  that   he  too  feels  excellent   and weightless and  is smiling.
This  is from  "In a  Season  of  U nem­
ployment," one of the sixty poems in Margaret  Avison's second book  The Dumbfounding. It  is  an  excellent   poem but  an  unusual  one  in  which  the  reader is at  a loss to  know  what  the  poet  is up to until  he has  read  the  last word  of the last  stanza.   Avison  takes  her  readers  on a  kind  of  "mystery   tour" in  which  sur­ prise  is all.  "In   a  Season  of   Unemploy­  ment" is a  characteristic  poem  and  one I want  to return  to.
 1.2   David  Wevill is prowling  through a  rain   forest   and   because  he  carries   a gun  is identifiable as a  hunter. When  he comes upon  a river, he fishes and  the assumption  is he is now a fisherman. He hooks a wildcat, so he concedes  he might be a dreamer who  would  "walk,  lung'd, with  the  wet  of  the  rain  forest."  Finally he  is on  all  fours,  "a  manhandled  fish." Then   he  gasps  for  breath   and  dies  and decides he is really a dead  man.  All man­ ner of dying  accounts  for his death. Now he  is but  a  fragment or  even  a  figment of something else,  whatever men  care  to call  him.
This  comes from  "The Voice of Colo­
nel  Fawcett," one  of  fifty  poems  in  A Christ  of the  lee-Floes, David  Wevill's second  book. I find the idea of the  poem stays with me because the search for a personal   identity  involves   both   what   a man  is and  what  others   think   he  is,  as well as what  a  man  does,  which  is  exis­ tential.   A  sense  of  identity   is  achieved  through "what men  come  to  know,"  but over and  above  this the  poet  tells us that  the   true   man-for-all-seasons  is  an   "ex­ plorer,  lost  in  his  mind"  (in  the  poem, this  is  Colonel   Fawcett,  presumably; in real   life,  the   poet   and   all  other   men, possibly).

REVIEW ARTICLES



2.1	What   intrigues   me  about   Mar­ garet  Avison's work is the utter selflessness of the poet-Keats' "negative capability" in action.  Someone  once wrote that  what really   excited   Stephane   Mallarme  to write  his  poem  was the  sight  of a  blank sheet  of  paper.  What   excites  Avison  is particles    of    experience  which    at   odd angles  bombard  the  retinas   in  her  eyes and  in  her  poems are  turned  into  atomic particles.   In  a  typical   poem  they  accu­ mulate   to  the   point   of  "critical   mass" and  explode   in  the  reader's  mind.  The  bits   of   "felt    life"    (in   Henry    James'  phrase)    are   so   microscopically    minute  they  would   be   lost  on   most   people   if Avison was not  there  to point  them  out. Generally   her  poetry  works  in  a  very contemporary   and   very  American   way. The  reader  has  to do away with  all prior conceptions   of   what   a  poem  should   be and   what   the   world   is.  Then  on   the atomic  level the  world  is built  up  again. When  the  poem  explodes  in  the  reader"s mind,   we   are   back   again   in   the   real world,  not a world  greatly  different from the one we suspended  disbelief in, but one with  fewer  shadows,  and  the  reader,  for his  trouble,  has  acquired  a  periscope  or two to peer around a few corners.  It  is a half-truth to say we enter  Avison's world when  what  happens is that we are entered  by  her  world.  She  assumes  the  reader's
mind  is a  tabula  rasa. This  is American and  "projectivist", but  it  is also Chinese and  "traditional". We are  always  distin­ guishing between Occidental and Oriental ways of thinking without really  realizing that  art  is  neither   Eastern   nor  Western but  inherent in  the  human  imagination which  knows no real  geography. But  her work   is  Chinese   in   the   sense  that   an ideogram is  characteristically Chinese.  If a  word   in  a   Western   language   can   be
 defined  in a deductive manner, and  an ideogram's  meaning  derived   or   discov­ ered    inductively,    Avison's    poems    are more  ideogrammatic than  verbal.  She  is very  Chinese  in  that   she  places  impres­ sion  beside  impression,  and   even  if  her poems  are  eight  pages  long  (as one  is in The  Dumbfounding),  she  is  writing   in the spirit  of the haiku.
2.2	The  interesting thing about  David Wevill's work is that  by and  large exactly the  opposite  is occurring. The  reader  of a  Wevill  poem  is  expected   to  make   a hundred connections of his own,  not  just the surprising  ones of the poet. The  mind is not  a tabula  rasa at all but  a booming, buzzing  confusion  hoping  for  a  sense of order   and   achieving  it   in   a   series  of kinetic  connections. The  traditional  con­ nections  are  part  of the knowing process. Society  and  common   sense  are  partners in   his  poems.   Someone   who   hunts   is, after  all, a hunter; a man  who fishes, an angler.  The  species  naturally  belongs  to the  genus-or  does  it?  Up  to  a  point the  part   subsumes  the  whole,  and   it  is this  point  that  interests  Wevill, the  inter­  section  of past  knowledge  and  the  poet's knowledge.  Man  is  more  than   someone with  a  gun  or  a  fishing  rod;  man  is all men,   even   a   dead   man,   and   the   ex­ plorer's   "maps"  are   manuals   "to   the mapless  Atlantic  roots".
Wevill's  vision is not  visionary  but  ex­ tremely   traditional  and   even  typical  of the  English  poets  from  the  New  Apoca­ lypse and  on. He  may not  be in the fore­ front  when  it  comes  to  opening   up  new doors  of  perception,  but  at  least  he  has the  comfort  of   knowing  his  work  inter­  acts with  the poetry  of the  past and  most of  the  poetry  of  the   present,   and   that  readers  will  feel  at  home  with  him,  al­ though  his  vision  of  animal,   vegetable,

73

REVIEW ARTICLES



mineral   and  human   life  is  as  appalling as  the   apocalypse   itself.  His  first  book won an untold number of awards which suggests that  the English see him as both serious  and  successful.  He  is being  con­ spired  into  the  role of an  English  Robert  Lowell,  but  it  is  unlikely  that  his  work will  develop   the  intellectual   density   of the   New   England  poet.
3.0    A too-hasty  reaction  to "In a Sea­ son of Unemployment" and  "The  Voice of  Colonel  Fawcett" would  see  them  as instances  of diametrically  opposed poetic theories:  Avison  the  "projectivist", We­ viii  the   "traditionalist".  With   a  bit  of digging,  a   perverse   reader   could   argue that  both  poets  have  written   poems  in the   other camp, and  that Avison's "Bestialities" is traditional and  Wevill's "Love-Stones" is projective.  This  is as fruitless as discussions of "stance" and "technique" always  are.  But  since  both poets  relate  centrally  to major  issues, let me  show  how  the  poets  differ  through their  relations  to spiritual matters.
4· I I keep  remembering the  sad  poet Hart  Crane  when   I read   The   Dumb­ founding,    a   poet   symptomatic   of   the failure   to  build  a  bridge  out  of  his own craft  and  consciousness  to span  the abyss
 between  the  public  world  and  the  world of  private   perceptions.  Crane   was  not unaware of the fact  he was in the league of   the    Pontifex    Maximus,    the    other bridge-builder,  who  boasted   not  only  a map  of  the  terrain but  also a systematic way  of erecting his structures. Margaret Avison has a map  too  but  no systematic way of going about  the  business of  bring­ ing the spiritual to bear on the  temporal. There are so many  religious  poems in the middle   section   of   The   Dumbfounding that   it's  hard   not  to  read   her  sad  but always human  poems  as a gloss on  a set of given  ideas  like  those  in  the  Gospels. Many  of  her  poems  are  biblical  margi­ nalia,  and  one  even  has  this  revealing  title  "A  Child:  Marginalia on  an  Epi­ graph"  in  which   the  source  of  the  epi­ graph  is the  Scriptural texts in  Matthew and   Luke   which   present   the   child   as coming  to Christ.  The  child  is "too  long
for  the I not  enough  out  of the  light  yet
/to be  filled, I fullness."   The   poem   is purposely   oblique   and  serves  the  poet's
purpose  of both  suggesting  the full signi­ ficance of her Christian  acquiescence  and not suggesting  it  simultaneously. She  has it   both   ways   and  is  both   secular   and spiritual  in the same poem.





Write  or Phone

THE  UNIVERSITY  BOOK   STORE
Vancouver  8,  B.C.	
 Text
Trade
Medical

whenever you need

BOOKS


74
 
Technical Hard Back Paper Back

REVIEW ARTICLES



It's safe to say Margaret Avison is the only  poet   (in  English  Canada at  least) who writes like a Christian, assuming Christianity's  values,  willing  to  be  con­ sumed  by them.  Like Crane's failure, her failure,  if it  can  be  counted  a  failure,  is the  peculiar  and  feminine  diffidence  she brings   to  her   religious   writing.   She   is aware  of \Hiting a poem  first and  a reli­ gious  poem  second,   unlike  Donne   who was always aware  Christian doctrine was around    the   corner.   With   doctrine    not around   the  corner   these  days,  Avison's poems are  Protestant rather than  Catho­ lic,  Quaker rather than  United Church, and  quietistic  rather than  activistic.  She eschews the power and  panache of the Catholic liturgy  and  accepts instead  a somewhat  bleak view of the "suffering servant", always faced with the pain of perception  but   not  always  certain   even of  the  hope  of salvation. Avison  believes and  affirms,  but exactly  what  she affirms I find  it  impossible  to  decide  in  light  of her  poems.
4.2    The   sadness  of  Hart Crane   was not lost on David  Wevill either. "Thirty­
three  years    ago   today I Hart  Crane
thought  twice,  and   chose  the  sea,"  the first  lines of "The Sounding," with  their air  of deja vu. I  suspect  Wevill  is not  a believing  Christian; at  least in his poetry he isn't, because all the affirmations  there are   are   humanistic  and   imaginative. There  are   sacrificial   acts  in  his  poems (like  the  Crane   suicide),  but  these  are judged  through their  viewers who  often, as in  measurements with  the  atomic  mi­ croscope,  upset  the  observation.  The  act of perception "Makes every man  a stran­
ger  to  himself, I Both  Christ   and  temp­
ter."  No matter where  he  turns,  there  is no  escaping   "the   accumulation of  alien eyes" whose  gaze  turns  a  nonentity into
 a  celebrity,  or  a  sacrifice  into  a  suicide, or  a  selfish act  into  something   so  inde­ scribably  selfish it  goes against  all  reason and  all right.
For  Wevill  to  be  a  Christian, a  man must  be a  hermit  shielded  from  all  eyes and  hearts.  Otherwise "You  cannot  begin again." This  is particularly bleak and  is willing to find its spiritual centre in the Middle   Ages   (which   can   never   be   re­ turned). When  we are out  of  something, the  past  begins  to smell of  roses without the  thorns.  It's  a  toss-up  between  Christ  and  the  tempter  these  days,  although it might   not  have  been  so  then.  Wevill  is out   of  the   Christian   period.   He   is,  as they  say,  post-Christian.  He  affirms  but doesn't  really  believe  in  anything.
5·   The  human imagination generates images  of  angels  and  demons,  gods  and devils,  Supermen  and   Fu   Manchus.   A man  without  culture is a man  haunted by these images;  and  as he is unable  to con­ trol   them,    they   control    him.   A   poet working   within    a   traditional   order   of images  has  all  the  power  of   that   order  behind   him   before   he  gets  started,  al­ though  he  then  faces  the  problem  of do­ ing  something   different   with   the   same data.  Margaret  Avison   toys  with   these possibilities;   David   Wevill   looks   back nostalgically  at  them  and  then  abandons them.   In   the   meantime,  the   demonic  and  apocalyptic imagery  circles overhead like so many  hawks  and  doves. So I am driven    to   the   conclusion    that    neither  poet  really  comes  to  terms  with  spiritual reality, although both  assume a prayerful attitude-piety  in   the  case  of  Avison, regret   in  the  case  of  Wevill.  But  since both   are   such   accomplished    and   fine poets,  let  me  not  define  them   by  what they  are   not,  but   rather  by  what   they seem  to  me  to  be.

75

REVIEW ARTICLES



6. 1      The  Chinese  have perfected  a skill which cures the afflictions of a patient through  the   use  of  long,  shiny   needles which  they deliver into  the  patient's flesh at  prescribed   points.  If the  head   hurts, there's a point in the toe where a good pinprick   will  take   the   pain   away.  The skill is called  acupuncture, and  it's either an  art  or  a  science,  depending on  how you view the matter. Margaret Avison practises  acupuncture in  her  poetry,  and it's  always  a  surprise  how  a  tiny  stab  in the   toe  will  unsettle   the   reader   in  his head. Break up the habitual order of associations,  and  the  disease is cured, the acupuncturist-Avison says.
6.2   The   Germans   perfected   another skill which proposes to remedy the root causes of any  psychical  affliction through a   discussion   and   dredging-up   process. This is called  psychoanalysis. Remove  the roots and  the tree will go away;  the symptoms   will  take  care   of  themselves, say the  psychoanalysists.  (The  passage of time   between   the   sessions  helps   too) . David   Wevill  is a  lay  analyst  who  con­ jures up  your experiences  and  ideals and
 sets  them   before  your  own  disbelieving eyes. Only  then  are  you  able  to  disown them  and  thereby  re-enfranchise yourself in   a   new   way.   Wevill   owes  much   to dream   psychology  and  its  literary  equi­ valent,  surrealism.
7.0    I   suppose   the   debased   Western form  of acupuncture is chiropractic, and the popular New York fascination with psychoanalysis  is a symptom  of abnormal behaviour all its own. Both practitioners have something of the quack  in them, although their  cures  could  form  queues. Both Avison and  Wevill are  real and  un­ real  as  poets,  but  neither  has  made  the unreal   a  part   of  his  real   world.   Both poets   are   writing    a   beautiful,   faintly troubled  poetry,  and  I  can  delight  in the new  perceptions of  The  Dumbfounding and   revel  in  the  array   of  images  in   A Christ   of the   Ice-Floes.  In   fact,   I  can recommend   both   books,   but   as   parts  rather than  wholes.  Yet  when  it  comes to   soul-saving   poetry   or   testaments  of deeply troubled  souls, neither  poet IS physician   enough   to  cure   the  coma   of the  man  asleep  in  his own  body.





EPIC MISERIES
 


Marya Fiamengo



GEORGE  RYGA, Ballad  of a Stone  Picker. Macmillan.


WHAT GEORGE RYGA'S NOVEL, Ballad  of a  Stone   Picker,  brings  to  life is the  epic  misery of poverty,  the  dreari­
ness,  the   monotony,  the   stark   tragedy.
The   book  is  both  specifically  Canadian in  setting   and   universal   in  implication. The  setting  is northern Alberta; it could
 be Calabria, Sicily, Greece,  India,  wher­ ever  the  land   and  climate  is  harsh,  life hard,   work  unremitting.
What    is  Ballad   of   a   Stone    Picker
about?  Among other  things, it is about suffering.   About   how  to  remain   human in   the   midst   of  suffering.   It  is  about

REVIEW ARTICLES



defeat   and   endurance,   disappointment and  stoic  resignation.  It  is what  its  title implies-a ballad,  a  string   of  episodic narrative  tales  with  a  repetitive   refrain and   an  inconclusive ending.   Like  many ballads,   the  story  it  tells  is  bleak,  some of the episodes are monotonous and  repe­ titive,  but  the  final  cumulative  effect  is powerful   and   moving.
Mr.   Ryga   writes  with  simplicity   and power,  and  the  landscape which  he  pre­ sents  the  reader   is at  once  realistic  and strongly  symbolic.  The   tale  is simple,  a sequence  of  sketches  tells  the  story  of  a Ukrainian  family   and   their  neighbours  living   in   northern   Alberta,    a   land   of scrub  willow, poplar, and  ubiquitous  clay soil,  dusty  and  drought dry  in  summer, sticky wet and  clammy  in the  brief rains.

This    clay   the   same   clay   you   can't   walk through when   it  gets  wet  won't   stay  down when  it  dries  into  dust.

The   novel  opens  with  a  sharp  evoca­ tion  of  the  landscape and  a  vivid  image of the  soil whose clay and  rock comes  to stand   in   fact   for   the   mortal    clay   of human life, the  kind  of  life these  people lead  in  this  gaunt  terrain.  Against   this background the  inhabitants of  the  area emerge,  make  a few gestures, futile,  poig­ nant,  melodramatic, occasionally comic, frequently  tragic,   and   then   disappear. The   narrator is the  second  son,  the  one who  stays  behind   to  farm   in  order   to support  the  bright  promise  of the family, Jim,  the Rhodes  scholar  who dies a futile self-inflicted   death   in  England.
The   book  which  ends  in  a  crescendo
of  misery  depicts   the  defeat   of  human hope  but   not  the  defeat   of  the  human spirit.   The    narrator   sees   the   meagre family  resources  completely   depleted   in order   to  bring  his  brother's body  home
 from    England.   He    ends   burying    his father and  being  totally  rejected   by  his mother  who has taken  refuge  in religion. At  twenty-eight he is old,  the  woman  he loves married   to someone  else, the  sacri­ fice he  has  made  for  his brother  useless, his  mother   utterly   alienated;  yet   there is no surrender to  corrosive  self  pity  but rather  an   ultimate   clarity   about   what life, the land,  and  fate  have done to him.

Then  it   carne   to   me-the    truth  I  had never    realized    before-the     truth   Nancy Burla   saw   when   she   married  the   doctor. These  arms   were   all   I  had   and   all   that anybody  had  ever wanted. Anybody-my mother, those  who  hired   stone  pickers,  and Nancy  Burla. They   were  the  reason  for  my life.   Here   was   my  strength  and   my  food and   my  bed.

The  truth  of the narrator's existence is summed  up in terms of simple human fortitude.
Mr.  Ryga's  final  chapter redeems  by a relentless  intensity,  an  ultimate candour, and  an  ultimate compassion,  a  tendency to  include   material  not  strictly  relevant to the overall structure of the book. Some of   the   characterization   and    narrative does not mesh with  the central  theme ex­ cept   as   peripheral   embroidery.   These sketches  are  effective  and   well  wrought  in   themselves.  They  display   George Ryga's   talent   for   a  spare   economy   of narration combined  with  vividness of de­ tail  and   telling  dialogue,  but   they  also serve as a digression which impedes rather than   intensifies   or   amplifies   the   main theme.
Part  of the  problem  here is that George
Ryga's  technique has  a  primarily   visual and  oral  flavour. What Mr.  Ryga achieves  is not  epic-he lacks  the  gran­ deur  of  the  epic;  nor  tragic  drama, al­ though   he  achieves   at   times   the  com­ pelling  commentary of  a  Greek  chorus;

77

REVIEW ARTICLES



but  rather the  heroic  scope of the  ballad which  he  combines  with  the  naturalism of  a  Gorki.  This  is  not  to  say  that   the book   is   in   any   way   eclectic   or   self­ conscious.   It  is  one   of   the   least   self­ conscious   novels  to  appear  in   Canada recently.   I've   only  to  think   of   Leonard  Cohen's  Beautiful  Losers   which,  for  all its  brilliance,  is deeply  self-conscious,  to be reinforced   in  my  opinion  of  the  can­  did  strength   of  this  novel.  Nor  is Ballad of  a  Stone  Picker   nai:ve-it is  a  con­ scious  and  sophisticated  work  for  all  its apparent   directness    and   simplicity.    It evinces  an  imagination  powerful,   open, direct,  deeply  engaged  with  reality,  and,  within  its  own  limitations, fully  certain  of  itself.
One   could   quibble,   of   course,   with
what   Mr.   Ryga   is  doing   to  the   novel form,  cavil with his characterization,  join
 those eminent  journalists in the East who object  to the  melodramatic social realism of  The  Hungry  Hills, Mr.   Ryga's   first novel,   "a   dip   into   the   wallows  of  the West  with  proper  social  meaning prose." But  let  Mr.   Ryga   take   heart;  Webster was  melodramatic, Gorki   was   melodra­ matic,    Kazantzakis   was   melodramatic, occasionally  even  eminent  Eastern  jour­ nalists,   slipping   into   the   hyperboles   of wit,  become  critically  melodramatic.
George   Ryga   has   moved    from   the
gaunt  intensity  of The Hungry Hills  into the  spare  yet more  complex  awareness  of Ballad  of a Stone Picker. He  gives every indication  of   being  an   original  and powerful  talent.  He  may  amaze  us all, if he  is  not  seduced   by  television   forever and   ever.  Even   for  television,  however, George  Ryga  writes  with  the  force  and impact  of a  poet.



THE SENSE	OF THE	WORD

Keith Harrison

HENRY BEISSEL, New  Wings for Icarus. The  Coach House  Press.
J.  MICHAEL  YATES,  Hunt in  an  Unmapped  Interior. Golden Quill  Press.  $4.00.
J.  MICHAEL   YATES,   Canticle for Electronic Music. Morriss Printing  Company.
$4.00.


MR. BEISSEL's four-part poem is a  long  lament   for  the  loss of  Orphic song,  beauty  and  love in  the  gross  actu­ alities  of  the  modern world.  He  repudi­ ates  these  actualities, and   wants  to  get
back  to  "the   ancient   ceremony  I of  fire
and  earth, air  and I water   as  it  was  in the  beginning." The  reaction  is  unequiv­
ocal:
0 Venus
Even  as a  torso  you  are  more  complete
Than all  the  perfections of  this  chrome and   plastic
 Millenium....
All through the poem there are echoes: Homer's  "rosy-fingered    dawn"   (twice) and  Eliot   (passim)  :

From  where  we are
Home is invisible  and  though the  way down May  be as  the  way  up  we shall  not  know Where we  return until   we  get  there  ...

Rather complicated, that:  in the  passage that   Mr.   Beissel  is  paraphrasing  here, Eliot  himself  was  paraphrasing St.  John of  the  Cross!  And  this  points  to  a  key

REVIEW ARTICLES



difference: Eliot's  religious vision in Four Quartets  is  placed and  controlled  within the  totality  of his images.  We  know  how he takes St. John,  what  intellectual and emotional    force   he   is  to   have   in   the drama of  the  whole  poem.  The   tone  is certain.  In  Mr.  Beissel's poem  nothing is clearly in focus. Apart from the violent reactionary  gestures  against   the  modern age, it's  very  hard  to see what  the  poem really means.  The  rhetoric is as vague  as it is insistent:

Black  the  glove,  black  the  bull's  eye, Black  the  path  between -and   yet in its  brief  rush  the  arrow catches
the  light   and   flashes  alive  in  the  will
Of  the  archer to come  to  rest  in  motion

In  the  enigman of  design.   From   the plucked string
Leaps   music.  If only  we  knew   to  sing. The arrow   has  feathers but  no  wing.

This   is  confusing,   and   even   contradic­ tory.   In   the   last   analysis   the  question  asked  by Mr.  Beissel's own  cosmic  Sar'­ maJor:

what   do  you  think   this  is - a  fuckin' funeral parade ?

is difficult  to answer.

In a  poetic  milieu  dominated  by  ab­ stractions-experimentalism,  the  search for identity,  nationalism and  God  wot­ how  refreshing  it  is to find  a  writer-a person  concerned  with  words, the  feel of them.   It's   a  quality  so  rare  that   at  the risk of seeming otiose I shall try to define further what  I mean.  But  that's difficult. Very  well, then.  Miss  Avison has it: the sense of  the  word  as  an  object,  and  the concern  that  when  making  a  poem  or  a sentence,   the   right   word   matters  over­ whelmingly, and  that   the  chase  is what  writing   is  all   about.   Mr.   Yates   has  it also:
 I am  born  in  a  thorough Missouri  of optics, A too, too central and  divided light: ...

Part   this  north of  writing what   others live, Part   this  south -living what   others
write ...

My  only  ancestors are  the  men
I think   I may  have  been; ...
("Spiral of Mirrors")

But  the  resemblance to  Miss Avison,  ex­ cept  at  this level of craftsmanly  concern, isn't  a  strong  one.  Mr.  Yates'  mentor   is not so much  Carlos  Williams  as  Wallace  Stevens.   Put   another  way:   he's   not  so much   interested  in   things   as  in   their transformations. His  poems  skew off  ac­ tuality,   taking  something  of  its  surfaces, but subsuming them  and expanding them into  a  new  and  sometimes  intricate de­ sign.  The  imagination is all;  yet  it  does not   run   wild,   but   keeps  its  focus  and delicate  poise:

One  by one
The heavy  doors
Of  my senses
Swing  open  into   spring.

Things I spent
The   winter naming
Struggle free  of
Their round syllables,  Fly  into   the  fruit trees, Sing  down   the  full  throats Of  the  fattening birds....
("Locust Spring")

The  birds and  trees are  there,  and  recog­ nizable.  But  they  have  taken  on  a  new resonance  and  have  become  part  of  the voice,  part   of  the  body.  Mr.  Yates  can also  write   with   an   engaging   directness  when  he   wants-as  in   Manichaen Houses,  short   enough   to   be  quoted   in full.  The  poem  is  sub-titled  "On  a High Ridge  After  Dark" :

There is  no Way  up  there From   here.

79

REVIEW ARTICLES



Between bright Veranda and  veranda Is  a  long  dark   night.

Distance between them
Is  the  absence   between stars
That appalled the  Jnsenist Pascal.

It is in these shorter  pieces that  his talent shows  at  its  best.  They  have  a  deft  and stately   assurance.   Each   word   is  beauti­ fully   set -and   in   many   of   them   the effect  of  the  whole  poem  is  of  a  gentle flooding    light-as     of    a    honeycomb  breaking  and  dissolving  in  the  mind :

A  wavering pillar of  vultures
Rises  like  dark   smoke
From   a  distant point on  this  plain.

Here, even
The  rocks
Eat  one  another.

When   my  stomach  lifts  and   plunges
In  the  thermal currents of steady  noon, I know  the  vultures are  poising  ...
("Vultures")
 The    authority  of   these   shorter    pieces makes  Hunt  in  an Unmapped Interior  a fine  book,  especially   by  an   author  still under   thirty.   But  I'm   not  so sure  about the  longer  poem,  Canticle   for Electronic Music.  For  my ear  it  is too  comfortably aphoristic, too involute-and it seems as if Mr.  Yates  hasn't  got  far  enough  away from   his  master,   Wallace   Stevens.   In­ stead  of driving  out  to a clear  object,  as do  many  of the  shorter  pieces,  the  poem marks   time   and   ruminates,  and  this  is frustrating. The  general  standard of  the writing   is  always   professional,   and   the variety   of  images  and  styles  are  almost enough  to hold  the  poem  together-but not  quite.
But  if this  poem  is a slight  falling  off
Mr.  Yates  need  not  be overly concerned. He   is  trying   something  more   difficult here -and  the  earlier   book  has  shown quite  clearly what  he can  do.




TROUNCING
THE	Y.OUNGER	POETS

Louis Dudek


M.    LAKSHMI  GILL,  During  Rain,  I  Plant  Chrysanthemums. The  Ryerson   Press.
$3.00.
GEORGE  BOWERING,   The   Silver  Wire.  The Quarry Press,  Kingston. $3.00; paper,
$2.00.
FRANK   DAVEY,  The   Scarred  Hull.   Imago  6,  English  Department,   University  of
Calgary. 6o  cents.


BEFORE EACH of these three poets  I  feel like an  old  experienced  sha­ man,  bending  a skinny eye of  wisdom  to their  children's games-a  ridiculous  pos­ ture-but  then  these  are  young  emerg­ ing  poets, and  the  impression  for  an  old

So
 decaying  one  like  me  is  probably   inevi­
table.
Lakshmi   Gill  is  the  most  juvenile   of the  three; she has not  yet quite  mastered the English  language, much  less the tech­ nique  of  poetry.   (Even   her  title  strikes

REVIEW ARTICLES



me as slightly unidiomatic: rain is not a period  of duration.) She is guilty of such barbarisms  as-
"we  think   about these  people
at  their   homes,  laying   aside  their
throats ... "
(Not  only barbarisms, but also absurdity; there   is  no  licence   to  cover   this.)    Or again:

"Lipoites awed  with   the  Yangtze ... "

-two barbarisms in a single line.
Worse still, I find it hard to accept her statement  of  what   she  feels.  In   a  love poem she tells us "our  bodies heavy  with
passion I succumb    after   the   seduction"
(one  would   think   they  had  succumbed before,  or  at  least  during, the  process), and   then   "your   sweat   pours   down   my check";  whereupon she  asks,  "this  ulti­
mate  union I it is just a mundane  repeti­
tion?"  One  feels that  this is inadequacy, not only of expression,  but also of feeling. To   change   the   subject,   we   have   a poem   on   the   Vietnam  war   which   de­ plores  Canada's refusal  to  back  the  U.S.
with  troops :

And  Canada Refuses  To  Send  Troops because   this  is  a  holy  nation
because   it  doesn't want   to  be involved because   it  doesn't believe  in  force because  the  women  want  the men  home
to  boost  the  needed   population ...

This  is absolute  nonsense. With  poetry  of invective   and   righteous   indignation  you have   to  be  at   least  credibly   righteous. This  poem seems to be so badly confused in its attitudes that  I cannot  imagine  any reader  sharing the  poet's  feelings.  I  my­ self certainly  can't.
Most of Miss Gill's  book is very doubt­ ful  as poetry: "this  is too coarse," as she herself  says.  The   Buddhas, Krishnas, Kalis,  etc.,  do  not  convince   me  at  all.
 (Earle    Birney's   praise,   on   the   jacket, strikes  me  as irresponsible.)  Only  at  the end  of the  book, in  a short  extract  from a  longer   poem,  "The  Eternal   Season", does she  redeem  herself;  and  also in  the poem  just before  this, "Ten Questions  to Rukmini-in-thc-sky".  Who   knows?   Per­ haps  this  may  still  indicate  a  hope  for poetry.
George  Bowering,  again,  is a poet who is  much   too  prolific,  as  well  as  prema­ ture.   He   has   two   novels   written   (one published), and  three books of poetry  al­ ready  out;   the  acknowledgments  before his book list thirty-nine places of publica­  tion.  He  is  certainly   a  young  man  in  a hurry.  It's a pity that  the wares he hawks are  such  light  and  flimsy stuff  that  they won't   last   the   season,  not   to  speak  of eternity.
Like  Lakshmi  Gill  he is guilty  of bar­
barisms, though  not on the same elemen­ tary   level.  He   invents   tasteless   orthog­ raphies,  like "lookt", "impresst", "relaxt", etc. ;  and   he  revels  in  intimacies of  sex that   offend   the   reader,  not   on   moral  grounds,  but  for  their  lack  of  intelligent  tact.   (Some  things  belong   to  a  honey­ mooner's  private   diary,  or  better,  mem­ ory; such  details  can  be left  to the  read­  er's imagination. When  nothing  is left  to the  reader's   imagination, is  there   not  a failure of imagination-somewhere?) Thus-

up!  it! comes!
This   is  merely   brutal,  not  imaginative, or  erotic,  or  affectionate.  Physical  dem­ onstrations belong  in  the  lunatic  asylum, not  in  imaginative literature.   It's  high time   that   the   young   poets   learned    to

81

REVIEW ARTICLES











KARSH
PORTFOLIO


Yousuf Karsh


Forty-eight of Karsh's favourite portraits magnificently repro­ duced.  Among  the new ones never before assembled in book form  are Kennedy, Khrushchev, Sir Edmund Hillary  and  the
Centennial Portrait of the Queen and  Duke  of Edinburgh. This fine collection  is being offered at the amazing price of only $10.95·

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO PRESS
 make   the   distinction.  (Note   for   young poets  who  have  just discovered  sex:  Lit­ erary   language  is  highly  evocative  lan­ guage; it does not "say  things right out". Also,   harsh    four-letter   words   are   not "just   like  any   other   words";  they   are harsh  and  brutal. If you don't  know this, you should  not  be  writing poetry.)
But George  Bowering is really past  this elementary  stage -or  should   be.  He  is really  a poet  of lyrical  sensitivity,  caught up  in  an  unfortunate school  of  thought. More  important for  him  is  the  question of technique. The  enjambment of his poems  is still,  I think,  often   purposeless and  distracting. In  fact,  I wonder  if the poets of the Greeley school are at all con­ scious of  the  purpose  of  enjambment in poetry. Bowering  actually says that  "what is written  down  is a score". He  may have discovered   this  on  his  own;   or  he  may have  picked  it  up  in  Vancouver in  the summer   of   Ig62   from   one   of  Dudek's lectures    (it's   a   long-standing  principle with  me). What  does it  mean?  That the arrangement of a poem is a guide for  the real  or  imagined  voice;  also  (as  I must have said in Vancouver)  that  it does not emphasize   the  obvious,   but   brings   out nuances of meaning. In Bowering's poetry I find  the  enjambments merely  disturb­ ing,  erratic and   eccentric. Consider   the following  poem  as he has laid  it out:
Here is  Angela's hair  on  the  side  of my  face; love  as

clean  and  soft  as it  is immediate
to  me.    Two heads

on  a  pillow  faces  to­ gether eyes  closed  or open  in  the  dark

Time   is on  our  side now  no  trick  to scrutinize but  behind

REVIEW ARTICLES



us  days.    Accumulating sounds  we  make  in
our  sleep,  our  dreams

of  one  another  seen.

You have  to read  this despite the nota­ tion-it's  a  positive  obstacle.  I  have  re­ arranged this  poem  in  order  of  the  nat­  ural  phrase  elements, keeping the phrases as much  as  possible  entire.  This  is what results:
Here  is Angela's hair
on  the  side  of my face;
love  as  clean  and  soft
as it  is immediate to me.

Two  heads  on  a  pillow faces  together eyes  closed or  open
in  the  dark.

Time is on  our  side now
no  trick  to  scrutinize
but  behind   us  days.

Accumulating sounds  we  make in  our  sleep,
our  dreams of one  another seen.
This   is  a  very  good  little   poem,  but not  as  Bowering   has  laid  it  out.   Right from   his  first  lines,  note  how  awkward and   aimless  the  break-up  is:   why  "the
side of /my face"? Why "Love  as I clean
and  soft  as"?  Why  "faces  to- I gether"?
All this makes no sense. A friend  here in Montreal  (Glen  Siebrasse)   has  said  that this kind  of poetry sounds  as if the writer had   a  speech   defect;  it  goes  stuttering and  halting from  line  to line like a spas­ tic sentence,  often  concealing  poverty  of thought.  Certainly  this  is not  a  musical score.
Apart   from   spastic   speech,   and   too
much  explicit  physical  sex, Bowering  re­ peats  William  Carlos  Williams  to  excess. The   nonchalant  personality,  and   the mere   descriptive  imagism   applied    to trivia,  become  a  bit  of  a  bore;  and  de-
 rivatlVeness  detracts.  One   must  get   be­ yond  the  trivial  object   to  some  kind  of significance;  in  fact,  in  a  few  of   these poems  one  gathers  that  Bowering is not incapable of  doing  so.  I  think   he  is  a very  promising  poet.  But  at  present,  his general  principle-"Write in  whatever
I form   informs   your   moment's  mood I
:that is poetry"-makes  neither  for poetry of content  nor solid art. It only produces  an abundance of casual  dribble. He  himself  says of  his  poems,  they  "live
for  a  moment   there I &  flicker  out I ...
poor   fledgling   things I without    courage to fly forever." The  reason  is they're  still
apprentice   work,    pencil    sketches;    he hasn't   even  tried  to  make  them  perma­ nent  poetry.  But  why  not  begin?  Isn't  it the  only thing  worth  trying?
Frank   Davey  in  The Scarred  Hull, a
long poem, tells harrowing stories of shipwrecks at sea, and connects them somewhat   mechanically  with  contempo­ rary  character studies  and  incidents.  He is really  a  narrative poet  of  some  force, though I  find  it  hard  to  decide  whether the  effect  is produced   by  the  sensational realities  described  or  the  poet's  narrative skill. The  style is  extremely  prosaic,  flat, direct; there  is  almost  no  ornament, no lyrical   lift   in   these   poems.   Perhaps  in narrative   verse   this   is  possible;   but   as poetry  I find  it  a  little  too prosy.
Since  his  early   poems,  and   the  book
Bridge Force, Davey has learned  how to simplify  and   pare  his  material down  to the bone. Many parts of this poem are readable  and   convincing;  also,   signifi­ cance  emerges  at some  points, though  on the   whole  I  miss  the  relation   between the shipwrecks  and  the contemporary set­ tings.  In  general,  I  gather   that  the  rela­ tion  is one  of  ironic  contrast, as  in  this passage on  Victoria, B.C.:

REVIEW ARTICLES



city  of  the  garden and  the  symphony, the  phoney
English   accent
on  therapist and  signboard,
the  museum and   the  millionaire playing together under shelter seeing  and   not  seeing
in  the  city
in  the  sea:

seeing  and  not  seeing the  encounters
in  the  misty  gardens the  drownings
in  the  night  ...
 But  there  must  be a  specific application in each set of stories and  in each separate story.  I  think  that  Davey  needs  to  make sure that  his narratives justify themselves, as narrative poetry,  having  not only anecdotal  interest   but  also  clear  signifi­ cance; they  must  never  relapse  into  in­ conclusive  bits  of character  depiction   or stray incidents. As a story-teller,  he could study   Chekhov;  and  for  poetry,   Edgar  Lee Masters.  In other  words, pack a wal­ lop with a meaning, never mumble  under  your  whiskers.




POETS	AND 	AUDIENCES

Dorothy Livesay


MICHAEL  COLLIE,  The House. Macmillan. $4.75.
PADRAIG  o  BROIN, No  Casual  Trespass. Clo  Chluain Tairbh.
HEATHER   SPEARS,  The Danish   Portraits. Ryerson   Press.  $3.95.


THERE IS GOOD REASON   why a book of poetry, like a novel, should challenge the  interest   of  the  reader. To write  poems  so  private   that   there  is  no sense of a single listener  at  the other  end is a kind of betrayal. Younger  poets in Canada today have understood this and have  accepted the  challenge  of projecting their   poetry   into   live  audiences,   where there   is  immediate  response   and   feed­ back.  Older   poets  unwilling   to  do  this offer  us  only  one  side  of  the  coin.  For example,   in  an  age  when   poetry  is  off the  page  and  in  the  air,  Michael  Collie's collection,  so  neatly  dressed  in  buff  and black,  lacks  impact.  The  style is Words­  worthian,  contemplative;  sentences   pile up,  images  accrue,  yet nothing is said  to compel  attention.  Contrived as  a  series of  subdued  lyrics which  are  meant  to be
 steps in a narrative theme  (the  return of the  native) , there  is so little  immediacy of contact with  things  seen and  felt  that one  has  to force  oneself on  these  waters. Now it  may  well  be that  the  poet  has
a right  to expect  "work" from  the reader.
But  in  this  case  the  only  work  required is  busy  work,  that   of  sifting  a  mass  of words from  the  core image.  These  poems are  boring  not  from  lack  of content, not from   lack  of  sincerity,   but  because  the image  as a "complex of experience" fails to  make  us   feel.  It is  stranded  on  the

shore, a limp  literary  fish.
Where the  man  moored his  boat now  ganglion tumours have  crusted
the  cancerous  rock
mantled with  a  calcine of shell
from  the  impact of  waves,  the  wash
of  the  nerveless   sea.
("Hous")

REVIEW ARTICLES



This   kind   of   language    won't    do   any more,   with   its   strained    epithets   (gan­ glion, cancerous,  nerveless)  and  its chains of prepositional phrases.  But  happily  not all  of the  verse in  this  book  is so flabby. Mr.  Collie  can  at  times  forget  the  ver­ biage  and   bring   us  an  immediate  per­ ception.   The   poem   "Notes   on  a  Day's Work"  has  moments  like these:

Swing  high  he  thought
on  the  plough-handle  parallel bars
of saxophone curlews   and  percussion rooks:
trace   to  the  earth-weighted  cha-chas of  the  ancient  plough
trembling to  the  rhythm of  the  arms held  low,  now
pitching, jerking, dancing  the  furrows of  the  dawn   plough:
hold  somehow   legs,  thighs,   pelvis,  spin coulter
to  the  break   of  that   black  soil ...

but  the  line  ends  with  a  simile;  like  a dawn   entente,  and   the   impact   of   the prime  image  is dissipated.
Although   he is a  writer  of monologue
turned  inward  on the self, Michael  Collie is anything but  a  "confessional" poet  in the  modern   sense.  Padraig 6 Broin  at­ tempts  to  be.  In  No  Casual  Trespass  he is cheery,  vigorous, knockabout-a kind of  Irish  Hugh  MacDiarmid not  truly  at home  on  Canadian  soil;  and   not  emo­ tionally   attuned   to   the   contemporary scene.  His  too-frequent failure   to  reach the  reader   seems  to  stem  from   his  in­ ability  to  visualize  an  audience, to  seek the  listener's  ear.  His  "confessions"   and philosophical ruminations  simply  do  not come  across.  In  prose  written  in  a  more objective  style  Mr.  6 Broin  has  greater appeal,  for  he is a balladeer of  no mean skill.  In   the  ballad   series  "Sweeney   the Mad" he combines  simplicity  with  wit in a strong  swinging  rhythm:

"The  vampires come, That are  not  dead"-
 Sun  shone  out
On  her  golden   head.

"Really?" I said,
"Have you seen  one?" Her  white  teeth  caught
The setting sun.

6 Broin  is a punning and  rhyming  poet. When  he sticks to the matter and  feeling at   hand   he   achieves   a   buoyancy   that gives pleasure.  But  too often  he indulges in  a  playful  wordiness  that  bores  or  an­ noys, as in  the  poem  "Ungulata". Today  we demand things  seen and  felt, not ver­ bally  played  with.
Very  different in  intention and  effect is   The    Danish   Portraits   by   Heather Spears.   In   Canada  the   past  few  years have  been  years  of the  woman  poet "coming  into   her   own."   Between   the latest  work  of  mature women  like  Mar­ garet  Avison or Miriam  Waddington and the  youthful  excitement  of  Gwen  Mac­  Ewen   or   Margaret   Atwood,  Heather Spears holds  a midway  balance.  Her  first chapbook, Asylum   Poems  appeared  dur­ ing  her  student  days  at  art  school  and the   University   of  British  Columbia.  In those poems there  was promise  of passion and  insight-a  promise not  wholly ful­ filled.
In   The   Danish   Portraits  there   is  no
mistake   about   the   audience  the   poet­ painter is addressing. She  speaks  directly to  individual persons  (in  the  manner of Browning  or Pound)  to the faces she has caught  on canvas.  She is talking  intensely to  each  "sitter" about  the  inner  self  re­ vealed.  And  because  Miss Spears  is pas­ sionately  preoccupied  with  the object  be­ fore  her-usually  a human being-the reader is caught  up too. Out  of a total  of
26  poems  "The Danish   Portraits"  make up   12, in  a  series  of  sonnets  and  lyrics loosely  conventional in  form,  yet  highly

REVIEW ARTICLES



controlled  in their   us..e   of  language   as sound  and  image. Her  sonnets  are  tight and  taut,  yet  they  move  in  their  own pattem  away from  the norm:

You're  asleep  the  phrase  unfinished  your Mouth  parted  a drift  of hair  half  over Your  cheek your  mouth  your eye lashes
ochre
Coloured  look  like an  unsure  stroke  or
The  brush  just out  of  touch  between
two breaths
And  my  tentative searching  thought
Crosses  there  and  recrosses and  you do not
Hinder  me released  in  the littlest  of deaths

These  poems achieve an  objectivity, a sense of distance;  yet at  the  s..ame  time they  are  obsessively personal,  as we see
 the inner struggle of the artist-poet seek­ ing to pull out the very soul of  her sub­ ject:  "The impress of  my eyes /seeking a way in." Sometimes the effect is fright­  ening,  because these are  poems  of spiri­ tual   struggle.   Furthermore,  the   forms into which  they fall fit as a glove fits.
It would  have been exciting, perhaps,
if   the   twelve  "Danish   Portraits"   had been  illustrated   by the  actual  paintings
-and  the  other  poems omitted.  None­ theless it  is good to see that  this  Cana­  dian  painter  has come back into  writing again. It  would  be even  better,  at  least for   us,  if  she  would   also   come   back home.






THE STORY OF
f!ae f?/7	go
ELEANOR  MURE



First written  version  ( I 831 )  of the classic nursery tale, from a MS in the  Osborne  Collection, Toronto. 13 colour plates. $4.50. OXFORD.




86




AN OUTSIDE VIEW

Modern   Canadian  Stories.  Edited  by   Giose
Rimanelli  and   Roberto  Ruberto.  Ryerson.
$6.oo.

THIS  IS THE BEST  COLLECTION  of  Cana­ dian  short   stories  ever  to  be  published! I do not say "Canadian" reservedly, even though   the  term  is often  used  to modify the   extent   of  praise   expressed.   In   the case  of  Modern   Canadian  Stories,  the term   extends   the   praise.  For   this  book shows  the  best  of   Canadian short  story writers   grasping  and   holding   on  vigor­ ously   to   a   genre  whose   variety  and  excellence  often  avoids  careful   and   dis­ criminating  readers.    There  is   nothing better   than   a  good  story  carefully  exe­ cuted; conversely,  there  is nothing  worse than  a story  badly written.
The  majority of the writers represented
in  this  volume  follow  no  distinct  tradi­ tion  in  the  short  story,  except  one that  may  be  truly  called  Canadian.  In  fact, it  appears  that   there   is a  more  distinct  and  separate quality  about the short  story in Canada, whereas  poetry and  the novel are  often  extensions  of   traditions estab­ lished  in  Britain   and  the  United   States. The  modern  British short story, developed  by  such  writers  as  Katherine Mansfield and  D.  H.  Lawrence, is primarily   based on  concepts  established  by Chekhov  and du  Maupassant. The   modern   American short story,  based  by  Poe  on  European influences,  is either  0. Henry-oriented or becomes   the   New    Yorker    story.   The Canadian story  is  a  mosaic  of  all  these forms,  and  can  rarely  be related  directly
 to the American or British development; instead,  the form seems to separate the Canadian writer into his own special category.
It develops  a  story  which  echoes  the
traditional introduction and  close, estab­ lishes  a  climax,  but  creates  instead of  a frequent  one-dimensional   growth    of character   and    action,    a   pared-down, many-dimensional    heightening   of    the essentials  in  the  story.  The  effect  of  the story   is   culminative, rather  than   frag­ mented,  much  more  like  the  effect  of  a novel.  So  instead   of  becoming   portions of   some   larger   whole,   as  is  often   the weakness in a story, the majority of these stories are  totally complete, wholes unto themselves. The  collection  is a collage showing  the  direction of  Canadian writers, and fortunately the selection has obviously  been  done  with  care.
Giose Rimanelli and  Roberto Ruberto
have  come  to  the  Canadian scene  with fresh eyes, with minds foraged  in the European tradition. I  think   it  is  good that Ryerson chose these two men of developed  sensibilities  to make  this  selec­ tion.  They   have  presented   a  nice  range in  time,  and  little  range  in  quality.  The  choice   of   Duncan   Campbell  Scott   to begin  the  collection  is  good.  His  reputa­ tion  as  a  poet  is  admirable, and   often his  short   stories  are   neglected   by  both critics and readers in favour  of his poetry. It is  hoped  that  the  inclusion  of a story by  Scott   in  this  volume  will  commend some Canadian publisher  to bring out a collection  of  Scott's  stories;  some  of  the tales  in  The  Village   of Viger  are  excep­ tional  not only in quality  but also because they are almost forerunners of  what  A. E. Coppard did  twenty  years  later  in  Eng­ land.  Scott's  sense of  observation is most compelling.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Scott   begins  the  range,  and   then   the editors  extend   it.  They  include  Leacock and   de  la  Roche,   mainly   because  their stories   are   good,   not   because   of  their great   commercial  success,  thought  both are  well  known,  as Rimanelli says in  his Introduction, outside  Canada. For  mood in  the  naturalist tradition, Grove  in  in­ cluded;  his  pictures   of  the   prairie   are almost  horribly   true.  The  best  stories  in the   volume   are   by  Sinclair  Ross;   they have  all the subtlety  and astringency that  successful stories must have. Again, Cana­ dian   publishers   take   note!   We  need   a selection  of  Ross's stories,  too.
The  least  successful  stories  in  the volume are  those by Callaghan and  Mac­ Lennan. Rimanelli says that  it is  prema­  ture  to pronounce an objective  judgment on  their  real  literary  worth.  The  stories by  them   in   this   volume,   if   used  as  a guide,   would   surely   give   them  both   a secondary  place. Both have written  much  better   stories,  but   then  the  form  is  not the  best  for  either   of  them,  surely,  and they   succeed   better   (though  not   com­ pletely)  in the novel. Contrasted to them is  Ethel   Wilson   who  appears  to  be  at home  in  both  genres.  Her  stories  have  a natural,  feminine charm,  and  well  they should!
The   person   most  successful  with   the
form  is obviously  Hugh   Garner,  though I  find  it  difficult   to  take  him  in  large doses.  His   "The  Yellow  Sweater" is  a story   that    will  undoubtedly  become   a classic;  for  some  reason  it  reminds   me of  "The Girls  in  Their   Light   Summer Dresses",  which  may  reveal  more  about me than  about  Garner. His control  of the rhythm  of prose is astute,  and  he has that great   capacity   of  a  good  story  teller  to know  when  to  finish.  Knowing   when  to stop   does   not  seem  to  be  the  forte   of

88
 Daphne Buckle;  her story is far  too long (not   in   the   sense   of   Lowry's   "Forest Path  to  the  Spring" either)   and  I  think that   it   is  unfortunate  that   the   editors chose  it.  I  doubt   if  people  would   look for her  work after  reading this one story, yet those  who  know  her  work  also know what good things she can do. George Bowering   can   also  write   better   stories than  that included in Modern Canadian Stories;  and  he is much  better  at  poetry than   he  is  at   prose.  The   other   writers are  excellently  represented.
These are in part comments revealing personal  taste;   no  one  can  agree  with  a whole  collection.   But  for  the  most  part I  like the  stories,  and  commend  the  edi­ tors on  their  choice.  The  Introduction is very  well  done; it  has  the  eye of  a  dis­ tinguished   writer  perusing  a  scene  he  is still  getting  to  know,  with  taste  and  cir­ cumspection.   It  does  not  apologize   for the book, as collections  of Canadian writ­ ing  often  do,  but  goes to  logically  prove and  explain   the  position  of  the  anthol­ ogists.   Rimanelli  says   that    they   have tried  to be "only"  decent; they have been much   more   than   that.   They   have  been careful,  not  overly  kind,  and  clear.  And best  of  all,  they  have  been  curious.  Oh, yes. A word  about  the  Foreword.  Please, Mr.  Birney,  write  more  of  them!
DONALD STEPHENS



LAYTON AND ISAIAH

IRVING LAYTON,  Periods  of the  Moon.  McClel­
land  and  Stewart. $2 .50.

MR. LAYTON'S  OWN  INTRODUCTION to his new book of poems, Periods of the Moon,

BOOKS IN REVIEW



contains   the   usual  evidence  of  his  fear and  envy of all others  who write.  Such  is to be expected.  Not  to be expected  from Mr.   Layton,    however,    arc   the   rather serious  declarations  it  makes   about   his basic conceptions of the  poet and  poetry. Poetry,  it  implies,  is a  field  that  should be "reserved   exclusively  for  Isaiah,  Mil­ ton,   Blake,   and   their   inspired   descen­ dants."  The   poem   is  to  be   "visionary experience," "musical delight,"  a "mira­ culous  fusion  of sound  and  sense,"  "not  a  tired  anecdote  that  can  just  as well be said  in  prose,"   and   never   the  fruit   of "rationalizing  intellect." Being somewhat
in  accord  with  Mr.  Layton  here,  I  pro­
pose  that  it  would  be  more  than  fair  to him in this review to accept his criteria without  question  and  to employ  them  as a  means  both  of  judging  his  poetry  and of determining his right to inhabit Isaiah's  domains.
First,  are  Mr.  Layton's poems "vision­ ary  experience"?  Only  if   recognition  of mankind's   obvious  love   of   violence ("Memo  to   Herbert    Spencer,"  "The Coming   of  the   Messiah"),  of  oneself's own  absurdity  ("North and  South"), of the poor's  being ignored  ("Quay Scene"), or  of  the  ephemerality of  man   ("Mut­ ability,"  "Time's Velvet  Tongue")  con­ stitute   genuine   mystic   vision   can   Mr. Layton  be considered  a "visionary." U n­ fortunately, the kind of vision that  Mr. Layton  requires  for poetry, that  of Isaiah, Milton,  or Blake, is based strictly  on  per­ ception  of divine  pattern or order  within the   universe.   And   such  a  sense  of  the numinous  is   nowhere    evident   in   this book. Here,  his attentions are fixed firmly on  things  of  this  world,  on  its  women, its   petty   insults,   its   pigeons,   its   sun­ bathers.   And  although  he  could  be said to  have  a  vision of a sort,  it  is anything
 but  a  grasp  of  the  design  of eternity: it is an  inconsistent   and  essentially  godless vision  of  a  vulgar,   collapsing,   and   yet somehow   exhilarating world. It  is  a vision, we  can  be sure,  that  the  authors in  eternity  have  had  nothing to do with. Next,    can   Mr.    Layton's  poems   be
termed   a  "miraculous   fusion  of  sound
and sense"? Such a fusion Mr. Layton achieves   often   only  if  we  so  term   the epigram  "Crisis  Theology":

To  this  pass has  Christianity come: There  is no God,  and  Jesus  is his son

This   represents   the   usual   kind  of   con­ cern  he  has  with  form  in  his  verse. He cares too often  for the burden of  what  he is saying and  for  the  images  by which  it can  be  illustrated -and  too  seldom  for rhythm   and   sound.   Far   from   being   a Blake  or  a   Milton,  he   is  frequently  a stuffy  Augustan  in  his  refusal  to  merge "sound   and  sense."  He  can  rise  to  such a fusion  (I  hesitate  to say "miraculous") in  a few  remarkable  poems such  as "On the  Quay   with  my  Mother's Ghost"   or "Rhine Boat Trip"), but  his usual poems have  the  dull  prosiness  of  "Westminster Abbey."
"Tired  anecdote": the  anecdote   is  a common  kind  of  Layton   poem,  some  of them  here-the  poet  "troubled" by  his woman's    breasts,   the   beach   girl   con­ cerned  with  her  appearance, the  police­ man   who   unthinkingly   obeys  laws­ certainly    tiring.    Mr.   Layton's   method  is generally  anecdotal. For  unlike  Blake or  Milton   (since  he  insists  on  the  com­ parison)    he  has  developed  no  vision  or world-view  that  can  sustain  a long  poem or a sequence  of  inter-related  poems. His universe  may  at  times  have  wonder,  but never  order.  Finding  no  pattern in  the world  except  the  intermittent ignorance

8g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



and  cruelty   of  man,  he  is  too  often  at the mercy of the separate  moments  of his sublunary experience for  his  poetic  ma­ terial.  These,  illuminated by only a slight inner  vision and  no external  numen, are indeed  ordinary,   sometimes  cliched ("Quay Scene"),  and,   not  surprisingly, often  "tired."
Finally,   does  Mr.   Layton   avoid  "ra­ tionalizing  intellect"?  Certainly  his  kind of poetry  is intellectual: thirty-six of  the eighty-four  poems  in  this  book   depend  mainly   on   irony   or   paradox   for   their effect.   In   others,    dependence   on   wit ("Speculators"),  invective   ("For  the Stinker") ,  and   direct   and   prosaic   dis­ course ("Sunbathers")  also testifies to the dominantly cerebral  quality of his poems. Despite   Mr.   Layton's   pose   as  a   pure artist  besieged  by  scholar and  bourgeois, he is much  more a  man  of ideas than  an artist.  I  would  say  that  he  is important to this country as an advocate of human­ ity,  tolerance,  and   delight-as  a  Vol­ taire  rather  than  a Milton.  And  he is in­ deed   a   rationalizer-especially   of  his own  fear,  hatreds,  and  scorns.
What  seems apparent, then,  in Periods of the  Moon  is that  Irving  Layton  is not exactly  the writer  he would like to be. He is often  a casual  philosopher  rather than an artist, an ironist rather  than a verbal musician.  And  he  is not  a  true  "vision­ ary";  he  is far  from  being  an  "inspired descendant" of  Isaiah,  Milton,  or  Blake. He  can  be  a  valuable  awakener of  our humanity, surely,  and  at  times a  charm­ ing  minor  poet  (for  I  would  not  ask  us all  to  be  great),  but  as  a  visionary  he cannot   even  point  as far  as the  patterns of his own  verse.
FRANK DAVEY




go
 MIGHTY  NOTHING
CALLED A WALL


JOHN   ROBERT COLOMBO, The Great   Wall  of
China. Delta. $2.00.

JoHN   RoBERT CoLOMBO  has  written   a book  on  the  Great Wall  of China, finished,  the  blurb   tells  us, one  year  to the  day  the  author carne  across  a  brick from  the  Great   Wall  in  Dr.  Sam  John­ son's house at  Gough  Square, London. I, too,  have  seen  Dr.  Johnson's  brick;  but, dumb  enough,  passed  it  by  as  a  curious  thing   to  have   in  the   house  where   the great   dictionary  was  compiled.   Not  so dumb,  Mr.  Colombo. Out of this incident  and  others  working  on  his imagination, he has manufactured, slimly but cogently, an  encyclopaedic  commentary  on  man­ kind, especially on  our  own period  fallen so deeply  in  love  with  great  walls.
The   book  is  a  compilation  of   anec­ dotes,  proverbs,  quotations,  illustrations, verse  made  newly and  prose  made  verse (the   pun   is  partly  intended)  -pertin­ ences  and  impertinences concerned   with the historical  fact of the Great  Wall built by  the  Emperor Ch'in  Shih  Huang Ti  in the  3rd  century   B.C.,  put  together  in  a sequence  of 99 sections. The  compilation is not  a closely-woven  tapestry  but  not  a gallimaufry  either.   The   book  is   some­ thing  between a compendium and a crea­ tion.   "A   place   to  wander   in,"  as  Mr. Colombo  has Keats  define it.  "Not quite  prose  and  not  quite  poetry,"  the  author says  in   his  footnote. The   approach  is defined   by  Section   LXXXVIII:   "One could   be  endlessly   academic  about   the Wall,  or  extremely  imaginative, but  the Wall-mouldering away in China  so far away-is    immensely   more   significant

BOOKS IN REVIEW



and  suggestive  than   any  single  account of it, whether  a fact  or a fiction,  a poem or  a  prose ... This   poem  (sic)   handles its learning  lightly."  And  so it  ( ambiva­ lently)   does.
As far  as I  know,  this is the first entry
into Canada of the Great  Wall of China. Its  1,250 miles are  stretched  into  M. Levesque's   Quebec.   No  surprise   attends this;  the  symbolism  built  into  the  Great Wall  of  China   is made  to  stretch.   As if in   corroboration,  Mr.   Colombo   comes up  with  a  pun  that  might  or  might  not be better  left unperpetrated: "Separatists are wall-flowers." Nevertheless, Section LXXXIV, "An  Aside for Rene Levesque, Should   He  Be  a  Separatist," brings  the Wall  pertinently into  La  Belle Province.
'The Wall  I is  the  image  I of  our  time"-

It stretch('s, as  they  say ...
from   New  York  to   (East)  Berlin.

Or  from  Toronto to  Vancouver, the  CPR or  CBC  of  its  day.

On   native  grounds,   the  book  goes  all the  way,  dedaring ilatly  that  Canada is one  of  the  "Famous  \Valls  in  History." Well,  not  quite; first  of  all,  we  are  not that  famous;  second  of all, if so we have been  a "'all, are  \\"e so now in  the  light of Expo?   lay
tive  to :\[.  Levesque.
At   any   rate,   in   his  general   upshot, Mr.   Colombo   is  right.   We  are  stupidly wall-eyed,  as Robert  Frost  famously  puts it.   In   support   of  the  immense  gap   be­ tween  Evidence   and   Wisdom,  the  vari­ ous sections  of the  book invoke  a  host of sages  from   Kafka   to  Robinson   Crusoe. "This   mighty   nothing  called   a   wall," cries  out   Crusoe,   like  Shelley   with  his Ozymandias.  Poor   old   Emperor   Ch'in  and  his fatuity, neither  here  nor  there!

The  mind  has  walls of its own.
 With a touch of Swiftian  writing, Mr. Colombo  expatiates:
The   Wall   is  almost    linear    and,   as   such, divides  the  population of the world into  its supporters  and    its   detractors,  those    who would   stone   anyone    stoning  it   and   those who  would   use  its  stones   to  throw   at  any­ one  praising it.
The  book's sectional juxtapositions throw up ironies, sarcasms and comedies. They  take  the  book  beyond  the  limits  of the author's definition  of it as an  "enter­ tainment." But  there  are  too many  eluci­ dations   of   the   obvious.   Ch'in   and   his "walled  state"  do not  need such addenda as:   "Where does  this  leave  the  People's Republic  of  China?  It   leaves  it  walled
in";  "The  fields   protest I there   is   no
space  left  I for   children  to   play  I in
China  today."  Or,  (reversing  Mr. Colom­ bo's  penchant for  making  prose  look like poetry,  and  putting his verse into  found­ prose) :   "China  is  as   unfinished   as  its Great   Wall  is...."
But  from  the  flats  one  comes  on  the
risibilities  (pun). I particularly liked Mr. Colombo's   lesson  No.  LXXIII:
Nor  has  this  anything to  do  with the  Wall-
another  Empress, upon   the  death of
the  Emperor,
so  mutilated  her  late   husband's  concubine,
that   her  only  son  went  insane
when  he  viewed   his  mother's handiwork.

RALPH GUSTAFSON


THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO  POP

JOHN    ROBERT  COLOMBO,  Abracadabra.    Mc­
Clelland &  Stewart. $s.oo;  paper, $2.50.

IN  Abracadabra  John   Robert   Colombo tries to place the past inside another framework. He  invites  the  reader  to  ex-

gr

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tend  the  poems  beyond  what  they are on the page; as the book's epigraph states, "characters,  events,  retrospections,  shall be   conveyed    in   gospels."   Disagreeing with MacLeish's "A poem should not mean/But be",  the  opening  poem  in  the book maintains that  "be means do", so presumably  this   collection   is   a   do-it­ yourself  kit  for  poetry.  The   poet  states that   it  is  useless  to  reconstruct   history in  its  own  context; it  must  be  set  in  a modern   context.   But  his  attempts to  do this  with  "found"  poems  do  not  succeed because,   for  instance,   Riel's   last  words are   full   of   an   over-blown    and   long­ winded   phraseology   which   resists  being placed  in  the  reader's  own  context.  The  other  long  "found" poem,  a James  Agee letter, contains  some interesting ideas and phrasing but  needs a firmer  organization to succeed  as a  poem.  "From The  Prov­ inces",    on   the    other    hand,    contains  "found" elements   and  succeeds  because the   poet   takes   the   trouble   to   set   the context  for  us.
The  "found" poems constitute only a small section of the book. There are translations from  various languages,  and series  of   poems   on   angels,   on   horror movies   and   novels,   and   on   paintings. This   last  group   seems  to  be  central   to this collection.  Just  as Rauschenberg erased  another  artist's   drawing  to  show the pop artist's  desire to change  the artis­ tic  past  and  so question  the  "reality" of art,  so Colombo  expresses his view of art and  reality  by extension  out of  past artis­ tic  creation.  However,  these  poems  lose some  immediacy   precisely  because   they are  extensions  of   other   people's   experi­ ence,  even  though  the  poet  attempts to make  them  part   of  his  and  our  experi­ ence.  In  order  to  make  us see the  paint­ ings, he  often  describes  the details  in  the

92
 pictures,   but   sometimes   the   poems   be­ come  mere  catalogues  of detail.  Yet  in a paradoxical way the details  remain some­ how   vague   because   Colombo   relies  in some  of  these  poems  on  an  alliterative metre  which  seems to lull him  into  repe­ tition   and   a  piling  up  of  detail  for  the sake  of  the  alliterative  sound.  Some  of the  poems  are  blurred,  and  at  times  the alliteration is so  emphatic that  it is diffi­ cult  to  understand  what  is  going  on  in the  poem,   in  spite  of  the  relative   sim­ plicity  of  the  diction.  However,  the  alli­ teration works  well  when  expressing  the ambiguity of art  in its relation  to reality; a sculpture can  be  "horrible but  heaven­  ly", a painting by  Picasso catches  human duality:

this  way  he  circled us into  a science that way  he  settled us into  a  savagery.

There are  some  poems  about  Dracula and   Fu   Manchu, using  these  figures  as pop  images,  emotionally-charged yet  de­ signed  to  bring  them  closer as an  ;:esthe­ tic experience. But  camp  has  taken  over these  subjects   to  such  an  extent   that   it becomes  virtually  impossible  to  create   a serious  context  for  them.
The most successful poems are those expressing direct personal experience ("Riverdale Lion", "Huron Street")  or a  poem  like  "There Is  No  Way  Out", which   uses  the  indefinable  horror  asso­ ciated  with works by Kafka  and Cocteau.
Abracadabra    is  a   bewildering  book. The  poetry  keeps promising  to reveal our world   through  a  rehabilitation  of  past artifacts in  terms  of what  the  poet  him­ self  calls   "documentary  realism".   The  poetry  is fashionably  modern-"psyche­ delic"  occurs  in  one  of  his definitions  of poetry.   Not  for   Colombo   the  romantic wonder  of "On First Looking  Into Chap-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



man's Homer" but rather  the realistic contemporaneity  of  "On   First   Looking Into   A  Vacuum  Tube".  The   reader   is invited  into  a pop  world,  but if "poetry's task  is  not  making   sense  but   remaking sense",  then   Abracadabra, apart  from  a few  poems,  does  not  offer  the  reader   a firm  enough   sense  of  reality  within   the poetry  itself  to  allow  him  to  participate in  this  world.
PETER STEVENS

INSTRUCTIVE HORROR

KAY  HILL,   Badger, the  Mischief   Maker.  Mc­ Clelland & Stewart. $3.50.
CLARE   DICE,  Hurricane Treasure. Macmillan of
Canada_  $3.75.

ONE OF   THE BRIGHTEST  PLEASURES  that children's literature  can  provide  is  free­ dom   from   the   more   sombre   kinds   of realism, like cancer  and  cavities and  anti­  climax   and   the  fact   that   we  all  grow older.  It's  an embattled freedom.  Once  it almost    disappeared    under    the   sharp­ penned   onslaughts  of   people   like  Mrs. Sherwood, with  her  appalling Fairchilds senior  and  their  dazed  and  dutiful   chil­ dren.   Nothing,  including corpses  rotting  on  gibbets,  was  too  terrible  for  the  little Fairchilcls to  be shown  in the interests  of their   education  in  life's  grimmer  possi­ bilities.
Since .Mrs. Sherwood's day, aside from a few subtler  sadisms from softer-tongued authors,  no such  instructive horrors  have darkened  the pages of children's books. Naked   ferocity   is  apparently  gone.  But its excuse for being, the assumption that children   should  see  in  their  story  king­ doms   reflections  of  life's  saddest  truths  and  possibilities  as well  as its glad  ones,
 still  seem  to  haunt  the  minds  of  some well-meaning authors and  infect  their stories.
Two  recent  children's books set in  the
l\1aritimes   show   symptoms   of   the   ail­ ment.   They   are  Kay  Hill's  Badger,  the Mischief Maker, a sequel to her Glooscap and  His Magic  of  I963, and  Clara  Bice's Hurricane    Treasure, a   novel  of  buried pirate's   gold  and  present-day smuggling  on  the  Nova  Scotia  coast.
Miss   Hill's    earlier    book   about    the
Wabanaki's demi-god,  Glooscap,  is a col­ lection  of  joyous  tales  involving  charac­ ters impervious to time and  all but minor reform.  The  most  incorrigible  is Badger, the   spirit  of  mischief-a  particular favourite of  Glooscap's,  we  are  told,  for Glooscap   "loves  an  indomitable spirit." But in the new collection  of tales the pas­ sage  of  time  and  a  need  for  social  har­ mony   are   becoming   effective   forces  in mythical    Wabanaki-land,  and    both Glooscap   and   Badger   change   a   little. These  stories  comprise  a sort  of Rogue's Progress   in   which   Badger   begins  as  a merry young devil, gradually grows angry and  more  destructive, and  is at  last  sub­ mitted   to  ordeals   that   almost   kill  him. He  emerges  older,  sadder,   morally  self­ conscious,   and   vulnerable. It  is   as  if Jupiter were to give up philandering and take  Juno  to  a  marriage  counsellor.  And Glooscap  verges on pipe-smoking unction  as  he  oversees  Badger's   metamorphosis. He  still loves  spirited  mirth, he says, but it  must  be of  a  humane kind.
Still,   Miss  Hill   is  a  first-rate   story­ teller  with  an  unobtrusive,  flexible  style. Despite  their  instructive  bent,  the  stories are  such  compulsive  reading  that  her  re­ fusal   to   condescend   to   an   elementary vocabulary when  more  "difficult" words are   stylistically   desirable   is  unlikely   to

93

BOOKS IN REVIEW



discourage  a smaller  reader.  John  Ham­ berger's    illustrations   have    a   raggeder  vitality   than   Robert   Frankenberg's  for Glooscap  and  His  Magic, but  the  same kind  of eloquence and  drama.
In  Mr.  Bice's  Hurricane  Treasure   the
blight   is  of  a  different,  less  forgivable kind,   for   it   involves   a   failure   to   live up   to   medodramatic  promises.   As  the book   opens,   young   Shad   Hackett  and his  superstitious sidekick  Willie  seem bound   for  rip-roaring adventure. There is said  to  be  buried   pirate's   treasure  on nearby  Gulf  Island. An ex-circus  family, strikingly   like  the  real,  ill-fated   Restall family whose quest for treasure on Nova Scotia's   Oak   Island   ended   in   disaster last  August,  are  digging  for  it.  Enter   a bizarre  gentleman in  cape  and  dark glasses, a  strangely  knowledgeable,  inar­ tistic artist,  and  a sinister pair  of  ruffians, Morrigan and  Joe  Wragg.  "I'll  meet  you again  some  day,  boy!"  Morrigan growls to Shad  as Chapter One closes. But it's a promise   he   barely   keeps.   The   ensuing  action  is   of   a   pretty  tame,  adult­ supervised  nature.  And  an  anticlimactic conclusion   full  of  banal,   not-very-clear explanations suggests that  whatever good may  come  of  boyish  adventure-seeking, it's  unlikely  to  be  a  chest  full  of  jewels and   Spanish   doubloons.   Probably   true but  certainly  dashing.
Mr.   Bice  is  an   artist   as  well  as  an autl:or, and  both  his  text  and  his  illus­ trations   accomplish   what   appears  to  be his  primary   purpose-a colourful  por­ trayal  of life on  Nova Scotia's coast.  But local   colour   is  unlikely   to   console   his readers   for  a  melodrama  gone  flat  any more  than  all Miss Hill's skill can prevent  disappointment at  Badger's  reform.  It is sad  to see Peter  Pan  sprout  a grey  hair.
FRANCES  FRAZER

94
 IMAGINATION'S OWN  WORLD


ROLOFF  BENY  and  MILTON WILSON,  To  Every­
thing   there   is  a  Season. Longmans. $25.00.

RoLOFF BENY's photographic response  to the  country,   To   Everything There  Is  a Season,   with   literary   excerpts   perspica­ ciously   edited   by  Milton   Wilson,   is  a centennial celebration-but  of madden­ ingly   nebulous   kind.   The   Biblical   title itself explores  an  ambiguity:  the affirma­  tion   of    fruitfulness  combined    with    a fateful   promise   of  an  end.  The   photo­  graphs  then  present  this -many of them beautifully designed, sensitively catching moments and places. But together they sometimes detract from each other,  and sometimes   a  single   photographic  point is  repeated  too  often   for  the   uncondi­ tional  success of the  book as a  unit  in its own  right.  It is interesting,  for  example,  to consider  the island, man-as-island, and the ship-as-island, and  these photographs put  side  by  side  illuminate as  imagistic  poetry    does-creating   an   intellectual  response   by   juxtaposing  visual   images. But  the  point  can  be  overmade.
The   book  is  avowedly  a  personal  dis­
covery  of  Canada, and  the  photographs are, with the poems and prose passages, ordered   to interpret its growth.  Showing first the  elements  and  shapes of the land, the  pictures  are  counterpointed by  Lay­
ton's  "Beauty  buds  from  mire I And  I,  a
singer   in   season,   observe I Death    is  a name  for  beauty   not  in  use".  Then the
Eskimos and  Indians are shown;  then wagon  wheels,  wheat  elevators,  snow fences, ships-emphasizing isolation  and what  once  was in season -Peter Stevens telling   us  at   the   same   time   that   "We




merely    are    intruders. I ... I will    con­ sume I Everything-itself,    the    prairie,  all  of  us...."  But  the  camera  shifts  to
contradict  this  somewhat   and   to  focus on  spring   thaw   and   flowers.  Margaret
Avison's "Gentle and  just pleasure I It is,
being  human, to  have  won  from  space I This    unchill,    habitable   interior",   fol­ lowed   by  pictures   of   churches,   grave­
yards,   flower   offerings,   and   old   build­ ings,  reminds   us  of  other   seasons  and other   kinds  of  mellowness.
Pictures  of industry  and  industrial  use of the  elements  come  next.  What  Gwen­ dolyn  MacEwen asks, however:  "0 citi­ zen  pose  for  this  image  of  the  city",  is too little  heeded  in the  book,  which  does not sufficiently show that  which  is Cana­ dian  in people. Part of any northern land's  history  involves  responding to  the  physi­ cal  environment -to  distance,  isolation and  cold.  And  of course  the  face  of the land   is  important-but   the   collective personality   of  a  people  must  be  merged with   that   of  the  land   before   a  nation exists, and  we do  not  see enough  human faces here.  Mr.  Beny does turn  to depict lines  of  communication  and  various  art media,  and  these certainly  emphasize  the human  landscape,  but   the  direction   of the  book  is  shifting.   To  end  it,  Robert Hogg   writes:    "That  which   the   mind
holds I which   the  sun  has  let I fall I we
can  return   to I and  install:  I Image  out of  Season".   The   end   here,   then,   is  in
affirmation. But  what  it  celebrates  is less the Centennial than  the power of the imagination to create  its own  world.
W. H. NEW
 BOOKS IN REVIEW


CATASTROPHIC ABILITIES

D.      J.   GOODSPEED,   Ludendorff:   Genius  of
World   War   I. $4-95·

THE  REVIVAL   OF INTEREST  in  the  First World   War,   which   the   flood  of  books that  accompanied the fiftieth  anniversary of  its  outbreak has  stimulated,  still  con­ tinues.   A   variety    of   men   and   events connected   with   the   war   have  been  re­ examined   in   the   perspective   of  a  half century   of  rapid   change.   In   retrospect the   Great    War   seems   ancient   history,
yet it still casts its shadow  upon  us. D.  J.
Goodspeed's  Ludendorff:   Genius  of World   War   I  helps   to  explain   why  it does.
The  "ruthless and  extreme  courses" followed by General  Eric Ludendorff, the most  powerful  man  in  the  German  Em­ pire during  the last two years of  the war, helped  to bring  "Europe to  ruin" and  to create   the   "terrible   new   world"   which produced   Hitler   and  the  Second   World War.   "Hitler  might   well  have  come  to power  without  Ludendorff's support  ( al­ though  that  support was  an  incalculable advantage  to  him  in the  early  days),  but Hitler  could  never  have  come  to  power had   not   Germany  been   so   grievously strained  by the war that  Ludendorff had carried   on  too  long."
Although  Goodspeed   believes  that   it was "catastrophic for Germany and  the whole  world  that Ludendorff should have attained the  power  he  did",  he  does not think  that  other  more  moderate and equally   able   military   men   could   have been   chosen   to   lead   the   Germany    of William  II. The   German General   Staff valued   ability   and   intelligence  and   be­ cause it did it was possible for Ludendorff,


95

BOOKS IN REVIEW



a tense, gifted,  aloof,  and  dedicated  pro­ fessional    soldier    of   bourgeois    origins, whose  view  of war  had  been  formed   by his teacher, Schlieffen,  "to  be  one of the most important staff officers in Germany" prior   to   rgq. As  chief  of   the  Second Section  of the  General  Staff  Ludendorff was  in  line  to  become  Chief  of  Opera­ tions  during a war  emergency.
The  fact  that  Ludendorff was not Moltke's  Chief of Operations when war came "may well have been fateful for Germany". Ludendorff's intransigence in pushing  his  superiors   to  demand an  in­ crease  in  the  size  of  the  army  and  his willingness  with  that  end  in  view  to seek a   political    ally   in   Class'   Pan-German League,  led  to  his transfer  to regimental  duty  in 1913. At the  time he was warned  that  if he got what  he wanted,  "he  would drive  Germany to  revolution."
 The   war   provided    Ludendorff   with the   opportunity,  first  in   the   East   and then   at   Supreme  Headquarters,  to  use his  talents   on  a  far   greater   scale.  The ability  to  bend  his  superiors  to  his  own will which  his pre-war  career  had already revealed was manifest in his relationships with  Hindenburg and  the  Emperor. This ability   combined    with   his  ruthless   in­ transigence   and    lack   of    "training,   or talent   to  cope  with   political  problems" made   it  possible  for  him  to  ignore   not only  political   realities   but  also  military  ones.  Despite  the  cool  realism  of  Hoff­ mann  who opposed  his ideas, Ludendorff continued  to  dream   of  "greater Father­ land   and  of  territorial  acquisitions   that would   compensate  the   German  people for their sacrifices",  and  thereby  deprived Germany  of  any  hope  for  a  negotiated peace.   Neither    his   administrative   skill,





CLARKE IRWIN
publisher   of  the   most  distinguished  names  in arts   and   letters   proudly   announces important new  works by two  major  Canadian poets:

SELECTED POEMS  OF  GEORGE  WOODCOCK
Widely admired as a critic,  historian  and  biographer, George Wood­ cock is also a poet of impressive  power.  His  work is compact, vivid, harsh,  wholly contemporary.

BREAD, WINE   AND   SALT by  ALDEN  NOWLAN
Alden  Nowlan's  first book of poetry in five years is his finest to date. A  highly  personal  poet,  intimately involved  with  the  faces  of love and   death,   he  captures   the  inescapable,   often  hilarious   ironies  of everyday  experience.

each $3.50

CLARKE IRWIN
TORONTO VANCOUVER



g6

BOOKS IN REVIEW



and  Goodspeed  maintains that  "he  must be ranked  as one of the greatest military organizers  of all time", nor his unequalled "tactical  brilliance" could   win  the  war for  the  Empire.  Ludendorff  committed the  already   over-taxed  resources  of  the army  and  the civilian  economy  to a final great   offensive   in   March    1918  which failed.   He  lost  the  war  and  did  indeed "drive   Germany to  revolution".
The  realization  that  he had  failed  and
that  Germany was defeated  "left  him without inner  resources"  and  Ludendorff broke under the strain. His mind never recovered   from   the  shock  of  defeat,   as his postwar  career  demonstrated. To  the end   of  his  life  he  still  exalted   war   as "the   highest   expression   of  the  national will  to live".
Mr.  Goodspeed's book makes excellent
reading    and   should   be   of   interest    to general    readers    and    professional    his­ torians.  The  role of the  General  Staff  in the   direction   of  the  war  effort   is  well described,   as  are   the   reasons   for   Ger­ many's  defeat  and  Ludendorff's  responsi­ bility  for  it.  Goodspeed  has  a rare  talent  for    characterization:   "General   Plehve was  small,  old,  wizened,  and  ill,  but  he had  the  heart   of  a  solider."  Ludendorff does  not  emerge  as a sympathetic figure, but   his  strengths,  weaknesses,   and   the pathos of his nervous collapse under the pressure of the  great responsibilities which he sought to fulfil are masterfully portrayed.  If there   is  a  tragic   hero   in the story, it is Max Hoffmann whose brilliance,   realism  and  moderation  were to  no  avail.
As  a  whole   Goodspeed   has   done   a careful,  if not  exhaustive  job of research. He is in places somewhat  careless in his documentation and large portions of his narrative and  analysis  of the  significance
 of events on the  Eastern  Front, and decisions   taken   by  the   Supreme   Com­ mand  at various  times during  the war are virtually  paraphrases of  Hoffmann's Me­ moirs.  Though  Hoffmann is cogent  and appealing,   Goodspeed    sometimes   trusts him  too  much.
If there  is a fault  in  the  book, it is in the  historical  setting.   More  should  have been   said   about  Ludendorff's   family background  and  its effect  upon  his  atti­ tudes   in  an  officer  corps  still   predomi­ nantly   aristocratic in  outlook,  if  not  al­ ways  in  composition. There  is  too  little mention   of  the  influence  of  such  groups as the  Pan-German League upon  Luden­ dorff's  plan  for a German colonial empire  in   the   East.   Not   enough   consideration was given  to the  unique  place  which  the army  occupied  in  the  German State  be­ fore  1914. The  fact  that  Supreme Head­ quarters   under    Ludendorff's   direction was  able  to  take  control   of  the  civilian economy  and   to  direct   German foreign  policy  to  suit  its  own  one-sided  concep­  tion  of  policy needs  cannot  be explained simply  in  terms  of  the  Kaiser's  weakness and  the  General Staff's  ability  to  attract brilliant  men whose ruthlessness and drive permitted  them   to  take   over   the   state during  a  war   emergency.   Ludendorff's rise  to  power  was  possible,  because  the army  had  never  been  properly  subordin­ ated   to  civilian  control  before  the  war. What  happened during  the  war  must  be seen as the  result of the unsolved problem  of  civil-military  relations  which  plagued  the  Second  Empire from  its  beginnings. The  military  men  produced   in  the  pre­ war  period  were capable technicians, but were  not  equipped to  evolve  a  balanced grand  strategy  for a nation.  This  too was in    part    the    product   of   the    army's favoured   position   in  the   state.   Officers

97

BOOKS IN REVIEW



were admired and  their opinions  deferred to when they should not have been, while their  very  faults were considered  by many to  be  virtues.   These   factors   only   rein­ forced   the  military   in  the  opinion  that  they   truly   represented  the   nation    and were  more  than   capable of  directing its policy.   Such   considerations  required  greater   stress,  for   without   them   Good­ speed's  conclusion   that   military   men  of greater  vision  and  moderation could  not have been chosen to lead Germany in the Empire of William  II loses its force.
In  the  main,  this is a stimulating  book
which  is well worth  reading.
ROBERT C.  WALTON

PASSING THE HOURS

NICHOLAS   MONSARRAT, Life  is  a  Four  Letter
Word.    Vol.  I. Breaking   In.    Longmans.
$g.25.

NicHOLAS MoNSARRAT  has  been  going through  a  long  dive  of  bad  novels,  sus­ tained   only  by  the  curious  tendency  of the  public  to  buy  books by  name  rather than   by  quality.   In   his  first  volume   of autobiography he  begins  to lift  again.
The  pattern he  adopts  is original; the book is divided  into five chapters, in each of which  the author stands  at the vantage point  of a five-year leap forward  in time, so that  he is seeing his life at equal inter­ vals from  the  age  of 6 to  the  age  of 26. This  lustral  rather than  linear  approach avoids  the  sagging  that   is  inevitable  in any  sequential  autobiography,  and   dra­ matizes   those  changes   in  the  autobiog­ rapher's    nature,   outlook    and    fortune which  develop   often  imperceptibly, and can  be seen clearly  only by some method  of  portraying a life in broad  expressionist

g8
 sweeps rather than  in the equally focussed detail  of a  pre-Raphaelite  vision.
The  period  Monsarrat covers takes one from  I9I6 to  I936, from  the First  World War   seen  by  a  small   boy  in  an   upper middle class Liverpool  household to the Spanish  Civil War seen by a young writer in radical  and  impoverished rebellion against   all   the   conservative   preconcep­ tions  of  his  upbringing. In  the  interven­ ing    sections the   spotlight  falls  on Monsarrat in a Cheshire  prep school, as a victim   of   organized    bullying   at   Win­ chester,  and  as  a  "double-breasted  fun­  ster"  at  Trinity.
On  the  surface,   Life  is a  Four  Letter Word   is a  candid   autobiography;  Mon­ sarrat  even   has   the   daring  honesty,   in this   decade,   to   confess  his  "long   pre­ served   virginity".   Yet    the   hesitancies which  evidently  prolonged  that condition are  still  present  in  another  way, and  all the  time  one  has  the  feeling  of  the  real Monsarrat   retreating  behind    the   self­ mocking  persona  he creates.
What  gives Life is a Four Letter  Word most   appeal    is  rather  the   minute   re­ construction of so many  facets of  English life  betwen   I9I6  and   I936.  For   those unborn   at  the  time  of  the  Spanish  Civil War  it  will  be a document of social  his­ tory;  for  those of us who are Monsarrat's contemporaries the  book  is  an  excellent  remembrancer  of  time  lost.
Yet  there  is an  artificiality about  even this  aspect  of  the  book.  A great  deal  of what   he  tells  Monsarrat  really  has   re­ membered, but  just  as much  is  carefully  researched,  as  the   list  of   acknowledg­ ments    demonstrates. In    other    words, Monsarrat  is  partly   the  autobiographer looking at  the  past  with  a subjective  eye, and  partly  the  historian  trying  to  get  it all  exact.  Unlike   Proust,  who  also did  a

BOOKS IN REVIEW



great  amount of research  to authenticate the  details  of  A  la  recherche, he has  not fusee\ the  two together  into  a harmonious continuum. The  transcending gift of the high  artist  is not his, and  never  has been, so that  while  his work  passes the  hour,  it also  passes \l·ith  it.
GEORGE WOODCOCK


MACKENZIE'S RIVER

Exploring the  Northwest Territory. Sir Alexander  ,Mackenzie's Journal  of a Voyage by Bark Canoe  from Lake  Athabasca to the Pacific    Ocean   in   the    Summer   of    I 789. Edited  by T.  H.  McDonald. Burns  &  Mac­ Eachern.  $5.95.

A  PRINTER'S    ERROR  in   the   above   title calls   for   immediate rectification. The text  contains   only  Mackenzie's   account of  his  voyage  to  the  Arctic.  His  subse­ quent   journey   to  the   Pacific  is  not  in­ cluded.
This  new edition  of a  basic document
of Canadian exploration is, for  a variety of  reasons,  most  welcome.  Professor 11c­ Donalcl   has   given   us  a  definitive   text, taken  from  the  manuscript in the  British Museum; he has indicated  variations be­ tween  this original  by  Mackenzie  himself and    the    Voyages   published    in    I 8o I, which   appear   to   have   been   compiled from    Mackenzie's    papers    by   William Combe,  a  professional  editor.  There are many small  but  interesting discrepancies.
Professor  McDonald  has  actually  fol­
lowed  Mackenzie's   route  in  a  seventeen­ foot   canoe   propelled    by   paddles,    the place   of   :Mackenzie's   voyageurs   being filled  by his  wife  ancl  son.  A continuous check upon  the  recorded  distances is thus made   possible,  together   with   persuasive
 identification  of   camp   sites  and   other points en route. Sixteen carefully chosen photographs sum up much of Mackenzie's incidental description of country  and  two maps   are  reprinted  from   the   I8oi   edi­ tion.   There   is  a  useful  bibliography.  A brief,  densely  packed  introduction holds everything in  place.
Rereading the familiar narrative, one gets a fresh  grasp  on  much  of the  struc­ ture  of  our  history.  This  classic  story  of deftly   planned   and   dextrously  executed  exploration  presents   a  paradigm  of  our recurring  problems.   We   realize   afresh that  Mackenzie  was, first and  last,  a fur trader.  The   fur   trade, winding   its  way across  the  face  of  Canadian history,  was a  necessary  evil  which  we  need  not  ac­ cept   uncritically.   Based   upon    shifting trends   of   fashion   in   Europe,  pursued with   a   rapacity   that   broke   into  inter­ mittent  violence,   inseparable   from  the slaughter   of  harmless  and  beautiful ani­ mals, sometimes  to the edge of extinction, the  fur  trade  was  inimical  to  the  settle­ ment  of the country,  to the establishment of   agriculture in the West, to the de­ velopment  of forest and mineral  resources and  in  general  to  the  amenities  of  civil­ ization.  Its  redeeming  virtue  was  resident in  the  courage,   steadfastness  and  enter­ prise  evoked  by the  effort  of  penetrating harsh,  rugged  and  interminable regions. In  such  men  as La  V.erendrye  and  Mac­  kenzie these  virtues shine  supremely.
Although   outstanding, Mackenzie  was not   atypical.    Eighteenth-century   Scot­ tish  upbringing commonly  encouraged a nexus between  a passion for achievement, power of rational planning and  perfected  tenacity   of  will.  Mackenzie,  Thompson, Fraser,    Selkirk,   McTavish  exhibit   this combination  in  Canada, as in  Africa  do Bruce  and  Mungo  Park.

99

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Four   of  the  five  voyageurs  supplying the main  muscle for endless paddling and portaging were French. Upon  the endur­ ance,    adaptability   and    sheer   physical strength of the  voyageur  fur  trading was wholly dependent. That  Mackenzie  could make    the    return   journey,    from    Fort Chipewayan to  the  Arctic,  in  ten  weeks, given  the  terrain  and the  delays incident to  traversing   unknown   country,   is  elo­ quent  tribute to his men. Several  Indians also   accompanied  him   and   were   able, though   with   difficulty,  to  communicate with the bands he encountered as the expedition moved down river, primitive people  cooking food  by dropping red hot stones   into   water   contained  in   basket work.   They   were   not   numerous;   they knew  no  agriculture and  had  no  horses; a  few  bits   of  iron   to  make   knives  or arrow  heads  was the  sole evidence  of  re­ layed  contact with  the outside  world.  An isolated,   low-keyed  way  of  life,  without history  as  we  conceive  it.
Up   to  the  day  they  actually   reached the  delta,  Mackenzie's  people  "were  ani­ mated   by  the  expectation that  another day   would    bring    them    to    the    Mer d'ouest."  It   was  the   turning   point   be­ tween   that   old,  vain   hope  of   reaching "Lachine"   and   the   realization,   which Mackenzie's  second   expedition  was   to confirm,  that  before the seas that  washed Asia could  be reached a sea of mountains had    to   be   traversed.   What    this   first voyage  did  bring  to light  was one of the largest  and  still  one  of  the  least  known rivers  of   the  world.   It drains   an   area nearly  twice  the  size of  Europe,  largely uninhabited. Its potential, when fully developed by advancing technology, quite  simply stuns  the imagination. What Mackenzie found  becomes,  year  by year, of more  significance  to  us as a nation.

roo
 At  this  time,  when  we  are  rethinking our   conscious  identity,  to  retrace  Mac­ kenzie's   journey   is  to  survey  our  prob­  lems  in  microcosm.   A  vast  and   empty land,  filled  with  the  primaeval  and   the primitive; an  expertise   able  to  confront and   control   all  this,  depending  upon   a technology   already   well   developed,  but dependent,  also,   for   success  upon   co­ operation  among   French  and   English­ speaking  and  indigenous races.  The  cer­ tainty  of a  profit  motive  in this attempt; the   inevitability  of  obstructions,  delays and  some  ingredient of  frustration. But the  opportunity  for  a  full  exercise  and thorough  testing   of   whatever    qualities of enterprise, foresight,  integrity  and determination we may possess or can contrive  to summon  up.
ROY DANIELLS


JAPANESE
IN CANADA


JESSIE   L.  BEATTIE,  Strength for  the   Bridge.
McClelland & Stewart.  $5.00.

THE  DUST JACKET  of  Jessie  L. Beattie's novel,  Strength  for  the   Bridge,  suggests that   the  book  deals  with  the  relocation of  the  Japanese from  the  Pacific  Coast during World  War  II, but  less than  one­ third   of  the  story  actually  concerns  this episode   of   our   history.   The   narrative deals with  the  life of  Keiichi  Wakao  and his  family,  starting  with  his  boyhood  in Japan and  ending  with  him  happily  en­ sconced in a cottage  beside Lake Ontario in  rg5r.  Rather than   a  novel,  the  book is a  chronological cataloguing of events, and  suffers  much  from  inaccuracies and a determination on the part  of the author

BOOKS IN REVIEW



to  gloss over  anything derogatory to  the
Japanese.
It  is true  that  most  Canadians are  by no means  proud  of the  way in which  the relocation    was   carried    out,   but    Miss Beattie does not strengthen her case by neglecting to mention  that Japan had embarked  upon   an  imperialistic  adven­ ture  in  Asia  long  before  the  attack   on Pearl Harbour. The protagonist, who was apparently born about  I 890, could hardly  have  been  ignorant of the  Sino-Japanese War   of    I895   nor   the   Russo-Japanese War  of   I904.   Nor  could  he  have  been unaware  of  the  so-called  China  incident  of I932 which  led to the rape of Nanking in  r 937. Yet his best friend  says, "I begin to consider  that  we Japanese are a peace­ ful nation." Wakao refers to friendship between Japan and Britain, apparently unaware of  the   I 939  ten-year   tripartite treaty  between  Japan, Germany  and Italy. No  wonder   the  characters  in  this  book are  surprised   at  the  turn   of  events  and that  they even hope that  Japan and  the Commonwealth  will  be  allies  in  World War  II! To  have  presented  all the facts, unslanted, would  have  resulted  in  a stronger   story  and  increased   the  impact of the  undeniable fact  that  our  Japanese Canadians were  never  found  to have en­ gaged  in  espionage   or  sabotage  despite the  fact  that  every  hint  and  rumour  was exhaustively  traced  by the  R.C.M.P.
Errors  in geography  when  speaking about Vancouver are inexcusable  in a Canadian  writer,   yet  Miss  Beattie   por­ trays  her  hero  standing on  Powell  street watching boats  coming  into  the  harbour and   noticing  some  of  them  already   an­  chored   "at   the  mouth   of   the   (Fraser) river."   And   while   roses   do   sometimes bloom in December  on the West Coast, it is  highly  unlikely  that  butterflies  would
 be  in  evidence  at  that   time  of the  year. Those portions dealing with Japan are likewise marred by inaccuracies, as in an episode   involving   a  geisha   which   per­ petuates  the  western  misconception  that  equates   these  women  with  prostitutes.
Material for a reasoned  and  engrossing
book   on   the   Japanese  Canadians   cer­ tainly  exists  but  Miss Beattie,  in  placing  her  characters too  firmly  on  the  side  of the  angels,  has  missed  her  boat.  On  the credit  side, Strength  for the  Bridge  does at  least  focus  some  attention  on  a  little known  part  of  Canadian life and  history. Publication of  Miss Beattie's  book should not    deter    some   more    knowledgeable writer  from  producing a less biased work on  this  subject.
DOUGLAS FORRESTER


PATRIOTIC PLUNDER

ANDRZEJ  BuszA, Conrad's  Polish   Literary Background. Polish   Historical Institute. N.P.

ExiLE  BEING  A    HABIT  with  most  Cana­ dians, who live out  of cultural kitbags  on which some kind of excise is due, we may be all  the  wiser for  knowing  the  cost of Conrad  Korzeniowski's English  art.  Mr.  Andrzej  Busza  has  shown  a  part  of  this (with   regrettable  brevity)    in   a   useful tally  of   the  cultural  baggage  which  the exiled  "incorrigible Quixote" brought  in­ tact  through   the  floating  commonwealth of  sailors  into  "Ia  grande  fraternite  des lettres" where English craftsmen looked askance  at  it  by  right  of  local  practice. As  for   the   tariff,   we   are   shown   the export-rates but are  offered  no answer  to the  questions  implicit  in bicultural art.

IOI

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



In   a  Canadian  context   Mr.   Busza's news can be startling. We are made ironi­ cally   aware   that,    if  Conrad's   Russian exile  had   ended   two  years   sooner,   his schooling   at  Cracow   would   have   been done  in German. Whether he  would  still have  broken  out  to sea, and  still  refused to be nationalized in exile, cannot  be said. He   might   have   opposed,   to   his   com­
patriots'  almost  canadien  fusion of race I
langue I foi, merely  the  deceptive  "exile, silence, cunning" of Joyce's sham  Icarus. But  in  the  year  of Canadian  Confedera­ tion   the   Austrian   government   (which
aided  missions in  the  Prairies)   conceded the  school  question   in  Poland.   Conrad was spared  in  his toil  a German growth of the  idea,  painfully  absurd,  of defining a  literary   patria  and   the  obligations   of literary   exile;   which   idea,   in  our   time and  land,  seems less needful  than  Taine's criteria  race, milieu, moment.
Mr. Busza illustrates his highly useful Conrad   compendium  by   parallels   be­ tween  Conrad's work   ("Karain",  "Amy Foster",  "Prince Roman",  Victory)   and the  works  of  other   Polish  authors using their  mother-tongue in  various lands  (e.g. Mickiewicz,   Slowacki,   Sienkiewicz,   Ze­ romski,  Konopnicka,  Dygasinski)   among  whom    Conrad's   exiled   father,  Apollo Korzeniewski, stands  out  very strong  and sharp.
The   most  thorough  Conrad   critic   in any  language is still  Ujejski,  late  Rector of the  Jagellonian University.  The  pres­ ent  monograph, however,  is  distinctly  an advance  on Gustav  Morf's valuable  work on   literary   displacement,   notorious   for the  bit  about  "Jim's  jump".  Lord  Jim  is not  Mr.  Busza's  target, but  looms  large nonetheless;  which   seems  a  pity,  but  is perhaps  a  challenge.
Those  who  write  of  Conrad's   "obses-


102
 sion with  betrayal" forget  the  NARCIS­ SUS.  They  overlook  the  number  of Con­  rad    characters   prefigured    in   Admiral  Mahan's roll  of  honour, Types of Naval Officers   ( r 893) .  They   forget   that   the
false   problem    of   Jim I Conrad's  guilt
(which Conrad nowhere  admitted) is a comic conversion, for later Anglo-Saxon bookmen,  of  what  for  Conrad's  genera­ tion  of  Poles was logically  a  question  of shame:   a  "point of  honour",  as Conrad labelled  a section  of The  Rescue.  Tsarist  officials   (like   Vladimir   in   The  Secret Agent)    might   have  smiled  at  the  Con­ radian  "spectacle" of  exiles in St.  Peters­ burg  reviling  an  exile  in  London, all  of them   dispossessed   Poles.  Even  a  patriot could   have  tasted   the  Conradian  irony beneath   the  frivolous   polemic,   whereby Kraj  writers  damned  Conrad  in absentia from  the  Polish Cavalry,  while the  prodi­  gal   (bearing  deeper   Russian  scars  than they)  wrestled  into  alien  speech  his "images"   of  men  "in  attitudes of  cruci­ fixion"  above  "the   destructive  element" to  form  an  art   brooded   over  for  thou­  sands  of  hours   at   sea.  From   Conrad's letters  in  three  languages,  and  from  his silences, it  appears that  he felt  the  spec­ tacular  irony  more  deeply,  with  a  Polish severity, than  any  guilt  or shame  divined posthumously in  his art.
GERALD MORGAN

ESKIMO AUTOBIOGRAPHY

I. Nuligak,  edited   and   translated  by  Maurice Metayer, illustrations by  Ekootak, Peter Martin Associates.   $s.oo.

THE AUTHOR, a former  hunter, became hospitalized  and  with  the encouragement of   Maurice  Metayer    reminisced    about

BOOKS IN REVIEW



his  life  from   earliest  times.  Not  only  is this  the  first  autobiography  of  a  Cana­ dian  Eskimo,  but  the  story  represents   a view of the old way of life which  perhaps makes  it  unique.   Both  Diamond Jenness and   Knud    Rasmussen   have   published first-hand  accounts  of  Eskimo  life before the   days  of  the   trading  post.   What   is different   and   valuable   about   Nuligak's  story  however,  is his  attitude towards  a hunting life and the details he remembers.
At   first   the   account  appears  to   be merely   a  recital   of  numbers   and   kinds of animals  killed,  but  gradually  there emerges the constant struggle for food throughout the  year.  As a youngster Nuligak was orphaned and left with his grandmother. From  this lowly position  of hanger-on in a hunting camp,  he yearned to  become   a  good   hunter.  As  he  suc­ ceeded    in   this   his   position    gradually changed  until  he became  leader and  pro­ vider  for  a  camp  of  upwards  of  a dozen persons.
There are moments  of drama and tragedy, but the story never becomes sentimentalized. When  a  boy  he  refused to abandon his grandmother on the trail. Instead   in  order   to  bury  her  at  home he  sledged  her  body in sub-zero  weather for  several  days, gradually falling  behind the   other   travellers.    He   describes   the thrill   of  hunting  polar   bears,  and   does not  fail  to  mention   his  terror   after  one
 hunt   when   he  was  laughed   at   by  the children   in  his  camp.   The   directness  of his  discussion  of  weather   conditions  for good hunting is striking.  Sunny,  still win­ ter  days  when  it was  easy to  travel  were the  worst  for  the  hunter. The   best  con­ ditions  for  approaching animals  was  just before  a blizzard  and  this  time  was most hazardous  for the hunter. He speaks with curiosity  rather than  fear  at  his first en­ counter   with   a  school  of   killer  whales while  sealing  in a kayak.  Of  interest  too, is his comment  about  the variable  ability to   withstand  cold   on   the   part   of  his compamons.
His sense of accomplishment as well as responsibility   in   providing  food   for   a large  household,  to  say  nothing of  visit­ ing   families  and    dog   teams   comes through  well.
Here  is evidence   too  of  the  bewilder­ ment   of  smallpox   and   influenza   epide­  mics,   the   capricious   fur  market  which violently  altered  the author's annual cash income  from  as  much  as $3,000  to  $70, and   always,  there  are  the  challenge   of the   hunt   the   hazards   of  weather    and the  recurring shortage   of  food.
Nuligak's    story   is  one   of   justifiable
pride.  But  it  is honest  and  independent. He   writes   neither   in   the  stereotype   of myth   nor   to  please  his  white   sponsors. It   is  an  important  book,  and   it  is  de­ lightful.                                  R. W. DUNNING
