$5.oo  per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·88


CONTEMPOR]IRY  QUEBEC FICTION
Articles
BY  MARY JANE  EDWARDS, NORMAND DOIRON, RICHARD G.  HODGSON, ESTELLE DANSEREAU, JENNIFER  WAELTI-WALTERS, FRAN<_;OISE  MACCABEE IQBAL, JACQUES  PELLETIER,  EVA-MARIE KROLLER, LAURENT MAILHOT
Poems
BY  DOUGLAS BARBOUR, JOHN BARTON, RON  MILES, G. B. SINCLAIR, JOHN BAGLOW, TOM WAYMAN, KENNETH SHERMAN
Reviews
BY  RONALD SUTHERLAND, EVA-MARIE KROLLER, RICHARD HODGSON, KEITH GAREBIAN, MICHAEL PETERMAN,  LINDA ROGERS, FRAN<_;OISE  IQBAL, VALERIE RAOUL, JACQtTELINE  VIS\VANATHAN, LAURENT MAILHOT, PIERRE SO:\fVILLE, ESTELLE DANSEREAU, JONATHAN  M.  WEISS, CAROLE GERSON, LORRAINE WEIR, PATRICIA MERIVALE, TERRY GOLDIE, PETER KLOVAN, ANTHONY J. HARDING, LAURIE RICOU, JANET GILTROW, DAVID  JACKEL, GEORGE WOODCOCK, A. A. MCKINNON, PATRICIA KEENEY SMITH,
PETER STEVENS

Opinions  and Notes
BY  DONALD SMITH, ALLISON MITCHAM, MICHELE LACOMBE, ALEXANDRE L. AMPRIMOZ

A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVJEW








OF QUEBEC, LATELY





As  A  TITLE,  "The  Arts in Canada -The  Last  Fifty  Years" has something of the sound of doomsday about it. And in these days of economic pressure on  the  arts -compounded,  perhaps,  by the  kinds of  political  turmoil that  Hugh  MacLennan so ably evokes in his new novel Voices in Time -one might be forgiven for reading the title so dyspeptically. In fact it is celebratory  and retrospective rather  than gloomily prophetic, and is the title given to the U nive7Sity of  Toronto  Quarterly's  fiftieth  anniversary  issue  (also  publi;hed   separatejy a; volume 261 in the University of Toronto  Press' University  Paperbook  series).  It thus  offers a  public  occasion to C .>;tgratQlal:e  the  editors,  past  and  present,  for having  sustained  the  quality of  the  journal  ov:er several  decades,  and  for  con­ tinuing  to serve Canadian society by continuing  to serve and  celebrate  the  life of the mind.
There  are more specific ways in which the Quarterly has engaged  with  Cana­
dian literature: in the occasional article, either directly on a literary  text or more often on cultural  background; in the dauntingly inclusive notices which appear  in its annual  "Letters in Canada" survey; and, of course, in an issue like "The  Arts in Canada." This issue includes survey articles by George Woodcock on anglophone non-fiction in Canada since 1930, by Jacques  Allard  on all aspects of book  pro­ duction in Quebec,  and  by Northrop  Frye on progress in the arts;  it also includes a number of more personal commentaries:  Michele Lalonde's  "Petit Testament," explaining  why, in  poetry,  "Ia  prose est indecente  et  l'humeur  subversif," and Gratien  Gelinas's  professional "credo."  I found  the most  arresting articles  to be among  this  latter   group:  for  example,  Hugh   MacLennan's  autobiographical account  of changes affecting opportunities  for writers to publish, changes  in  the nature of fiction between 1930 and 1g8o, and changes in the economics of publish­ ing-a commentary  which reads almost like a footnote to Voices in Time. Robert­ son Davies writes barbed  reflections on the differences between creation  and  per­ formance,  between  comedy and  commerce, between  national  theatrical  heritage  and national  dramatic limits; Ralph  Gustafson's piece is a pyrotechnic  revelation

2

EDITORIAL

of poetic process, which incidentally  attacks  the conventional  view of Canada as a  land  of inferior  people  terrorized  by  their  own  landscape; Godfrey  Ridout's account of fifty years of Canadian music comes with the disarming subtitle "Good Lord,  I  Was  There  for  All of Them!" And  Gerard  Bessette's partly  autobio­ graphical,  partly   historical,   partly  polemical  commentary   on   Quebec  fiction manages at once to trace lines of development, draw attention  to a large number  of writers (  many of them still unknown in translation), and make fine discrimina­  tions among them.
"Attention must  be paid  ... ," one thinks,  passively, after  commentaries  like
these. But who pays attention, actively? Who makes the works, so many unknown, widely available  to readers? And who reads? As part of a postscript to "The Arts in Canada," W. J. Keith  and  Ben-Zion Shek record various phases of the history of their  journal,  and  Shek  writes:  "One  of the  most significant  aspects of  the annual  'Letters  in Canada' feature  ... has been its treatment of publications  in
French.  Indeed,  the  journal  has presented  the longest continuous  yearly review of francophone letters in the country, dating  back to 1937."  He adds:

In his first review [Felix]  Walter ... took issue with the historian A. R. M. Lower who, in an article entitled 'In Unknown Quebec,' published in October 1936, had given short shrift to Quebec letters. Walter wrote:  'Far  from agreeing with  this writing-down of the merits of French-Canadian literature, it seems to me that, from the turn of the century at any rate, French-Canadian  novelists, poets and critics have  been  marching  steadily  away  from  the  'romantic,'   the  'tepid'  and   the
'stylistic... .'

With  time,  of  course,  perspectives  change.  It is now  possible to  see  that   the "romantic" was not so much  left behind  as reinvented  by Quebec  writers, that francophone  writing  in  Canada  is anything  but  tepid,  and  that  critical  fashion has once more claimed "stylistic" as a term of praise rather  than a term of censure. After  the  Quiet  Revolution,  the  October  Crisis, the  Referendum   Debates,  and the Montreal  Olympics, it might even be impossible to write a satisfactory article called "In  Unknown  Quebec" any more. But despite an active government  pro­ gramme in support  of translation, and despite a certain academic interest in Roch Carrier,  Hubert Aquin,  and  Marie-Claire  Blais, francophone  writers still  remain largely unknown  in anglophone  Canada. And because anglophones do not  appre­  ciate the significance that  many Quebecois attach  to particular writers -Lange­ vin is familiar  as the author  of books studied  at school, Vigneault  as  a  political chanteur,  Ferron  as the cultural  mythographer, Aquin  as an  intellectual  symbol
(one  of the  buildings  at  l'Universite  du  Quebec  a Montreal  is called  Pavillon
Hubert-Aquin) -the social  dimensions  of  Quebecois  culture   remain   at  least
still unfamiliar  outside the province.
There  are  journals  to which one can go for instruction,  though  they are  not widely available  on magazine  racks:  Ellipse, Libert.e, Quebec/ Amerique, Voix  et

3

EDITORIAL

Images, Livres et auteurs qulbecois, Ecritures  franfaises, Les Lettres quebecoises. Since it began in 1959, Canadian Literature, too, has attempted to take account of Canadian writing  in  French  as well as that  in  English.  But  many  writers  still remain undistributed, unstocked, unread, and  unknown in the reading community at large. The  results of the translation  programme  may  well already  be altering this state of affairs, but general awareness depends  more on mass market  paper­ back distribution  than on the simple availability of a translated  text, whatever  its quality. I was reminded of this fact a few years ago, at a public symposium in the late 197o's, when it became clear that the only Quebec  novelists who were widely known  were  Gabrielle  Roy  and  Roger  Lemelin.  These  writers  were  familiar because they had  appeared  in  McClelland  & Stewart's  New  Canadian Library. (Which  demonstrates  the utility and importance of this series, despite its limita­ tions; the uncertainty  of the future  of the series is therefore  cause for concern.) But the  point about  the familiarity of Roy and  Lemelin  had  another  dimension. Many  of the  people who were acquainted  with  these two  writers  felt, whether consciously or unconsciously, that such an acquaintance made  them familiar  with the entire spectrum of Quebec fiction. Somehow Roy and Lemelin -and increas­ ingly Roy alone,  despite her  Manitoba  roots -came  to  represent  all  that  was modern  about  Quebec society, all that  was true  about  Quebec  lifestyles, all that was innovative about francophone literature.  Clearly, Gabrielle  Roy's accomplish­ ment  is substantial,  and  her  modernism  continues  to develop;  but  it is not  all­ inclusive. Nor does it any longer serve to see foremost in her work-or to accept as the  most  recent  development  in  Quebec  writing -a  rejection  of  the  rural expectations  and clerical biases of an earlier time. That  was a stage of the 194o's and  1 gsa's.  More  recent writing  has accommodated itself to the  rural  past and the clerical  presence; it has focussed more directly and  politically  than  before on the plight of  women and the possibility of independence; it has shaped  the fable into a high  political art, and has probed the passionate and  often amoral  recesses of  emotional behaviour.
The  196o's and  197o's saw a great many  talented  writers  change  the textures
of fiction in Quebec. To say that the work of Gerard  Bessette, Yves Theriault, and Andre  Langevin  constitutes  a  kind  of transition  into  the  new  idiom  is not  to diminish  its contemporaneity; to call  Victor-Levy  Beaulieu,  Michel  Tremblay, Louky Bersianik, and  Nicole Brossard currently  the  most experimental does not deny them  the  traditional  role of artists:  to elucidate  the  human  condition.  In between  lie various  territories:   the subterranean  worlds  of  Hubert   Aquin  and Marie-Claire  Blais, the comic worlds of Roch Carrier  and  Jacques  Ferron,  the verifiable worlds of Jacques  Godbout  and  Anne  Hebert,  the  singularly  stylized worlds of Andre  Major,  Jacques  Benoit, Rejean  Ducharme, and Jacques  Poulin. These and  other  writers have already  accomplished  much,  have  already  devised works that  are stylistically sure and psychologically exploratory.  They  will appeal

4

EDITORIAL


to different  tastes, and  will affect other  writers, in Quebec  and  outside it, separ­ ately. But we should  also remind  ourselves of the obvious:  that  fifty  years from now, another  retrospective on the arts in Canada  may well be looking back to this time,  reflecting  on the  individual  talents  and  on the  collective  burst  of literary energy which in these decades in Quebec  have contributed  so remarkably  and so variously to the national  heritage.
W.N.















EDGES:
 


Douglas Barbour


& how  they  edge closer in sight    in
situ
here
the long  white  stretch  of beach  below
the grey rocks
seas edge
grey & glittering
metallic


edge
 
the sun  in clouds 	the clouds

edging in
 
over that  edgy

ranging glitter
 
& beside me

standing   on edge
1 great  green  tree
i touch  .

the edge.

5

GERARD BESSETTE

A Tribute
 





Mary Jane Edwards




GERARD BESSETTE  (b.  Ste-Anne-de-Salrrevois,  Quebec,
25 February  I 920), the editor of three anthologies and  the author  of one volume of poetry, eight novels, one collection of short stories, and several works of criticism, is a seminal figure in contemporary  Quebec  literature. Yet, since  I 946, when  he left Montreal  to teach French at the University of Saskatchewan  in Saskatoon,  he has  lived  almost  continually  outside  his  native  province -in  New  Yark  City ( I949-5I); in  Pittsburgh   ( I95I-58); and  since  I958,  except  for  one  year  he spent  teaching  at  Laval, in Kingston,  Ontario. Despite,  however,  his receipt  of two Governor-General  Awards, for L'Incubation and  Le Cycle, his Fellowship in the Royal Society of Canada  ( I 966), the publication  of an English translation  of three of his novels, and his presence among  us, his is hardly  a household name in English Canada. To reveal aspects of the life and  works of Gerard  Bessette is one reason for this interview.
There  are  other  reasons, of course. I first met  Gerard  Bessette at  Queen's  in September   I 960. I  had  just come to study for an  MA, and  he had  just moved from RMC, where he had taught  French for two years. In  I 960-6 I, I was one of two  students  in  a  graduate   course  he  gave  on  French-Canadian  literature.   I admired  his teaching  method and  his critical ability then;  I delight in his fiction now. This interview was thus also partly carried  out  to allow me to pay my  per­ sonal tribute  to Gerard  Bessette.
I have culled this interview from two sessions we recorded  in Kingston  on  I 7
October  I 980, and  2 I  November  I 980. During  the first, we concentrated on his criticism, although  his fiction was never far  from  our  conversation; during  the second, we discussed his novels. I  have included  in  the  notes examples  of, and bibliographical information  about,  Bessette's critical  articles.
As it worked out,  these sessions came at  a very significant  time  in the  life of Gerard Bessette. On the 7th and 8th of November  I98o, the Department of French hosted the "Colloque Bessette" to honour  the man who had  retired from Queen's the previous July.  On  26 November  I98o,  the Government  of Quebec  awarded Gerard  Bessette Le Prix Athanase-David for  I 980, the  highest award  for litera­ ture  that  the  province can bestow. Canadian Literature, of course, neither hosts colloquia nor bestows awards. I hope, however, that  the publication of this inter­ view will serve as its homage to a professor who pioneered the teaching  of French-

6

BESSETI'E

Canadian literature, a critic who revolutionized our reading  of it, and  a novelist who has created some of its most exciting works.
EDWARDS :   You  started   writing  poetry  and   doing  your  criticism  on  poetry. Poemes temporels  ( 1954)  was the first volume of creative  writing you published. Your  MA thesis and  your doctoral dissertation  both dealt  with images in Emile Nelligan's  poetry. Now why did you tum  from writing  poetry and  talking about poetry to writing fiction and  concentrating  on fiction in your criticism?

BESSETTE:     Who  knows? I  just lost interest in writing  poetry. I suppose it had something  to do with the fact  that  in my opinion, the only great  writer we had when I was young was Nelligan. I admired  him greatly, and it never crossed my mind that  I should devote my time to foreign -that means  French -literature, so I didn't  have that  much  choice. I had  not discovered Albert  Laberge yet. No one  knew about  him. Gabrielle  Roy published  Bonheur d'occasion  ( 1945)  only when  my MA  thesis was almost finished. Anyway, at  that  time  you could  not write  a thesis about  contemporary writers. There  was as well Ringuet's  Trente arpents  ( 1938), and  that  was it. So, after  I  quit  writing  poetry  at  the  age  of twenty-five or so, I wrote a few, not many, critical articles. Then  there was a long silence as far as creative writing was concerned. I started  again when I was thirty­ six or thirty-seven.  I  say again,  because I  remember  in  New  York  writing  the beginning of a novel in  rgso  or so.

EDWARDS:     Why  do  you  think  it never crossed your  mind  to  work  in  French literature?
BESSETTE:     Mind  you, my doctoral  thesis deals with  French  poets as well as French-Canadian ones. But to me it was absurd that  I should  devote my time to writers who were foreign,  first, and  who had so many  critics in France,  second. I still don't  understand the  Quebecois who devote most of their  time to French literature.

EDWARDS:     But you were a pioneer in the criticism of French-Canadian  litera­
ture, especially in the way you approached  it.

BESSETTE:     Yes, there's  no doubt  about this. I was one of the first to get a doc­ toral  degree in French-Canadian literature,  maybe the first at  the  Universire  de Montreal,  I'm  not sure, but certainly among the pioneers.

EDWARDS:     In one of your early articles on Nelligan, you talk about  the impor­
tance of "la  critique  formelle'' as opposed to "la  critique  fon iere"
historique.m Why did you think in the 194o's that formal  criticism was so impor­
tant?

BESSETTE:     Because I did  not think  then, and  I do not  think  still, that  history of literature  is literature. To  me that  is history. I  did  not  want  to specialize in

7

BESSETTE

history. I wanted  to study literature in its specificity, let's say, so I was quite bored with the courses we had in literature.  The  only course that  I loved was a course in history given by Lionel Groulx.

EDWARDS:     You studied under Lionel Groulx?

BESSETTE:     Well, I attended  as an auditor.  I was not enrolled in history, but  he was an outstanding professor.

EDWARDS:     Do  you think  he  influenced  your  view  of  French   Canada  at  all, because he is very nationalistic and  very Catholic?

BESSETTE:     Oh,  I was an unbeliever even then. It was not so much  his  patrio­ tisme that  influenced  me. It was his eloquence;  using only notes, he spoke slowly, clearly, and  well. He was, I think, a great teacher  because he could  both  analyse and synthesize. When  he lectured  on French-Canadian history, he linked  events in  Canada to events in France,  Great  Britain,  and  other  places in  Europe  and beyond. It  was an excellent course in history.  Maybe  I loved it  more  because  I did not have to attend.  But my courses in literature weren't worth  much.

EDWARDS:     But what stimulated  your interest in formal  criticism? Did  you read other  critics, or did you just invent  your own  method  yourself according  to the text, because you do say that  if you're going to do formal  criticism, the text in a sense imposes on you the kind of questions you're going to ask? Isn't  that  right?

BESSETTE:     Yes. You know, I have the impression  that  I did it more or less by myself. Maybe  it's not true, but  that's  the impression  I have. Of  course, I read Ferdinand  Brunetiere,  Jules Lemaitre,  Emile Faguet,  and  Albert Thibaudet, and quite often they would speak of literature.

EDWARDS:     And then you took another  step. In  the  rg6o's,  you moved into "la psychocritique,"  a criticism based very much  on  Freudian ideas. 2  I  notice  that
'even in your criticism of Nelligan, for example,  you went from  talking  about  his
images  to  talking  about  his Oedipus  complex.a  What   psychologists and  critics were you reading  in theI g6o's?

BESSETTE:	I read  Freud, of course-actually, as I explain in Mes  Romans  et moi  (I 979), I reread  him -and  Charles Mauron, who is considered  to be the founder of psychocriticism in France. I read Charles Baudouin,  and  I loved Marie Bonaparte's   book on  Edgar  Allan  Poe.  Psychocriticism  gives you  a  feeling  of power, for you have the impression and/or illusion that  you are discovering things that  the writer himself did not know. That's a great satisfaction.

EDWARDS:     You get there, though, by looking particularly  at images and patterns.

BESSETTE:     Oh  yes, oh yes.

8

BESSETTE

EDWARDS:     Do  you agree, then,  that  to analyse the  techniques  of a work isn't really enough?
BESSETTE:     Yes, formal  criticism seems to me now a little desincarnee, a little disembodied. It would not satisfy me anymore  just to study the form of images as I did in my thesis. My aim now is to delve into the unconscious of the author.  In I 960, I had not written  anything  about  psychocriticism, so I was still a formalist.
EDWARDS :   That's right. And  I  think  that's  the difference  between  La  Bagarre (1958), Le  Libraire  (1960), and  La  Commensale   (1975), which  dates  from then, and L'Incubation ( I965). The first three are very formal novels. In L'lncu­ bation, on the other hand, it is almost as if you've thrown  all form out, and you've gone so far  the  other  way that  the novel becomes a  little shadowy. There isn't enough  of the  realism that  is in Le  Libraire, for example,  or even  in  Le  Cycle (I 97 I ) , which has this quality of solidity, of concreteness.
BESSETTE:     Oh yes, well, Gilles Marcotte thinks that with Le Cycle, I took a step backwards  because it's too realistic.
EDWARDS:     Oh,  I don't  think so. Anyway, I've been rereading  your criticism of other  contemporary  French-Canadian  novelists. You've  deplored  the  fact  that Hubert  Aquin  and  Jacques  Ferron  have  become  what  you call  ades  monstres sacres" in French-Canadian criticism/ you've written long, important articles on each of Yves Theriault,5  Andre  Langevin,6  and  Victor-Levy  Beaulieu.7    It seems to me, however, that  the novelist you've returned  to most frequently  is Gabrielle Roy. At various points you've talked about the importance  of Bonheur d'occasion, and you've praised it highly.8 Do you have any general comments about  fiction in contemporary Quebec?
BESSETTE:     Well,  I  have  not  followed it  very closely these  last  ten  years.  I devoted maybe a fourth  of Le Semestre ( I979)  to one novel, Gilbert La Rocque's Serge d'entre  les morts  ( I976). Obviously, I think that  La Rocque  is important.
EDWARDS:     What  do you think of Victor-Levy Beaulieu now?

BESSETTE:     Well, his last half-dozen  books have  been,  I  think,  extremely  dis­ appointing. When  he returns  to the family cycle, maybe he will again  re-emerge, but I am not too optimistic.

EDWARDS:     What  about  Langevin?  You  called  L'Elan  d'Amerique  ( I972)   a disappointing, but  basically  a  rather  exciting  new  beginning  for  him  because, when it appeared, he hadn't published a novel for a long time.
BESSETTE:     I was hopeful. His last novel, U ne C halne dans le pare (I 974), had some success, but  I didn't  think it was very good. There  was an error in point of view. It was third-person, and it should have been first. You know, I think if there is an optical mistake in a novel, it is enough to really ruin it. U ne Chaine  dans le

9

BESSETTE

pare is not  alive, and  about  this matter  I have  not  changed.  To  me  the  first quality of a novel is for the characters to be alive.

EDWARDS:     You said that  about  Rose-Anna  and  Florentine  in Bonheur  d'occa­
sion.9

BESSETTE:     Yes, but many secondary characters  in it are  also very much  alive.

'

BESSETTE:     I was excited too when I discovered that.  That's one of the strong emotions I have had  in criticism. When  I unearthed the  key to Gabrielle  Roy's anxiety and anguish, that was a real discovery.

EDWARDS:    I think  you're  absolutely right  because  I can't  read  the  ending  of La Route d'Altamont  (I 966)  without crying. I think any daughter especially who reads that  and  who has left her mother  is very much  moved. There  is also her point that  in the end  the daughter  becomes the  mother,  and  it's  almost  at  the precise moment that the mother starts to become the child that  the daughter starts taking on the personality traits of her mother. So you don't  just kill your mother; you incorporate  her into you at a certain point in your life.

BESSETTE:      That's very true, but I don't  think  I developed  that.  Well, maybe I
touch on it in my study of Alexandre Chenevert  ( 1954) .n

EDWARDS:     In  later  comments  about  Gabrielle  Roy,  you  imply  that  after  La Route  d'Altamont, after she'd  worked out her relationship  with her mother, per­ haps she had little more to say.

BESSETTE:     Well, when  I read  Get ete  qui chantait   ( I972 ), I said  to myself, "She's finished." Then  she published Ces Enfants  de ma vie ( 1977), and that's  a good book. But it's  not  a novel. It's  autobiographie  romancee.  I think  in  that direction,  she will still be able  to  produce  something  valuable,  but  I would  be flabbergasted if she published another  good novel.

EDWARDS:     Do you still think, then, that Bonheur d'occasion is Roy's great work?

BESSETTE:     Yes. But Alexandre Chenevert is also a good novel. There  are these, and there are her works of fictionalized memoirs, Rue  Deschambault  (I 955) , La Route  d'Altamont, and Ces Enfants  de ma vie. The last is not as good as the first two, but  it is still quite good. So there are these two versants in her  production. They're  both important. LaMontagne secrete is interesting only because it permits one to know more about Roy's unconscious. I don't  think it is a good novel.

10

BESSETTE


EDWARDS:     In your criticism, you use the term la cenesthesie, and  I gather from what  you say that  a novel without  this sort of tactile quality  really lacks the kind of realism which makes it a good novel.12  What  qualities would your ideal novel have?

BESSETTE:    Well, la cenesthesie is very important. It  is the  consciousness you have of the inner functioning of your body. The first sensations we have are tactile, but  we also have very early, from babyhood  probably, une  conscience  cenesthC­ sique. When,  in  Bonheur  d'occasion, Rose-Anna  gives birth,  that  scene is very cenesthesique  because  you suffer  when she is in labour.  She is  extremement  in­ carnie at that moment. So Gabrielle Roy is a good writer obviously. It is extremely important to give the reader  the feeling that he is touching something.

EDWARDS :   Is that  what you mean by realism then?

BESSETTE:    Yes, but  it also includes the different layers of consciousness.

EDWARDS :   But I mean  in terms of a style which allows the reader  to get these feelings of touching and to know where he is at every point. When  I was reading L'lncubation, for example,  I felt sometimes depaysee. I didn't  know where I was, and  that's  what  I  meant  when  I said earlier that  there  didn't  seem to be quite enough of this concrete  placing of the reader to get him into the scene.

BESSETTE:    Do you know what  would have given me great  pleasure?

EDWARDS:     What?

BESSETTE:    Your telling me that when you read L'lncubation, you had the sen­
sation you were inside a womb.

EDWARDS:     I know that's  what  I was supposed to have. But I was going to ask you about the techniques of language, content, and optique you use in your fiction to get the kind of realism you're looking for, because at your best, you do balance internal and external reality brilliantly. I think you do this in Le Cycle; I'm always aware,  for example,  of the  fact  that  the first three  narrators are  standing  by a corpse as they think. I feel the little details of the scene that  come into each char­ acter's thoughts. Jacot,  the little boy, watches his aunt, watches his mother and her lover, and reacts emotionally to them and the situation. I'm  aware of the candles, and at the same time I'm  aware that Jacot has to go pee-pee.

BESSETTE:      That's cenesthesie.

EDWARDS:     Exactly. Now, are you conscious of using certain  techniques, certain kinds of language,  or even choosing certain kinds of content  to get that  quality in your fiction?

BESSETTE:    Yes, of course.  I  use the  present  participle  to avoid  pronouns  and


II

BESSETTE

subjects, and  I omit connecting words because they are not necessary for compre­ hension. On  the other  hand,  I tend to put  together  two or three  words that  are not synonyms because real synonyms hardly  exist. In  Les  Anthropo"ides ( I 977), there are  very many  words that  are  joined with  hyphens. These  are  not  usually des mots composes. I  just add  hyphens. I also like to create  new words. We had the noun  film. Then  the adjective  filmique  was created.  That's a word  I should have liked to coin. The  creation  of new  words  that  the  reader  will understand right away is both legitimate and  praiseworthy.

EDWARDS:     Let's  talk  about  your  novels.  When  your  first  novel  La  Bagarre ( I958)  was published as The  Brawl in English in I976, Ronald  Sutherland com­ mented  that  it was still your "most  intriguing  book" because it was  "almost  un­ cannily prophetic  with regard  to labour  problems, religion, language,  education,  and sex."3 Are you pleased that  in I 976, Sutherland  should  call your first novel your "most  intriguing  book"?

BESSETTE:    I  don't  mind,  but  I  don't  believe it's  true.  Well, maybe  from  the standpoint  of what  I said about society and  history, it had  its importance, but as a work of art,  I don't  find it intriguing.  Recently  there  was a long criticism of it by Andre  Belleau in Le Romancier  fictif:essai sur la representation  de l'ecrivain dans le roman  qwffbecois (I 980). He found  the different  kinds and levels of  lan­ guage and  the character  of Jules Lebeuf particularly interesting.

EDWARDS:    In  Mes  Romans  et moi, you say that  Jules  Lebeuf is the character closest to you. Now Jules is a student,  he spends  much  time talking  about  intel­ lectual subjects, and  he wants to be a writer, yet he works as a sweeper, he lives with a waitress, and he enjoys what I would call, without trying to sound snobbish, fairly lower-class activities and friends. And in the end he opts for his job and  his waitress. Why did you put yourself into the novel as Jules Lebeuf?

BESSETTE:	But I am not just Lebeuf. All the characters in the novel are projec­ tions of the novelist, all of them. What I said in M es Romans et moi was that when I wrote La Bagarre, I was still torn among not only levels of  language-you  can see that  very well-but also levels of society. I was from a lower-class milieu, but because of my studies, I was out of it. There  were then these two poles. There  was also a third, I suppose, because when I wrote the novel, I was living in the United States;  hence  the American  Weston. It  is funny, you know, because others  have been convinced  that  Sillery was mostly  myself, even though  I  am  not "gay,"  as you say now. It is dangerous to identify the author with one character only.

EDWARDS:     According  to the recent checklist of your work compiled  by Carole Pilotte, there have been two editions and several reprintings  of your second novel, Le Libraire ( I 960) ; it has been translated  into English and Czech;  and the CBC

I2

BESSETTE

has dramatized  Not  for Every  Eye  ( 1g62), the English translation.14 Why do you think that  Herve Jodoin  and  his adventures in St-Joachin  have been so popular?
BESSETTE:     I really don't  know. I think that  in a way he is a forerunner  of the revolt among the young. You know, at the beginning he has dropped  everything, and has had trouble with the Catholic Church. Then he gets into the book business and again has trouble  with the Church. And then he just throws everything  away and mocks the old regime. I suppose that is why it caught  with the youth, because from all I hear, young students still like it.
EDWARDS:      I find Herve  a rather  nasty, passive aggressive little man.  I  am  not sure that  I like him, but I admire  his wit, his irony, and  his ability to plot and  to exact  revenge. Somehow  he seems the  perfect symbol for the society he depicts. Did you intend  him to be both the agent and the object of your satire?
BESSETTE:     I don't  think  that  I plan characters  that  way. I do think,  however, that  I have a tendency to laugh both at others and at myself. I will attack  others, but usually I attack  myself also. I don't know that it is out of fairness. I think  that it is a matter  of a certain  inner  distanciation. So it is there, and  I don't  have  to plan.
EDWARDS:     It  is also the role of the satirist. I think,  for example, that  the mar­ vellous thing  about  Gulliver  in Gulliver's  Travels is that  he is the  gull  and  the gulled, especially at the end when, living in the stable with the horses, he almost totally fails to see his relationship  with human  beings. Swift, on the other  hand, sees this relationship.
BESSETTE:     I must read Swift again. I had forgotten about  the horses.

EDWARDS:     Yes, I was thinking of Swift and  his horses when I was reading  Les
Anthropo'ides.

BESSETTE:     Yes, but  you  must  also remember  how  my  "horse  fixation"   was analysed at the colloquium.
EDWARDS:     Les  Pedagogues  ( 1961), your third  novel, has not  been translated into English and does not appear  to have been discussed very much even in Que­ bec. It  was hardly  mentioned,  for example,  at  the  colloquium.  One  question   I have about  it concerns Jules Lebeuf. He appears  in the novel as the  president  of a union who eventually  persuades Sarto  Pellerin, the French  professor who is the chief character  in Les Pedagogues, to join forces with the workers. Now why did you reincarnate Jules? Did you intend to write a series of  realistic, urban,  socially relevant novels set in Montreal?

BESSETTE:    No,  but  at  the  time-at  the  time,  mind  you, it is no longer  my opinion -I felt strongly that there should be some kind of solidarity between  the intellectuals and the workers. That  was long before the labour  unions became  too

BESSETTE

strong. It is also interesting that at the end of La Bagarre, Jules was forced against his will to go into management. I suppose I wanted  him to swing back to the side of the workers, and  that's  what happens in Les Pedagogues.

EDWARDS:	Despite the apparent disaster of Sarto's  loss of his job at the Normal School, I found the ending ambivalent,  but essentially optimistic. Did you intend Sarto to be seen as quietly triumphant in the final lines?

BESSETTE:     Well, I wanted to leave the future  open  at least. I did not consider that  he had  undergone  a final defeat, but that  he still had  a chance  to do what he wanted.
EDWARDs:    After Le Libraire, L'lncubation  ( 1965)  is your most popular  novel. It has been translated  into English and  Czech, and  it marks two new departures for you. You still use Montreal,  but your main setting is now for the first time Narcotown,  a small Ontario  city where there is a university. And you plunge into a stream-of-consciousness technique  where  time,  place,  and  action  are  all  dis­ located,  and  where  conventional  patterns  of writing  are  broken.  We've  already talked a bit about  L'Incubation. In Le Semestre, however, you hint that you may have another story to tell about a love triangle from the period of your life during which you wrote L'lncubation, and  that in L'Incubation, there  were things that you couldn't,  or wouldn't,  tell. I am  wondering  if that  partly  explains some of the vagueness of that  novel for me.

BESSETTE:     Well, that's possible, but from what I understood,  your criticism was that at times when you were reading the novel, you literally didn't  know spatially where you were. But I suspect that  your objection  goes beyond la spatialite, and you are probably  concerned  with the characterization as well. If this is the case, then the existence of another  triangle below the visible triangle  may explain  why the location was blurry for you.

EDWARDS:     Yes, I did mean more than  location.  T. S. Eliot says about  Hamlet that  it is not entirely successful because it "is full of some stuff  I Shakespeare  I could not drag to light, contemplate,  or manipulate into art.m 5  Now that  I have
read Le Semestre, I am suggesting that if you at that  time couldn't  respond clearly to a certain set of emotions, it is possible that  everything  in  L'Incubation is also slightly askew.

BESSETTE:    Yes, that's  quite possible. Indeed.

EDWARDS:     We have already talked about several aspects of your next novelLe Cycle ( 1971). In Mes Romans et moi, however, you say that  the character  closest to you in Le Cycle is probably Julien. Why do you see him as your moi character?

BESSETTE:    Well, there is a revolt in him. There  is a tendency  to try to get out of his milieu through  foreign influences, like the Dutch  mistress and  Marxism. -

BESSETTE


Of course, I am  not at all a Marxist, so when I say that  he is closest to me, that has to be transposed  also. But I have undergone  non-quebecois  influences in my psyche.-And there is the great pain Julien feels when he remembers his father. One  of my colleagues also pointed out  that  Julien  was central  because he is the fourth  of seven narrators  in the book. I had not thought  about  this, but it makes sense.
EDWARDS :  Have you ever tested the theory that if you open a novel right in the middle, you get the central scene? The fourth of seven narrators is the same thing in another  way. But you have another tour de force because four of the seven nar­ rators are women. Now, some feminists might say that  to try to go into the psyche of women is a dangerous  undertaking for a man, especially when you start talking about  the menstruation of the youngest daughter.  That's very bold!

BESSETTE:     I don't  know that  it's bold, but I think it was worth trying. As you know, male artists envy women because of their power to create life. So, it's only natural  that  I should feel the urge to put myself inside their skin.
EDWARDS:     Let's talk about  La Commensale. Although it was not published until
1975, it dates from  the early sixties. When  I read it, I noticed its similarities to both  Le  Libraire  and  the  Oedipus,   Freudian   nightmare   memory  which  you analyse in M es Romans  et moi, and  which seems out  of place in the novel.
BESSETTE:     Well, you know, this passage was not planned  at all. It just came to me suddenly. When  I look at it now, I am tempted  to say that  La Commensale really didn't  work as a novel because already something  deeper  was working in me. It came out in that  passage, but  I could not integrate  it with the rest of the novel.
EDWARDS:     I was especially interested in what  you said in Mes  Romans  et moi about  Les Anthropoides  ( 1977), your novel about anthropoids.  I thought  it was brilliant. In the novel the first-person narrator, the adolescent Guito, works out his role as the  paroleur of his horde. He plays this role partly because he is wounded and  has a dead  arm;  it leaves him solitary and  in exile from  «[e  fleuve giant," Kebekoua,  but the role is necessary to record the history and  legends of his horde, and  in a sense, to create  his horde,  because until  he has spoken,  his horde  has verbally neither  history nor legend and  therefore doesn't  truly  exist. Would  you agree that  the  paroleur of the Kalahoumes  is equivalent  to the artist of men and that  the image you present of both is ambiguous, but essentially affirmative, triumphant, and even divine.
BESSETTE:     There's  nothing  divine  about  it. Speech  came  to  the species man little by little. What  is surprising -and  we are not surprised  enough  about  this
-is that  words should sometimes have the power to give us sensations and visions that  are just as vivid as if we felt and saw the real things.

BESSETTE

EDWARDS:	You claim that you don't  have a visual imagination, but when each of those anthropoids wants to speak, il image  quelquechose.  Now imager  means to see.
BESSETTE:	C'est le phenomene de la compensation. When you lack something, you try  to overcome  it and  you go even  further   than  the  people  who  have  it naturally.  That's why I made myself a vocabulary  of all the traits of the human face and  body. I knew I had to describe this animal,  and  I wanted  to make the reader see things that  I did not.

EDWARDS:     I think that one reason why the ending of Les Anthropo"ides seems so triumphant is the stately, balanced  rhythms  of the language  of its conclusion. I think, in fact, the rhythms of your language  are one of the great strengths of your style. Are you aware of the music of language?

BESSETTE:    Oh  yes. The music of language  I feel naturally.

EDWARDS:    In  Le Semestre  (1979), we have another  portrait  of the artist,  this time as an older man.  In this novel, you present again  Narcotown,  Princess  Uni­ versity, and Omer  Marin, an almost sixty-year-old university professor, critic, and novelist. In  order  to present him, you abandon the first-person  narration  for the first time in years, even though  you are still involved  in  stream-of-consciousness technique  and  the unconscious. Why?

BESSETTE:     Well, although the optique is third-person, you see only Marin  from either the outside  or the inside, so you don't  go over this double  boundary.  But I think that the third-person point of view was a necessity of distanciation. I didn't know how it would come about,  but  I  knew when  I began  Le Semestre  that  I wanted to make a big swing from pre-history to something  that  gave the impres­ sion of being recent, even contemporary.  But I still needed  some way  to achieve distance.

EDWARDS:     You've also given the novel a very complex structure  by writing  in an  analysis of  Serge  d'entre  les morts,  by  mentioning   other  works  of  Quebec writers-albeit slightly  disguised -and  by  almost  giving  a  history  of  recent Quebec fiction, including that of Gerard  Bessette, and by naming  your chief  char­ acter after  Homer,  the sailor, and  the mother.  So you've gone from  La Rocque's novel and Quebec literature  to Homeric legend and  Freud.  Is this structure  more distanciation?

BESSETTE:	I have to rely a little on what others say about  Le Semestre because this is my most recent book and  very close to my personality. I don't  really think that I am able or ready to analyse it yet.
EDWARDS:     You have in some ways written a roman a cU. If you know Queen's,

r6

BESSETTE

you recognize many  of the  people in  Le Semestre, and,  of course, if you know
Quebec  literature, you recognize many  authors  and  books. Isn't  this dangerous?

BESSETTE:       I  don't  see why it should  be dangerous.  No  novel is ever purely invented;  all novels are always partly drawn from reality. I say nothing scandalous about  other people.

EDWARDS:     OK,  three  final questions. In  Les Anthropo'ides and  in Mes romans et moi, you express regret that you do not/cannot live in Montreal, but hope nevertheless to  have  many  Quebec  readers. Several  of them  came  to Kingston recently to  honour  you. Do you think  you may  become one of your "monstres sacref  in Quebec?

BESSETTE:     I suppose the possibility is there.

EDWARDS:      I  wondered  if that  was one reason why nobody  at  the  colloquium discussed the  humour  in your fiction. Everyone was treating  you very solemnly.

BESSETTE:     My "humour" is never mentioned.  I think, for instance,  that  if La Commensale  has one quality,  it has some very funny scenes. But the critics have never laughed.  They  never say my novels are funny.

EDWARDS:     Well, I'll say it. I think that even Le Semestre is funny, although  it's a wise humour  and therefore  one chuckles quietly. But would you like anglos and anglotes, as you call us, to read you too?

BESSETTE:     Sure.  I'd  like the whole world to read  my novels. They  would  all have to be translated  and  published, of course.

EDWARDS:     You mention  in Mes  Romans  et moi your  phobia  about  repeating yourself, and you give this as one reason why you did not publish La Commensale right after  Le  Libraire, and  why you are tiring of psychocriticism. I sense too in Le Semestre that  you may be leaving what  you call your «freudomanie." Where do you think you're going?

BESSETTE:     You're  assuming that  Marin  is me! ... But anyway,  I hope that  I am moving away from Freud, but I don't know where I'm going next. I'm still struggling  with  two novels. The  last thing  I actually  wrote and  published  was a short story, "La  Garden-Party de Christophine" (I g8o), in the collection of the same name. This was meant  to be a prologue to a larger work, but the main body of that  prologue has not been progressing well, and the other  novel I'm  writing is not satisfactory  yet either.  I  hope that  there  will be something  new, but  I don't know how or what.

I7

BESSETTE


NOTES

1 "Analyse d'un  poeme  de  Nelligan," 1948;  rpt.   m  Une  Litterature   en  ebullition
(Montreal: Editions du Jour, 1968), pp. 27-41.
2   "La  psychocritique," Voix  et images, 1 ( 1975-76), 72-79.
3  "Nelligan et  les  remous  de  son  subconscient," 1963;   rpt.   m  Une  Litterature   en ebullition,  pp. 43-62.
4  "L'Elan d'Amerique  dans !'oeuvre d'Andre Langevin," 1972;  rpt.  in Trois  Roman­
ciers quebecois (Montreal: Editions du Jour, 1973), pp. 131-77.
5  "Le  Primitivisme dans  les romans de Theriault," in Une  Litterature  en ebullition,
pp. 111-216.
6  "L'Elan d'Amhique dans !'oeuvre d'And11e Langevin."
7   "Les  Romans de Victor-Levy Beaulieu," in Trois  Romanciers  quebecois, pp. 9-128.
a  See, for example, "Bonheur d'occasion,'' 1952; rpt. in Une  Litterature  on ebullition,
pp. 219·38.
9  Ibid.
10 "La Route  d'Altamont, clef de La Montagne  secrete," 1967;  rpt.  in Trois  Roman­
ciers quebecois, pp. 183-99.
11   "Alexandre Chenevert  de  Gabrielle Roy,"  1969;  rpt.  in  Trois  Romanciers  que­
becois, pp.  2o1-37·
12  "Correspondances entre  les personnages et le milieu  physique  dans  Bonheur d'occa­
sion," in Une  litterature  en ebullition, pp. 257-77.
13 The  Brawl, trans.  Marc  Lebel and  Ronald Sutherland  (Montreal:  Harvest House,
1976).
14  Carole Pilotte,  "Gerard Bessette: Bibliographie analytique et annotee ( 1939-1976) ," Diss. Universite de Montreal, 1978.
15  "Hamlet,'' in Selected Prose (Peregrine Books, 1963), p. 101.






TOUCHJIBLE
 


John Barton


the  pain  that  knits into  my form
knits  my form  into an other

it does not let go and  does not mean
to

18

POEM

its marrow knits  the bone dark  falling  of my
echo  into  its own shaft

I live in its socket inside  bones  that  howl into  the  wind's
mouth	I live in each syllable hardening into my skull

bone-flute of the dark
I live
in the caste  I am
I live in the caste
I live in 	I am







UNIFORMS
 


Ron Miles


Sun  leaves one  warning on my skin: 	the brown steer's  toughness
over  ripening flesh. On yours: 	that  flesh is beauty
not  enough.

We watch  our  children age, exchange their  fears for certainty.
My daughter's shadow
bruises your shoulder, your  son digs a grave in sand.

Slowly  the  tide repeats itself.

rg

BESTIARE ET CARNAVAL DANS LA FICTION FERRONJENNE
Normand Doiron


<?e reprends a ma  far;on  le discours de l'ane  a son anier: "Ah miserable! s'ecria le dit ane, si je te reprends a brouter l'herbe  de
man  pre, eh  bien!   j'irai dans  ta  maison  et   je  coucherai  avec
l'finiere."	"L'Impromptu d,es deux chiens,"
Theatre  2.





Le Bestiaire
 
"Il ne  fait que commencer,  ton  carnaval."
 

Le Salut  de l'Irlande.


L'oeuvre  de Jacques  Ferron  se revele entier.1  Suivant  la  comparaison  desor­ mais fameuse, il est, lui aussi, cathedrale.  Certes  les pierres  n'apparaissent  pas toutes si polies, si bien taillees qu'on  n'y puisse decouvrir quelque  imperfection  ou maladresse. Mais un certain marechal  a pris soin  d'asseoir solidement  l'edifice.
Le theme  du salut  en constitue  la  pierre  angulaire,  philosophale: salut  indi­
viduel, de l'ame  et du corps; salut collectif, national,  universe!. Le salut s'accom­ plit sur le mode particulier  de la metamorphose,  dont l'acception  se limitera  pres­ que toujours  ici a la transformation  d'un  animal  en homme  ou  d'un  homme  en animal.  Le conte "Melie et le boeuf" reste exemplaire,  effectuant les deux opera­ tions inverses.2  Nous n'insisterons pas sur la fonction de l'appareil rhetorique.3  On a rapproche  metaphore  et metamorphose.  Pour  notre  part,  nous noterons le role crucial  joue par l'ironie4  dans leur accomplissement.
A l'analyse, le bestiaire ferronien s'avere d'une  surprenante richesse (plus de So
figures animales  dans  les Contes   du   pays incertain). Tante Donatienne,   apres avoir ete trente ans modiste "de  chapeaux  a plume pour  dames de la Societe," se metamorphosera en un perroquet  eponyme presentant  quant  a lui maints carac­ teres de l'humain. L'egalite  de statut  entre  Coco  et  la  fille de  M.  Comtois  est frappante. Coco, faute de parler, comprend  tres bien ce qu'on  lui  dit. On  songe encore a la meprise  qui vaudra  au neveu Wellie de "la  Corde  et  la genisse" de dcmeurer  bon chrctien; a !'identification  selon un decoupage sexuel, du bonhommc Aubertin  a !'original,  et des six filles aux six perruches, dans Cotnoir; ala  permu­  tation  BarbottejFran<;ois  dans  Les  Confitures de  coings;  au  centaure  mythique que forment le cheval et le cavalier du Don  juan  chretien; au Mouftan  du Dodu, devenant  l'oiseau qu'il a tue;  et Agnes, poupoule.

20

FERRON


Le fomenteur  de toutes ces metamorphoses, la Bete par  excellence qui  preside a "cette  ronde  de  formes  en  mutation   perpetuelle,"5    c'est  evidemment,  omni­ present  dans  l'oeuvre,  le  diable,  "Belial,  mandate  sur  terre  pour  organiser  la
Betise" (La  Charrette). La  communaute du  nom  de Belial, chien  de Tinamer dans  L'Amelanchier, maitre  de la nuit  et de ses demons  dans  La Charrette;  le cheval noir de ce dernier  roman; "le Chien gris" des Contes, ou la patte de bouc dans La Chaise du marechal  ferrant, contribuent  a tracer le portrait  traditionnel.
Le diable et Jean  (le)  Goupil procedent en outre a un echange de roles. L'am­ biguite,  que  Ferron  laisse entiere,  relative  au  choix  de  la  majuscule  ou  de  la minuscule,"6  offre  un  modele  du  procede  general  des  metamorphoses.  Ce  "ruse animal" aux  ancetres  medievaux,  "chasse de la  bergerie"  du  pape  Poulin;  cet enfant  expose au  nom d'origine  amerindienne,  reconciliant  les Hauts et les Bas; qu'on  soupc;onne d'etre  le  fils du  "vieux  renard,"  de  "Maurice-le-Malin":  il s'avere  "plus  malin  que  le malin."  On  s'approche  deja  de !'inversion  carnava­  lesque, dont le diable "dupe dans sa duperie" (La Chaise du marechal /errant) ou les gentlemen "chasseurs  chasses" et le renard qui doit "etre  chasseur au lieu d'etre chasse" (Le  Salut de l'lrlande), nous fourissent le paradigme. Notre goupil, doue de la  plus belle eloquence,  voyeur, delateur,  nous le retrouvons  done dans  cette derniere  oeuvre  ou, veritable  totem  de la famille  Haffi.gan, il orne les armoiries irlandaises. Cette fois, c'est Connie qui, operant la metamorphose  inverse, mariant  par  ses amours  les deux  renards,  deviendra  lui-meme  renard,  a la suite  de son pere, sous l'insulte  finale  des policiers. 11 sacrifiera sa vie pour  sauver  l'lrlande, pour le plaisir du "fastueux deploiement de chevaux, de chiens, de chasseurs et de dames" qu'il  commande.
Ces deux  romans  forment  les volets d'un  diptyque  ou  Ferron  prend  plaisir a demesurement  enrichir  le symbolisme du renard.  La thematique de la chasse, largement  developpee dans !'ensemble de l'oeuvre, devient  ici obsedante. Le rap­ prochement   de  la  prostitution   et  de  la  chasse  n'en  constitue  qu'un  exemple. L'Emery  Samuel  de La Chaise du marechal  ferrant est originaire  de Riviere-aux­ Renards. 11 n'est pas jusqu'au  nom de Connie que ne suggere !'opposition goupil/ connil  (de  1'ancien  fran<;ais "lapin")  repondant   a  la  duplication   des renards:
1'Anglais-ruse et l'lrlandais-sincere ( Le Salut  de l'Irlande), le premier finissant
par manger  le second  pour la conservation de 1' "harmonie sociale."
La richesse du bestiaire ferronien  tient, par-dela les lois du conte, a des raisons inherentes a 1'economie generale de la thematique: au role considerable de la medecine confondant dans la puissance du corps l'homme  et l'animal, notamment au moment  decisif de la mort; a la figure centrale,  tantot  attachante et cocasse, tantot  grotesque ou tragique  comme ce Poutre des Grands Soleils sortant  de scene a quatre  pattes, de I'habitant entoure  de ses animaux; en general,  a un homme souvent plus bete que ses betes elles-memes; ala recuperation  des representations amerindiennes. A travers le bestiaire qu'il compose, identifiant, denombrant, nom-

21

FERRON

mant, tel Noe, tel le Cotnoir exalte et lucide fixant l'image  du monde qu'il aban­ donne a sa femme, on imagine un Jacques  Ferron  donnant forme au  pays incer­ tain.  Mais il y a plus:  c'est grace aux animaux que l'homme assurera son salut. Barbotte,  le Christ-chat  des Confitures  de  coings, l'oiseau  sauvegardant  par  sa mort le bonheur  des amants  du Dodu et le cheval sauvant le medecin opiomane  du conte "Les  Mechins," apparaissent  particulierement  probants.

Le Carnaval
Le mythe du deluge dans sa version biblique lie salut et bestiaire:  l'Arche, mais "inversee,"  car  ce sont les animaux  qui  sauveront  l'homme.  L'inversion  s'avere meme la condition du salut. La descente d'Orphee aux enfers prelude a l'assomp­ tion de Redempteur Fauche. Toujours  la mort  doit etre  traversee  pour  arriver  a la vie. Et c'est au  moment ou tout parait  perdu; la mort,  totale et  irremediable,  que  le basculement  se produit,  que  se revele l'arcane, que  la  vie eclate.  C'est l'image  repetee du  printemps sur lequel, dans Cotnoir, la porte condamnee  tout l'hiver s'ouvre ala fin. Son sense se resume dans le schema de type carnavalesque  NAISSANCE-MORT-RESURRECTION. 7   Le temps d'une  nuit, l'oeuvre  de Ferron  nous convie a  une  mascarade  au  terme  de laquelle  une  lumiere  neuve  illumine  un monde regenere.
Les masques  ne dissimulent pas, ils revelent:  une  autre  persona, un  dieu,  un ancetre, le sacre.8  11 faut rapprocher la metamorphose de cette  juxtaposition  des etres, de la transgression de l'individualite  que permet le masque. Sous ce masque, etymologiquement, apparait a nouveau la "sorciere" qui,  telle cette Barbara  fille de Caron  et  nautoniere  de la nuit  dans  La  Charrette, jouera  toujours  un  role determinant dans les ceremonies de passage.
Les figures animales, tantot  assument cette  symbolique  redemptrice, tantot  se
presentent  avec l'homme  dans  un  rapport  d'inversion  carnavalesque. Attardons­
nous a La Charrette: l'ane,  la hyene, le chevreau.
Nul animal plus representatif que l'ane monte par F-A. Campbell et ensuite par la catin. 11 possede cette double fonction  "rabaissante" et "regeneratrice" carac­ teristique  du  schema  carnavalesque  general.  11 devient  protagoniste  d'une  fete carnavalesque,  1'Assouade   (ou  fete  de  1'Ane),  qui  commemorait  la  fuite  en Egypte et que celebre maintenant le couple errant  dans le Vieux  Montreal.
Comme le chacal  et le corbeau  de la demonstration de Levi-Strauss, la hyene permet de resoudre !'opposition Vie/Mort. Mediatrice, elle se nourrit  de la mort mais sans la provoquer, donnant  la promesse que la mort sert la vie. Par ailleurs, la hyene rit  ( c'est meme chez Ferron  sa principale  caracteristique), acte  carna­ valesque par excellence. Et Morciani, hante  par le rire des hyenes du  Canada, se prendra  a l'heure  de sa mort d'un  fou rire qui le metamorphosera.
Le chevreau demeure 1' "emissaire," celui qu'on  doit sacrifier, la mort necessaire
au retour  periodique  de la vie. Pour n'etre  que suggere, le sacrifice n'en  reste pas


22

FERRON


mains  manifeste.  Ferron  s'applique a  associer les chevreaux  accourant dans  la cuisine lors de la naissance du dernier  Rouille, evoques lors de la scene d'amour entre Barbara  et le medecin longueillois, gambadant dans le depotoir-cimetiere, aux termes extremes de !'existence. Au dernier chapitre,  Mme Rouille offre ala veuve un chevreau  qui  finit par  recouvrer  la liberte  au moment  meme ou  Marguerite affirme au  diable  qu'elle  n'a  pas perdu son mari. Chevreaux  et charrette   jouent sensiblement le meme role, celui d'un  symbole ambivalent  de la vie et de la mort.
Pour le rapport  d'inversion  hommefanimal, retenons seulement  Rouille  tirant
la charrette dans laquelle il a depose le cheval.
Le  carnaval   ferronien  s'anime  de  bien  d'autres  scenes encore.  Au  chapitre XVII, Belial avec sa tete de cheval s'entretient  avec le cardinal  a tete de cochon. On  assiste, pour  deborder  des representations  a caractere  theriomorphe, au  ma­ riage d'Ange-Aime  et du travesti renvoyant  d'une  part  a !'inversion  des sexes tres frequente  en periode de carnaval,  d'autre part au Charivari, fete qui marquait les mariages grotesques. On  celebre la parodie de la ceremonie religieuse. Le cabaret est d'abord sacristie, puis eglise. Lebar devient maitre-autel. 11 n'y a pas jusqu-aux propos blasphematoires,  aux  jurons, institutionnalises en  periode de carnaval,  qui ne concourent  a la fete.
La metamorphose constitue l'aventure  d'une nouvelle naissance. Se transformer, mourir pour survivre. Comme le  dernier rire, spasmodique, de Morciani,  l'ultime soupir de Cotnoir  temoigne d'une superposition des etres dont les esprits se croisent au rythme de 1' "haleine  chaude"  des trains, d'une  metamorphose  coincidant tou­ jours avec  le retour  de  la  mort.  Avec elle, c'est  veritablement  Emmanuel  qui investit, qui prend et relaie le souffie extreme et la vie de Cotnoir: "Un billet pour Quebec."  Ce  mythe   polymorphe,  lui-meme  susceptible  de   revetir  differentes formes, celles du changement  perpetuel, de la circulation  des etres les uns dans les autres, voire de la metempsychose dans sa formulation  platonicienne,  il s'exprime dans le gout  que  marque  Ferron  pour les genealogies minutieuses.  F-A. Scot en incarne !'interpretation initiatique. 11 s'inscrit clairement dans sa version de mythe de  croissance   ( agrolunaire)  dans  L'Amelanchier. L'anamnese  salvatrice,   sou­ tenant  toute la narration, restitue dans son integralite le monde de Tinamer. Car si les animaux peuvent sauver l'homme, ils ne possedent toutefois pas cette faculte essentielle au salut final: la  memoire.

On  ne  saurait finir  dans  le passe carle temps  n'a  qu'un mouvement; il  vient  du passe, passe par  le present et va vers l'avenir. On  ne remonte pas  a l'ancien, on en
repart et l'on  rejoint sous l'aiguille de la montre les gens de peu de memoire qui ne sont que  des animaux.-Le Saint-Elias

Or,  pour  echapper  au cycle ferme des renaissances, c'est precisement  la  trans­ formation  capitale  qu'operera Ferron: d'un  mythe rythmique,  repetitif, d'eternel  retour, il fera un mythe du progres. Et si Tinamer  nous raconte son enfance, nous

23

FERRON

previent-elle  des la  premiere page  de  L' Amelanchier, c'est  qu'clle  "le  fait  pour son orientement."

LeGrand Oeuvre seton jacques Ferron

Comment  reduire la serie d'oppositions qu'un Ferron manichei:ste allonge inlas­ sablement?  Le salut  s'accomplira   par  le passage du  pale  devalorise  au  pale  re­ valorise.  La  representation  transfiguree,  et  sans  doute  la  plus  puissante,  de  ce passage qui se creuse entre la vie et la mort, le petit et le grand  village, le bon et le mauvais  cote des choses, c'est le pont, le pont Jacques-Cartier fantastiquement
decrit  dans  La Charrette.  ll est frappant de  constater   a quel  point  l'itineraire symbolique de Ferron correspond a l'analyse de Gilbert Durand: du regime diurne
( glaive)  au regime nocturne  (coupe)  et, de Ia, du denier  au baton  ( du  cycle au progres),  la volonte d'accomplir  ce dernier  passage nous  paraissant  caracteriser en propre d'entreprise  ferronienne.
Dans La Charrette, les premieres evocations de la mort appartiennent au regime
diurne. Ce sont les images du cauchemar,  de la tapiniere,  de l'araignee s'emparant de Dufeutreuille,  de l'hydre participant  a "l'oeuvre de chair." Mais Ferron  prend
soin d'annoncer la metamorphose: "je  me recouchais en recommen'Sant le cocon d'ou  la chenille evoque le papillon."9
Cette nuit ou l'on ne sort "qu'oblige  par  [ses] devoirs professionnels," elle s'euphemise dans le regime nocturne  qui commence avec le chapitre  VI  introduit
par  la chute  du  "je" au "il."  Renversant  les valeurs,  on  entame  "l'hymne  a la
nuit." La mort devient reposante,  maternelle; le lit, nef; Barbara, Marguerite et Adrienne.  Des lors, la nuit n'est plus que magnifique  attente  de l'aube  qui vain­ era finalement  Belial.
De l'euphemisation du temps, on passe naturellement au desir dele controler, par  repetition,  par  progres. Les structures  "synthetiques" abondent.  Retenons
l'image  d"'une des grandes roues a rayons d'ombre  [qui]  se detacha  de la  char­
rette  ... et  rejoignit  le soleil," "embleme  du  devenir  cyclique,  resume  magique qui permet la maitrise du temps.mo
La lumiere  jaillit, victorieuse, une lumiere aurorale,  nouvelle comme la vie de Marguerite. Le cheval noir, personifiant le temps destructeur, fuyant irremediable­ ment,  si vite qu'il  courre  est toujours  devance  par  la  vie qui  dans  son  progri' s triomphe.  La roue est l'image  meme de !'inversion  salvatrice, de ce mystere qui, faisant coi:ncider debut et fin du temps, transmue  la mort en naissance. Le tableau de la temporalite  de Cotnoir illustre ce principe.11 Au moment  ou, dans la chrono­ logie n elle
reste, la derniere apparition  d'Emmanuel n'est pas sans evoquer la lame XXII ou zero du  Tarot, vagabond  representant  le depart  de l'homme  vers d'autres  nais­ sances.

FERRON

Mais  "on  ne se sauve  pas sans faire quelques victimes,"  dira  le procureur  de La Tete  du Roi. 11 faut  un sacrifice pour cette victoire: celui de Taque, du docteur Cotnoir,  de Tante   Elise, du  docteur  Chenier, !'accoucheur qui  en  mourant  fait naitre la patrie. Notre peuple emerge-jamais Ferron  ne le dissimule-du  sang
d'un  genocide amerindien. Et Eurydice sera sacrifiee a son tour, tuee par un autre
cheval  noir  (!'Etoile  blanche)   incarnant  la  vengeance  des manes  de la  grande
nation  Mandan. Ainsi, Orphee,  qui devait l'aller chercher  aux enfers, obtiendra­ t-il son propre  salut.  Le sacrifice est un marche,  un gage,  un  echange, celui du passe contre l'avenir.  lei  encore, "la  philosophic du sacrifice, c'est la philosophic de la maitrise du temps et de l'eclaircissement de l'histoire.m 2
Dans la serie des antagonismes ferroniens, le sacrifice s'oppose anthropologique­
ment  a la chasse dont  nous avons releve !'importance. Les animaux  familiers utili­
sent des techniques  de piegeage pour capturer  la Tinamer deL'Amelanchier  (les
chasses chasseurs). On fait la chasse aux Acadiens des Roses Sauvages. Laguerre devient  chasse  pour  les  Patriotes  perdus  des  Grands  Soleils. Or   Le  Salut  de l'lrlande nous a des le debut  lances sur de fausses pistes. En effet, il ne s'agit  ni
de chasse a courre,  ni de chasse-galerie, ni de chasse-croise mais bien de chasse a
l'homme.  Le renard  survivant  au  Montreal  Hunt  Club  fait  finalement  basculer
la thematique. Le gibier se change en victime.
La  problematique  revolutionnaire   commune  nous  autorise  a rapprocher  ce
roman  de Prochain Episode d'Hubert Aquin. Paul Zumthor  souligne que la ques­
tion  du  carnaval   debouche  sur  celle du  double:   "L'un  et  I'autre, l'un   dans l'autre."13 Non seulement un probleme d'inversion, mais aussi un probleme de coexistence, nous dirions  presque de gemellite. Le visage, tel celui d'Eurydice, a toujours deux faces. Le temps d'une  Fete-Dieu, double est le jeu du procureur  de La Tete  du Roi, se reconnaissant  dans ses deux fils qui "s'opposent  l'un  l'autre." La lutte entre Canadiens-fran(_;ais et Canadiens-anglais  peut se poser, Aquin  nous l'apprend, en termes de suppression du double fascinateur.  "Chasseurs  et chasses finissent toujours  parse ressembler," nous dit le renard  du Salut  de l'lrlande. Au
demeurant, I'oeuvre entier de Ferron reprend a son compte les philosophies erigeant
en principe la lutte  eternelle des contraires. "Un  vieux combat,  celui de la vie et
de la mort.  C'est  toujours  le meme, c'est toujours le seul combat" (Les  Grands
Soleils, III,  iv).
Nul doute  qu'il  n'existe  maints  rapports  entre  cette  philosophic explicite chez Ferron  et  les  philosophies  de  type  alchimique,  telles  qu'elles  culminent   dans l'Europe des XVe et XVIe siecles. Ferron le suggere par les nombreuses references au forgeron ayant toujours  plus ou moins parti lie avec le diable. "[L] a metallurgic s'encadre  dans un univers spirituel ou le Dieu celeste ... est definitivement  evince par le Dieu fort ... ,"14 ou, comme dans Le Ciel de Quebec, olympiens et prome­ theens s'affrontent. Ala  creation  procedant  d'un etre supreme succede la creation par hierogamie et sacrifice. Le mythe alchimique, dont la fonction salvatrice s'avere

FERRON

toujours constitutive, menage  sa place au coeur  de !'oeuvre, soit en tant  que coin­ cidentia oppositorum  revetant tres souvent  chez  Ferron Ia forme  d'un rite nuptial (les amours de  Connie et de Doreen,  celles de  Fran ois
Ciel de Quebec); soit en tant  que  technique qui  vise, en se substituant au  temps, a maitriser Ia nature, a  accelerer  l'histoire. L'ideologie techniciste de  l'alchimie, comme   "prototype de  mythe   progressiste  et  revolutionnaire,"15   ne  laissait   pas d'etre seduisante pour  un acteur  de Ia Revolution tranquille soucieux  de precipiter le rythme  tempore!. Ferron  reussit Ia oil Charles Amand avait  echoue.
Plusieurs images temoignent chez Ferron  de ce glissement  "du scheme  rythmique au mythe  du  progres." D'abord le feu, feu alchimique se combinant a l'eau  dilu­ vienne;  feu  rechauffant le Cadieu  des Contes;  incendie recomposant  l'univers de Leon  de  Portanqueu; feu  des  Grands  Soleils qui   ne  sont  qu'incandescence et symbole  igne,  depuis  les discours  incendiaires des  Rouges,  jusqu'a ce  Fils,  qui enflammera plus tard le vicaire  Lupien, Fils eternellement condamne, tel un nou­  veau  Promethee, a  "bn1ler  vi£ pour  que  le soleil ne s'eteigne pas"  (IV,  i). Puis l'arbre, amelanchier eponyme,  cerisier dans  Papa Boss, mais surtout l'arbre genea­ logique,  tel  ce  rosier  des  Roses Sauvages, ascendance prenant ici !'allure d'une malediction atavique, aux  dimensions  proprement tragiques, qui,  remontant au carnage de  Moncton, pese sur  Ia  famille  jusqu'a ce que  soeur  Agnes  l'en  delivre  et que,  bouclant Ia boucle, Rose-Aimee  epouse  I'Acadien Ronald. Et  finalement l'echelle,  "specialite de Saint-Amable," "dressee  contre  Ia barre du  jour" dans  la Charrette,  "jetee du  ciel sur  Ia  terre" dans  Le  Salut  de l'lrlande, convertie en escabeaux dans  Papa  Boss.
La  volonte  alchimique de  controle  de Ia nature survit  dans  les ideologies  mo­ dernes  liees a l'industrie et  aux sciences experimentales. Ce  projet, encore  utopie  pour  Jean Rivard, dont  les lineaments se dessinent   deja  dans  "Une  vision"  de Louis  Frechette, Ferron  l'exprime comme  un  fait:

une grande mutation s'est faite, qui changera toutes  les mythologies: Ia nature, de mere  toute-puissante qu'elle  etait, devient  Ia fille de  tous les hommes.
-Le  Saint-Elias

Accompagnant le passage  d'une societe  traditionnelle rattachee au  passe,  ras­ suree  par  les cadences regulieres,  a une societe  industrielle et  capitaliste  moderne qui  se projette dans  l'avenir, apparait une  ideologic  du  progres  supplantant Ia vieille ideologic  du  rythme  repetitif  et purement cycliq ue.16
La  thematique d'une  renaissance   periodique apres  transgression, loin  d'etre neuve, constitue l'un  des principes  les plus fertiles d'une litterature qui  se presente comme  !'instrument  ideologique d'election de  cette  societe  traditionnelle encore proche  des rythmes puissants  de Ia nature. La  Rose  Latulipe d'Aubert de  Gaspe est punie  pour  avoir  danse  "sur le Mercredi des Cendres." De meme  Louvigny de Montigny dans  son "Histoire de Loup-Garou" fait  apparaitre Ia bete alors qu'on

FERRON


se trouve  "fair  su' l'Mardi Gras."  Chez Honore  Beaugrand/ 7   Jos le Cook  part courir la chasse-galerie la veille du Jour de l'An, a "l'heure de sauter  a pieds joints pardessus la tete d'un  quart  de lard, de la vieille annee dans la nouvelle." Fran ois Ricard  note dans sa brillante preface !'importance de l'alcool comme element transgressif, et aussi celle du contexte: la fete, cependant  que "toute  l'ordinaire disposition du monde et des chases se renverse." On remarque  la tendance  a sub­ stituer le traditionnel Jour  de l'An  ala Paques  chretienne.  Du  mains sert-il sou­ vent de relais, comme la Noel chez Frechette. En fait, ce qui importe c'est lacon­ science aigiie  d'une  rupture dans le temps. Le Jour  de 1'An du  chapitre  X de Maria Chapdelaine marque  effectivement le point central et tournant de !'oeuvre puisque Maria y apprend  la mort de Fran ois.
sa puissance d'explosion regeneratrice. Le drame se denoue au printemps par l'audacieuse  prosopopee ala faveur de laquelle Maria, veillant le corps de sa mere transfiguree  par la mort,  invoque les manes de ses anoetres. Les contes du XIXe siecle, de meme que le roman  de la terre, ne serait-ce qu'en  raison de la  proble­ matique ou s'installe le genre, ne peuvent se comprendre en dehors de cette thema­ tique d'une  succession reguliere de la vie et de la mort.
Ce  qui  est neuf,  en  revanche,  c'est !'utilisation  qu'en   fait  Ferron.  "Jacques
Ferron a invente ... la folie esperance que le temps finira par arranger l'Histoire."18
En ce sens, non seulement il participe a l'ideologie de la Revolution  tranquille, passant du "respect  des traditions" au "defi du progres,m 9 mais i1 emprunte large­ ment  a l'ideologie renaissante. Car  Ferron  fut sans doute  tres tot  conscient de la double articulation de sa thematique: renaissance remportant periodiquement une victoire sur la mort; Renaissance  en tant  que periode  historique,  certes extreme­ ment ambigiie, mais reunissant tout de meme un ensemble de caracteristiques rela­ tivement  bien definies et sur lesquelles s'accordent  la plupart  des historiens.
Le parallCle doit s'entendre en termes de references explicites, inscrites dans les textes eux-memes, soit a l'histoire,  soit aux  ideologies, soit a la litterature de  la Renaissance. Aussi les auteurs  levent-ils, par leurs prises de position, les difficultes methodologiques  et theoriques  relatives a l'histoire.20  Qu'il  s'agisse de l'esthetique baroque  developpee dans Trou  de memoire, du Shakespeare  d'Aquin ou du Don Quichotte de V-L.  Beaulieu, la  representation  tranche  le noeud  gordien. Souli­ gnons que  c'est souvent  par  volonte de  reaction  contre  les ideologies  issues des
representations medievales  developpees  a l'epoque  precedente,  que  l'epoque  de
"rattrapage" est amenee  a utiliser l'image  d'une  "Renaissance quebecoise."  Mais
cette derniere  doit s'interpreter en definitive dans le cadre  general  d'une  renais­
sance du monde, la conquete des espaces nouveaux repondant  par-dessus les siecles
a celle des nouveaux  mondes que continue  de decouvrir  Le Saint-Elias.21
Ferron  multiplie  les reperes:  la tradition  camavalesque; la  philosophic  alchi­
mique; la question des langues nationales; la formation des grands Etats modernes
(Duplessis, homme  politique  de la Renaissance dans La Chaise du marechal  fer-

FERRON

rant 22 )  ; le mythe  progressiste  d'un temps  ou  "tout a  ete  ramene sur  terre";  le mode  de  reinterpretation de  l'histoire, qu'il  serait   revelateur d'etudier  dans  les essais qu'ici nous avons negliges; et finalement, Ia figure  obsedante, susceptible de resumer  le projet  ferronien: Faust.23
De Marlowe a Lenau, Faust  le "Manicheen," Faust  l'ingenieur, Faust  inquiet, orgueilleux, prometheen, heros de tous les doutes,  aspirant a Ia connaissance uni­
verselle, sauve  par  Marguerite.
Le diable,  specialement dans  La Chaise  du  marechal ferrant, apparait, comme chez Goethe, "victime d'un  deni  de  justice": "I'esprit qui  affirme  doit  triompher de !'esprit negateur."24
Mais  Ferron  a  pris garde  a poser d'abord le probleme de  Ia  redemption dans
toute  son  ambigwte. "Apres  [sa]  mort,  si l'on  daigne alors  [lui]   faire  l'honneur d'un  proces,"25   pourrons-nous accorder au  docteur Ferron un  salut  qu'il  a  labo­ rieusement prepare?

NOTES

1 Je  tiens .a remercier  M. Laurent  Mailhot,  dont  !',erudition  et  les conseils eclaires m'ont  introduit   a !'oeuvre,  et MM.  Stephane  Vachon  et  Maurice  Lachance,  qui furent a l'origine de cette etude.
2  Voir  Gerard   Bessette, "Melie  et  le  boeuf  de  Jacques   Ferron," Modern   Fiction Studies,  22  (automne  I976),   44I-48.  Nous  ne  reviendrons  pas  non  plus  sur  le serpent  et le coq dans Papa Boss, dont traite Daniel  Dery, "Le  Bestiaire dans Papa Boss," Action  nationale, 59, no.  ro  (juin  I970), gg8-Ioo6.

3 "Si le fantastique se sert sans cesse des figures rhetoriques,  c'est qu'il  y a trouve son origine.... Le surnaturel  commence a partir  du  moment  ou  ]'on  glisse des mots aux  choses que ces mots sont censes designer. Les metamorphoses forment  done a
leur tour  une transgression de Ia separation  entre  matiere  et esprit,  telle que gene­
ralement  elle est con ue."                                                          a la litterature  fantas­
tique  (Paris:  Le Seuil, I970),  p. 86 et p. IIg.

4  Pierre  Fontanier, Les Figures du  discours (Paris:   Flammarion, Ig68), pp.  I45s: "L'Ironie consiste a dire par  une raillerie, ou plaisante, ou serieuse, le contraire  de ce qu'on  pense, ou de ce qu'on  veut faire penser."  Voir aussi, a propos des "traits
retenus  par  Bakhtine"  (L'Oeuvre de Franrois Rabelais et la Culture  populaire au MA  et sous la Renaissance  (Paris:  Gallimard,  I970)  "lorsqu'il  parle  le litterature carnavalisee"; Paul Zumthor,  Le Masque et la lumihe; la pohique  des grands rhetoriqueurs,  (Paris:  Le Seuil,  I 978),  p.  I 33:  "Je  subsumerai  ces traditions  sous le terme  rhetorique  d' 'ironie', que  j'elargis jusqu'a lui faire designer toute  rupture intentionnelle d'isotopie:   'ironiquement,' l'etre  s'echange  avec  le paraitre, en  un reciproque  renvoi ambigu."
5   M. Cinotti,  Bosch (Paris:  Les classiques de l'art  Flammarion, I967), p. 95· Rele­ vons au  passage !'indubitable  parente  entre  l'iconographie du  triptyque  le  Chariot de  foin et la symbolique de la Charrette. Voir aussi, C. Kappler, Demons, monstres et merveilles  (Paris:   Payot, I g8o),  p. I 53:  "Le  specialiste des  metamorphoses  est Satan  qui transmet  ,egalement aux sorcieres le pouvoir  de se metamorphoser et de metamorphoser les autres."
6  La Chaise du marechal  ferrant (Montreal: Le Jour,  I972)' p.  I36:  "0 Jeannot, mechant  goupil, tu te ris moi qui ne suis qu'une  pauvre  et humble fille!''

FERRON


7  Schema  donne par  Marie-France Gueusquin, "Le Masque en France," dans Samuel Glotz,  dir.,  Le  Masque dans  la tradition europe,enne,  exposition   du  musee  inter­ national du  carnaval et  du  masque,  Binche,  I3  juin-6 octobre, I975,  pp.  I6I-73· Retenons encore, concernant le bestiaire carnavalesque, Jean Jacquot et Elie Konig­ son, dir.,  Les Fetes de la Renaissance, 3 vol., communications du  I5e colloque inter­ national d',etudes  humanistes, Tours, 10-22  juillet  I972,  Paris, Editions du  CNRS, I975· A notre  connaissance, Ia seule etude soulevant comme  telle  Ia question  des representations carnavalesques dans !'oeuvre de Ferron  est  celle  de  Michel  Guer­ rero, "La tradition carnavalesque dans les contes de Jacques Ferron," Itinbaires, I (juin  I976), pp.  29-36.  Nous avons appris, malheureusement un  peu  tard,  que  M.  Guerrero p11eparait en ce moment une these sur le sujet.
8  G!Otz, p. 2:  "Sans  masque, peut-on affirmer,  pas  de  vrai  carnaval !"  Par  ailleurs, notons  le  rapport genetique qui  existerait entre  rites  funeraires et  fetes  carnava­
lesques, conformement .a !'hypothese de  Meuli: "a l'origine de  Ia mascarade, il y
aurait une  fete  marquant le retour  sur  terre  des anoetres," Glotz,  p. 33· On  songe
,evidemment a !'importance des ceremonies funeraires chez  Ferron, et  notamment
a cette  "ce1.1emonie renversee" qui ouvre  Cotnoir. Pour  Ia fete  de  l'Ane,  voir Bakh­
tine, p. 86s. Pour  le masque, ibid., pp. 36 et 49·
9  La Charrette (Montreal:  Le Jour, 1968), p. I9. Chez  Ferron, "cauchemar," p. I9; "taupiniere," p. I 9; "araignee," p. I 4; "hydre," p. I 5; mort  jmere, pp. I wss; litjnef, p. 62. Chez Gilbert Durand, Les Structures anthropologiques de l'imaginaire (Paris: Bordas,  I969), respectivement, p. 8o, pp.  I22-29, p. 115, p. 116, pp. 269-74, p. 285.
"L'hymne a Ia nuit," Durand, pp. 247-56.
10  Durand, p. 372; voir aussi Bakhtine, p. 19. Pour les representations carnavalesques, Durand p. 355· Pour  le cheval  noir, ibid.,  pp. 78-89.
11 Voir  Rejean Robindoux et  Andre  Renaud, Le  Roman  canadien-franfjais du  ving- tieme  siecle  (Editions de l'Universite d'Ottawa:  CRCCF, I966), pp.  I85-96.
12   Durand, p. 357·
13   Zumthor, p.  I 26; voir aussi Bakhtine, p.  I 3·
14  Mircea E!iade,  Forgerons  et alchimistes  (Paris: Flammarion, I977), p. 24.
15 Durand, p. 349;  "du  scheme  rythmique au  mythe  du  prog1.1es," ibid.,  pp.  378-90.
16 "[L] a fete archai"que relevant d'une  resurrection du  passe pour  ar1.1eter l'histoire, Ia fete  moderne devant servir  en fin de compte  d'anticipation de l'avenir pour accele­ rer  cette  histoire." Jean-Jacques Wonenburger, La  Fete, le  j,eu  et le sacre  (Paris:
Editions J-P. Delagrave, I977), p. I38.
17 La Chasse-galerie  (Montreal: Fides,  I979).
18 And1.1e  Major, Le  Devoir, 30-04-68,  reproduit dans   Jacques Ferron, Theatre  1
(Montreal: Librairie Deom,  I975), p.  I23.
19 Denis  Moniere, Le  Dev,elopp,ement  des ideologies  au  Quebec,· des  origines  a nos jours (Montreal:  Editions QuebecjAmerique, I977), p. 320.
'
21 Voir  Liberte, 6-I3  (septembre I973). "Roman des  Ameriques," Actes  de  la  ren­
contre quebecoise internationale  des  ecrivains,  pp.  I 34S. Pour  les  representations medi,evales,  voir  A-J. Belanger, L'Apolitisme  des ideologies quebecoises; le  grand
tournant de 1934-1936  (Quebec: PUL, I974)·

FERRON


zz La Chaise du marechal  ferrant, p. 155. p. 160; pape  PoulinjBorgia, p. 75· Pour  la reinterpretation de  l'histoire,  voir  la  dedicace de  Ferron a Jacques Hebert dans
Historiettes  (Montreal: Le Jour, 1969): "l'histoire vit  comme un  roman."
zs Wonenburger, p.   147:   "la   volonte  faustienne  de  creation  d'idoles  immanentes, fonctionnant comme substitut de l'archai:que  sacl'e. La  fete  va  etre  prise  dans  un reseau  de  justification de l'Histoire...."
24  Genevieve  Bianquis, Faust a travers quatre siecles (Paris: Droz,  1934),  p. 353·
25  Jacques Ferron, "L'alias du non et du neant," dans  "L'Ecrivain et le politique," Le
Devoir, 19-04-So, p. 21.





GITSKitN WOMitN
 


G. B. Sinclair


charm visible, she enlarges  it small  and  silver, she envelops  it with  growing  visions
until  it's large  enough 	to take  her where  she wants  to go

Gitskan woman,  she steps lightly into  the charm, the canoe  rocks slightly,  under  her  feet
little  fish-net 	to catch the  run-away soul

under the cedars,  a man  has lain  there fifteen  days, he has lain  there
in  vain  his wife's sad  hands
his son's  young  laughter	his eyes lie dying  in  the  embers

a rope  of light, a man's  life
stretching, she cries, from  past  to future then  like a snake, Gitskan  woman
rubs herself against  the rope and  finds the darkness

across  the  water,  her  charm  guides  her in the  canoe  her  song finds her
over  the  water,  she brings  his soul back  to the cedars, she sings his soul back  to the  fire, she sings 	his soul

30


TIME AND SPACE IN ANDRE LANGEVIN'S "L'ELAN D'AMERIQUE"


Richard G. Hodgson



Claire Peabody chante, danse, s'ecoule, moelleuse, alanguie, sous la douche, qui abolit le temps et l'espace....





w.N ANDRi LANGEVIN PUBLISHED L'E/an d'AmJriqu• in 1972, sixteen years after Le Temps des hommes, this technically innovative new novel was not very favorably received by the reading public, and since then it has not  received  the  critical  attention  it deserves. Many  readers  have  found  it  dis­ jointed, esoteric, and  difficult if not impossible to read. 1 Very few critics have been able to see that  beneath  the rambling, chaotic interior  monologues of  which  the novel is composed lies a very carefully constructed set of  interrelationships between the various  points in time  and  the  various  places  inside and  outside  Quebec  to which  constant   reference  is  made.2     The  unordered   and  seemingly  unrelated images, memories and bits of dialogue which make up much of the text repeatedly refer to a limited  number  of experiences in  the lives of the two main characters, Claire  Peabody,  the  Franco-American  wife  of  an  American   industrialist,  and Antoine, a modem  Menaud, maitre draveur. In order to understand the social and other ideological prises de position which Langevin takes in L'Elan d'Amerique,we must first undertake a detailed study of the use of time and space in this very com­ plex novel. Essential elements of any novel, time and  space are of particular  im­ portance in all of  Langevin's  novels, but especially in L'Elan d'Amerique, a text in which  meaning  is  produced  largely  through  the symbolic  use of historical  and fictional events and  real and imaginary  places.
The major  problem which confronts the reader of L'Elan d' Amerique  is due to the fact  that  the events of the novel are presented in an order  which is far from chronological. As in most nouveaux  romans, it is the reader  who must attempt  to reconstruct  a reality which involuntary  memory and the physical condition  of the two main  characters have left in the form of recurring  images and  hazily  recol­ lected  memories.  In  the  first hundred  pages of the  novel, it is largely  the  past

LANGEVIN

experiences of Claire Peabody which are related, not in any coherent  manner,  but rather  as they are  remembered  by a depressed, neurotic  and  inebriated  woman. In the chalet in northern  Quebec  which is the focal point of the novel, Claire has, at the beginning of the novel, just made love to Antoine, the coureur de bois, and
in the shower she begins to recall her past, "livree a l'eau chaude  d'un  flux intem­
porel."3 Later in the novel, Antoine's memories are presented in a somewhat more coherent  way, despite the fact  that  he has  just had  an  attack  of apoplexy. The twelve hours  (approximately)  which  Claire  and  Antoine  spend  together  in  the chalet  is the  basic  time-frame,  the  "present," of  the  novel,  during   which  the previous events in the lives of Claire and Antoine are presented  by the stream-of­ consciousness technique, as images, characters  and experiences float to the surface of "la  vase mouvante  de la memoire."  In  an  undoubtedly  intentional  reference to Faulkner,  Claire  (and  later  Antoine)  abandon  themselves  to "the  sound  and
the fury"  ("au  bruit et a la fureur") of their recollected experiences, which rever­
berate against  "un  espace et un temps aux frontieres  abolies." Only  very careful
re-reading of the novel enables the reader to determine  the sequence of events and their interrelationships.
In  addition  to the apparently  random  order  in  which  the  principal  events of the novel are presented, the various places in which Claire and Antoine have lived, their  respective and  very different "worlds,"  are  not described  in any systematic way. For  example,  Boston  (where  Claire,  the  daughter of  a  French-Canadian mother  and  an  American  father,  grew  up  and  was educated)  and  the  cottage near the sea where she met David  (possibly on Cape Cod)  are both associated in her mind with specific memories, such as the elevated train  tracks above the house where she spent her childhood or the slate-grey colour of the seaside cottage. Simi­ larly, the two very different settings which Antoine vividly remembers, the corrupt,  cosmopolitan  city of  Montreal  and  the  vast  uninhabited expanses  of   northern  Quebec,  are never actually described. In  L'Elan  d'Amerique, space, like  time, is fragmented  and distorted by the functioning  of the human  mind, a  psychological phenomenon  which  most nouveaux  romans seek to describe  through a  radically new use of language.  What makes it possible to make some sense of the unordered  fragents of reality with which the reader is confronted  is the fact that  the number  of specific locations in Quebec and in the north-eastern  United  States  where the events of the novel take place is actually fairly limited.  It is only the chaotic and disconcerting way in which the places are alluded to and the lack of chronological order  in which  the sequence of events is presented  which  make  reading  L'Elan d'Amerique a  very different  experience  from  reading  Langevin's  earlier,  much more traditional novels, like Poussiere sur la ville ( 1953). In attempting to under­  stand  what  Langevin  has tried to achieve in this experimental novel, let us begin by analyzing the various aspects of the physical setting of the novel and their rela­ tionships with fictional (and  historical)  time.

32

LANGEVIN

Of all the places which Claire vividly remembers, her earliest memories are of the working-class neighbourhood of Boston, where she grew up, the daughter  of Rose Greenwood  (originally Boisvert), whose family had emigrated  from Quebec to the northeastern  United  States to find work in the textile factories. The  dark house where she grew up was a place where the economic hardship  was a part of every-day life and  where freedom  was only an ideal. This  part  of Boston, which Claire  remembers  well years after she left it to go to college across the river in Cambridge, represents in Langevin's eyes that part of American society which will always fail to realize its share of the American dream.  It is very important  to the meaning  of the  novel as a whole that  Claire  started  her life as a victim of the in justices of the American socio-economic system and that even after her marriage to Mr.  Peabody,  the  American  industrialist  who "adopts" her,  her  experiences with  individual  Americans   (who  often  exemplify specific  aspects  of  American society)  are always unhappy  and  ultimately catastrophic.
The  physical distance which separates the working-class Boston of Claire's child­
hood from the intellectual,  upper-class world of Cambridge across the St.-Charles River  is not great,  but  the  two settings symbolize two  very different  features  of American  life. At the age of seventeen, Claire goes to college in Cambridge: "I­ park-my-car-in-Harvard-yard." This intellectual  hothouse  ( "serre  chaude")  has a  profound  effect  upon  Claire's  personal and  social development.  It is in  Cam­ bridge that  she discovers the outside world as well as the world of the mind and learns standard French,  the  joual of her  mother's  generation  having  completely disappeared. It  is interesting  that  in  L'Elan  d'Amerique it  is the  female  pro­ tagonist, Claire,  who is the  intellectual  and  it is the  male  protagonist,  Antoine, who personifies animal  instinct  and the basic impulses of  human  life. This situa­ tion is in sharp contrast to that in Poussiere sur la ville, where it is Alain who is the intellectual and Madeleine  who is the wild and uninhibited  creature of instinct. In addition  to  her  intellectual   education,  Claire  also comes into  contact  in  Cam­  bridge  with  the  decadent  America  of the  rg6o's,  personified  by Allan,  a  cruel, arrogant, and  suicidal  sociology student  who exemplifies "une   jeune  Amerique
lancee a la conquete  de la mort."  From  this point in her life, Claire will always
be associated with that  which is decaying in American society. She is permanently tainted with her Americanness-as Antoine tells her, she is "pire qu'une  Anglaise. Une  Americaine !"




sOON AFTER HER YEARS IN  CAMBRIDGE  (it is not clear exactly when), Claire's  parents  are  killed in an  automobile  accident.  Like almost all of Langevin's  characters,  she becomes an orphan,  cut off completely from  her  cul­ tural  heritage  (she has already  been forced to re-learn  French  as a  foreign  Ian-

33

LANGEVIN

guage). It  is at  this point  that  she becomes totally  Americanized,  marries  Mr. Peabody, whose company owns the seaside cottage  at Suoco Pool (as well as the chalet  in  northern   Quebec)   and,  like so many  characters in  recent  Canadian fiction, goes into "un  exil sans retour." It is significant  that  Claire's  marriage  to Mr. Peabody is a business arrangement, "un  mariage  d'affaires." Because of her association with Peabody and her almost entirely American background,  Claire embodies all the negative aspects of American  culture,  particularly  as it has influ­ enced Quebec  society. In  her relationship  with Antoine,  who is the embodiment  of traditional   Quebec  values, can  be seen an  allegorical  confluence  of the  two cultures which does not fail to have disastrous results.
Three  months later, Claire spends the month  of October   (one year before the October  during  which the last events of the novel take place)  in the large slate­ grey cottage at the seaside near Suoco Pool. Throughout the novel, constant refer­ ence is made  to this cottage, to the nearby  beach  and  lighthouse  and  to the sea. In  Claire's  mind,  the sometimes hazily recollected  memories  of the  weeks spent with her lover David in this seaside resort are of supreme importance, for this time period  represents  for  her all that  she has lost : her  innocence,  her  freedom  and David himself, who drowned  (or committed  suicide)  in the sea. This fog-bound coastal  location  is above  all  a  living  symbol  of  purity:   "Les  grandes  marees d'octobre  restituent  au sable  blanc  sa virginite  des  premiers  ages."  The  events which  unfold  during  this first October  of peace  and  happiness  repeatedly  reach the surface of Claire's consciousness, as she remembers "son premier jour de deuil, en octobre, il y a un an," "un  passe tellement  proche qu'il  est impossible qu'il  ne lui appartienne plus." For Claire, this "daughter of  the sea," the sea represents a freedom  which she can no longer attain.  The  physical  (and  spiritual)  distance which  separates  this  New  England  coastal  resort  from  the  chalet  in  northern  Quebec in which she finds herself in this "second" October, the one in which she has met and  slept  with Antoine, is the  point  where  time and  space  converge in L'Elan d'Amerique  in a highly significant manner. Only  a year has passed, but Claire has come a long way, both  physically and spiritually,  from the happy days of her affair with David.
Thus,  Claire now finds herself in northern  Quebec,  in a hunting  chalet  near  a lake, alone with Antoine. It is the second October, the "present" of the beginning of the  novel, the  point at  which the destinies of Claire  and  Antoine  have  con­ verged. To  Claire, it is as if the continent  has shifted  beneath  her and  she finds
herself "etrangere et seule avec l'autre,  a mille milles de Ia mer, dans cette cabine
de douche...." It  is at this point in time and  in this place that  the final tragic events of Claire's life are to take place. A profound  sense of loss of freedom, sym­ bolized  by  the  great  distance  from  the  sea,  has  made  Claire  more  depressed than  usual:

34

LANGEVIN

[Mr. PeabodyJ  n'avait plus qu'a la priver de lamer  eta la mettre au continent sec et a l'eau douce de ce lac ou, une fois encore, octobre a laisse couler un dernier or p1Ue pour le recouvrir aussitot d'une cendre glacee.

The  tundra surrounding the  hunting  chalet  to which she has accompanied  her husband  on a hunting  trip is referred to several times as a sea,4  but it is a tideless sea, which cannot  wash away the past, as had the North Atlantic  at Suoco Pool. Feeling alienated, "une Americaine" despite her French-Canadian ancestry, Claire has come to know Antoine, the other main character  of the novel, whose past is also revealed to the reader  by the technique of interior monologue and whose experiences are related,  much  more directly than  are those of Claire, to the parts of Quebec   (especially  Montreal)  where  he  has  lived and  to specific events  in recent Quebec  history.




IN THE  CHARACTER OF  ANTOINE can be seen the confrontation between two fundamentally different  aspects of Quebec  culture.  Brought  up  to fend for himself as a lumberjack,  hunter, and coureur de bois, Antoine  represents the old Quebec,  the  Quebec  in which individual  physical prowess was the  only means of survival  in a  hostile environment.  This  archetypal  Quebec  hero, born and raised in the forest, comes into contact with modern, industrialized  and Americanized  Quebec  in  Montreal, the  meeting  place of Claire's  America  and his own, rapidly  disappearing traditional values. It is in  Montreal  that  Antoine becomes aware  that  his world, his Quebec,  is on the point of extinction  and  that nothing  will ever be the same.  In  cosmopolitan  Montreal,  he feels out  of place. "C'est  quasiment  l'etranger," as his brother  Hercule  puts it. His contemporaries are members of a lost generation,  "tous fils des bois, nes vagabonds  et libres, ... marins sans voiles au fond  d'un  ocean sans cartes."  In  his life time, Antoine  has seen a complete transformation of Quebec society:

On vous a fait eclater au moins un siecle d'histoire en plein visage. De la culture des cailloux .a la societe d'abondance en une generation.

Montreal, where Antoine meets the Peruvian exotic dancer  Marla,  is both  physic­ ally and symbolically the half-way  point  between  Claire's  urban  America  (New England) and  Antoine's  land  of freedom, the northern  tundra of  Quebec.  As in many  of Langevin's novels, space takes on, in the case of  Montreal, a symbolic dimension which is one of the keys to the meaning of the novel.
The  historical events of the 196o's and  1970's which form  the  background  of Antoine's  remembered  experiences  in  Montreal, this great  manifestation   of the decay of traditional Quebec society, are presented in such a way that it is obvious that  the tragedy  which befalls Antoine, and the moose to which he is often  com-

35

LANGEVIN

pared,  are linked to the tragic fate of contemporary Quebec.  In  L'Elan  d'Ame­ rique, there  is a very close relationship  between  historical  time and  the fictional time-frame  of the novel. To  a much  greater  extent  than  in  his  previous  novels, Langevin  has attempted  to relate  the fictitious  events of  L'Elan  d'Amerique  to the  historical  events which  had  a  profound  effect  on  the  evolution  of modern Quebec.  One of Antoine's earliest memories of the time he spent in  Montreal  is an obvious allusion to the FLQ  bombing of  mailboxes in Westmount  in the early Ig6o's: "Une bombe pete dans une bol:te aux lettres, chez les Anglais." Antoine's memories  of Expo  '67  are  particularly  vivid, as it  was Expo  which  made  him aware  of the  outside  world and  at  the  same  time  of the  fragility  of his world, Quebec  before the Quiet  Revolution :

Tout  cela, c'est Montreal, l''etranger, l'endroit ou il avait decouvert avec accable­ ment et stupeur, l'annee de !'exposition universelle,  a voir tant de touristes de toutes les couleurs et toutes les langues ... a quel point lui et les siens etaient fragiles....

By far the most important  event in recent Quebec  history which Antoine experi­ enced  directly  was the  October  crisis of 1970,  when  the  fragility  of  his world became even more apparent:

Antoine regarde, ecoute, dans une incredulite totale. Ce sont vraiment des etran­
gers. II n'a  lu que des mots anglais sur les tuniques. L'exposition  universelle a
l'envers....

Undermined  by the  massive American  influence  which  Claire  represents,  An­
toine's Quebec  is, like himself, on the verge of annihilation.
In  Langevin's  eyes, what  has happened  to Antoine  and  to  the  world  he has known is part of a phenomenon which extends far  beyond the borders of Quebec. In L'Elan d' Amerique, the primary function  of Maria  del Peru, the exotic dancer Antoine met in Montreal, is to remind the reader that the exploitation and cultural contamination which Quebec  has suffered  at  the  hands  of its American  neigh­ bours have also affected the  rest of the  hemisphere.  Maria,  like  Antoine,  is the victim of forces far stronger than  the desire for freedom.  Maria's name is signifi­ cant  not only because it evokes, ironically, the Virgin  Mary,  but also because the original name of the city of Montreal was Ville-Marie.  An additional  link between the fates of Antoine and Maria and their respective worlds is expressed in the form of frequent allusions to the condor, the South-American bird which, like the moose, has always been a  powerful symbol of freedom. When  the  moose of the  title is killed from  a  helicopter  by Mr.  Peabody,  Antoine  realizes that  his world  is at an end,

... que la ville et ses femelles,  si lointaines soient-elles, ont, depuis longtemps, con­ quis le monde, et que le p,erou, si inaccessible soit-il, et le condor, si haut, et le pois­ son et Maria, si vifs, n'echapperont  jamais aux millions de bees avides....

LANGEVIN


The social and  political changes which Langevin is describing  in L'Elan d'Ame­
rique are also taking place far outside the confines of Quebec.
This  brings us to what  is by far  the most moving and  dramatic scene of the novel, the killing of the moose with a semi-automatic  rifle, an event which shocks Antoine and  proves to him that  he is powerless to overcome the forces which are encroaching  on his world. The  death  of the moose is presented as an apocalyptic event, signalling the end of the world: "L'echine du male se rompt dans un beugle­ ment de fin du monde...." The  entire forest seems to react  to this crime against Nature,  to this transgression of all the laws of the tundra:
c'est  toute  la for@t qui  hurle, des pierres a la cime des arbres,  et le bouillonnement du  lac qui  s'offre  tout  grand  devant le canot  dans  une chute de vent  verticale qui
le projette a folle allure sur l'ecume noire, toute  la foret qui s'ouvre  dans  un dechire­
ment  de fin du monde....

For  Langevin,  this event symbolizes everything which has happened  to Quebec, everything which has transformed  Antoine's world into that  of Claire. Even more than the October  Crisis, this tragic event shows that there can be no turning  back
-the tide has turned  and  Quebec  has lost its battle for cultural  survival.5
Following the death  of the moose, the destinies of Claire  and  of Antoine  are also sealed.  Unable   to  continue   to  exist,  Claire  commits  suicide  by  jumping through  the open  door of the Cessna, and drowns in the lake, seeking the same fate as that  of David,  one year earlier. From the point of view of time, the novel ends soon after  it began,  the  previous lives of Claire and  Antoine  having  passed before their respective consciousnesses, but the time elapsed being only half a day. It can therefore be said that  the structure  of L'Elan d'Amerique  is essentially cir­ cular. At the beginning  of the novel, Claire had felt relaxed in the shower, "taus
muscles relaches, absente  a elle-meme, elle £lotte dans  un  temps  circulaire...."
The fluctuation  between past and present and particularly between "this" October
and the October  of the previous year in New England  has revealed to the reader much  about  Claire's  past and  the various places in which  the drama  of her life was carried  out. In the case of Antoine, the future  is even bleaker than  it would have been for Claire. The  death  of the moose has signalled the end of his world, the end of freedom, the end of the road.
Unlike his earlier, more traditional  novels, Langevin's  L'Elan d'Amerique  is a
nouveau  roman,' 6  a novel whose structure  is not based on the narration  of a linear series of  events  but  rather   on  the  interrelationships  between  time  and  space, between  specific points  in  fictional  and  historical  time  and  real  and  imaginary places. Traditional narrative forms  had  sufficed to depict  the  old  Quebec,  the Quebec  of Antoine's  youth, but to evoke the present situation  in Quebec  and  the dissolution of traditional values, Langevin chose a radically  new form of fiction. 7
In  L'Elan d'Amerique,  his vision of the cultural  dilemma of Quebec  in the years


37

LANGEVIN

following  the  October crisis is presented  in a form  which  is at least  as disturbing to the  reader  as  his pessimistic view of the  problems faced  by Quebecers in  the early 197o's.  Through the symbolic use of the physical  settings in which  the action of the  novel  takes  place  and  by creating close links  between  fictional   time   ( "le temps  de  Ia  fiction")  and  historical  time,  Langevin  has  produced  a  powerful novel,  whose  merits  far  outweigh  the  difficulties  which  the  reader  initially  faces. Like any good novel, L'Elan d'Amerique is meant to be read several times, for it is only through re-reading that  the meaning of the  novel  emerges.

NOTES

1 The problems encountered by the reader of L'Elan d' Amerique are well summarized in Gerard  Bessette's long review article entitled  "L' Elan d' Amerique  dans !'oeuvre d'Andre Langevin"  in Livres et auteurs quebecois  (I 972),  pp.  I 2-33. As Bessette points out, "sa comprehension, meme sommaire, exige une seconde lecture,"  p. I2.
2  In an interesting  study of narrative  techniques  in L'Elan  d'Amerique, Denis Saint­ Jacques  points out  that  in  this novel there  is much  which  is not obvious  on first reading,  "le  hasard  de  la  fiction  ne  pouvant   etre  qu'un subterfuge  ..."  (Denis Saint-Jacques, "L'Elan d' Amerique," Etudes litteraires, 6, no.  2  [aoilt  I 973], 262).
3 Andre Langevin,  L'Elan d' Amerique  (Montl'eal: Cercle du livre de France,  I 972).
4  For example, "cette mer rocheuse" (p. 106); "lamer plate de la toundra" (p. I8I). As Andre Gaulin  points out, the killing of the moose also has metaphysical implica-
tions:  "Tous  les personnages sont saisis de vertige  devant  cette  fin de monde....
Le monde est d'autant plus absurde que l'homme  appara1t comme le plus precieux
collaborateur de la mort."  (Andre Gaulin,  "La  Vision du  monde d'Andre Lange­
vin," Etudes litteraires, 6, No. 2  [aoilt  I973],  I65).
6   "La structure de L'Elan d' Amerique ... pourrait  en effet etre assimile au nouveau roman,  car ce recit rompt  avec la convention  romanesque." (Gabrielle  Pascal, La Quete  de l'identite  chez Andre  Langevin  [Montl'eal: Aquila,  I976],  p. 3).
7   "Avec l'age, les jeux de la fiction deviennent savants chez Langevin" (Saint-Jacques, p. 257).




CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075  WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T 1W5 / 228-4741


g8


LE FANTASTIQUE CHEZ ROCH CARRIER ET JACQUES BENOIT
Estelle Dansereau

Il n'est ni necessaire, ni suffisant de peindre l'extraordinaire  pour atteindre  au  fantastique. L'evenement  le plus insolite, s'il est seul dans  un  monde  gouverne  par les lois, rentre  de  lui-meme  dans l'ordre universel.
Sartr.e, Situations I.



LE PRIX DE LA   PROVINCE  DE  QUEBEC   dans  Ia  section  de; oeuvres de !'imagination a ete accorde en 1965 a Roch Carrier  pour  ]olis Deuils et en  Ig68  a Jacques  Benoit pour  ]os Carbone. Depuis chacun  a demontre  dans ses autres  oeuvres le souci de Ia realite et du fantastique.  Les critiques ont carac­ terise les oeuvres  de  Carrier  "realisme  fantastique"; celles de  Benoit  "realisme macabre," "histoires rocambolesques"  et "recit fantastique." Bien que les appella­ tions soient diverses, deux mots dominent: realisme et fantastique, traits qui  pa­ raissent contradictoires. C'est  par Ia combination  qu'en  fait I'auteur que ces deux peuvent  caracteriser  un seul texte. Chacun  sait que toute oeuvre litteraire  est une creation de !'imagination. Et dans le domaine du fantastique, l'ecrivain  peut intro­ duire  des evenements  ou des personnages irreels, bizarres ou surnaturels qui  co­ toient  des evenements  banals  ou  ordinaires. Tout  evenement  qui  ne suit  pas les lois naturelles  connues, qui viole nos habitudes,  peut etre qualifie de fantastique. Les moyens dont  se sert  l'ecrivain  pour integrer  le fantastique au  texte  et l'effet produit  par ce procede font  partie de notre appreciation  globale de l'oeuvre.1 Un des moyens les plus souvent  utilises au  vingtieme siecle est le grotesque  qui  est caracterise  par l'exageration bizarre qui  peut a Ia fois susciter le rire et choquer le lecteur  par sa verite.
En Amerique  Latine, les oeuvres d'ecrivains tels que Jorge Luis Borges, Gabriel Garcia   Marquez   et  Jose  Marla   Arguedas  ont  popularise  le  realisme  magique jusqu'a  ce qu'il  devienne synonyme du nouveau roman  hispano-americain. Ainsi, le traitement  subjectif de Ia realite cree un effet de mystere, de magie. Le tout fonctionne  comme  une  metaphore qui traduit  Ia realite  turbulente d'une  societe nouvelle.  De  meme  au  Quebec,  les innovations  de  Carrier   ont  ete  accueillies comme un souffle nouveau,  un espoir de creativite et d'imagination, une ouverture sur  Ia litterature. Les oeuvres de Benoit, mains accessibles et  plus etranges, sont egalement remarquables pour leur authenticite et leur originalite. Afin de le demontrer, nous limiterons notre etude a quelques oeuvres choisies pour leur em-


39

CARRIER & BENOIT

ploi du fantastique tel que nous l'entendons: Il est par la, le solei! ct Le Jardin des delices de Roch  Carrier, et Patience et Firlipon et Les Princes de Jacques  Benoit.
Carrier  et Benoit presentent dans leurs romans  un monde  a la fois absurde  et cruel;  un  monde  ou  la  transcendance,  meme  l'evasion,  sont  impossibles.  Mais l'emploi qu'ils font du fantastique  dans leurs oeuvres est si different qu'il est neces­ saire de discuter de chaque auteur individuellement. Carrier  se sert de trois formes du fantastique: le reve, les personnages etranges  et  l'exageration  d'evenements.
Le r·eve, selon Franz Hellens,est un phenomene  generateur  du fantastique reel.2
Selon ce procede,  un element qui  figure dans  la  narration est isoie et sa valeur symbolique est developpee dans le r·eve. Dans LaGuerre, Yes  Sir!,  le cercueil de Corriveau,  dans lequel Henri voit tout son village penetrer,  devient symbole de la mort,  de  cette  mort  qui,  un  jour,  unifiera  les quebecois  et  les soldats  anglais. L'homme-bottine, dans  le  reve d'Il  est  par la, le  solei!, devient  le symbole  du travailleur  opprime  qui est assujeti par son travail.  La  bottine  afire  a  Philibert, dans le reve, la revanche qu'il  ne peut  pas se permettre  dans  la realite:  "Je  me suis elance  comme  un sabot de cheval et  je me suis enfonce  entre  les fesses du contremaitre. Je me suis reveille ace moment-la.  J'etais  plus une bottine, mais un homme.  Mais  je sentais  encore  le cuir...."3    Le  reve  devient,  non  une  vision gratuite,  mais  un  moyen  par  lequel  l'auteur peut  demontrer sa  perception  du monde quebecois:  une position sociale inferieure  qui n'est que prison et angoisse.
La  Neuvieme  Merveille  du  Monde  est presque  le seul  personnage,  dans  les
romans de Carrier,  qui s'approche  du fantastique. Ce colosse, cet homme  d'acier, lance un defi a ceux qui payent pour le frapper. Mais ce geant,  peut a peu, s'hu­ manise:  Boris commence  a etre  sensible aux  douleurs,  le sang  coule  et  enfin il doit  s'echapper. Boris est, selon  Philibert,  une  richesse  naturelle  qu'on  a  trap  exploitee et qu'on  a enfin perdue.4
Ce sont, cependant, les evenements bizarres qui caracterisent l'emploi  du  fan­ tastique  dans les romans de Carrier.  Fidele a son style dans  Ia trilogie, l'humour nair  et le grotesque  abondent.  Carrier  se sert  de  representations  illogiques pour souligner certains themes. Le Portuguais, par exemple, qui a ose s'offrir en sacrifice, represente l'homme  pensant qui ne peut plus continuer  a  participer  au viol de la terre  quebecoise:  ''Si  on etait  pas fous, on ferait  comme  le Portuguais, ct toute cette  bapteme  de  ferraille  qu'on  est en  train  de  tricoter  pour  les riches  serait arrosee d'une  pluie de viande humaine  hachee ala dynamite."5  La realite sociale, presentee sous une forme si brutale,  ne peut que choquer  et eveiller le lecteur.
Le  deuxieme  evenement  insolite  est  introduit   Iars  de  la  mort  de  Philibert. L'auteur permet au lecteur de partager  Ia douleur  de Philibert: le sang qui coule "comme  un  fleuve"6   suggere une immolation  necessaire pour  la  redemption   du peuple quebecois:

Le sang coule sur les montagnes, arrache les villages,  innonde la ville;  la mer  ouvre de grands yeux erail1es.

CARRIER & BENOIT


Le sang brule les moissons, emporte  les arbres et les pierres, deracine  les gratte­ ciel, Phil ne peut plus Iutter, tant d'efforts l'ont epuise, un homme seul ne peut  rien, il ferme les yeux, il serre les levres, ramene les bras le long de son corps et accepte  de se noyer sans regret ni colere. II n'a plus Ia force de refuser. 7

Done,  Philibert, par  cette  presentation symbolique  de sa mort,  marque la fin d'un Quebec passe.  Un  nouveau Quebec doit  naitre: "Il est  par  la,  le soleil."  Cette derniere pensee de Philibert promet  la fin de la souffrance, de !'humiliation et de
!'exploitation et annonce l'avenement d'une ere plus genereuse.  Le milieu  baroque ainsi  cree  complete les innombrables images  grotesques et  satiriques permettant ainsi  a l'auteur  d'evoquer symboliquement les maux  sociaux  avant le reveil.
Tandis que  les personnages et  les evenements  d'Il est  par La, le solei! etaient
encore  essentiellement realistes,  le monde  presente  dans  Le  Jardin des delices est desordonne, tumultueux; les hommes  agissent instinctivement plutot  que logique­
ment.  Les villageois  s'affolent quand ils entendent les paroles  de  J. J. Bourdage
qui  leur  promet:
L'paradis terrestre, c',etait pas dans le passe; c'est devant nous. La science le prouve. Sortez de votre maudit  passe.... Debarrassez-vous du passe. L'avenir  est icitte. Y a plus d'or  dans vos montagnes  qu'y a d'enfants  dans votre descendance.8

Le roman entier  joue sur  la dichotomie orjamour  et tousles  personnages agissent en fonction  de l'un  ou de I'autre. Pour les villageois, la promesse  de l'or  represente la  naissance, le  commencement d'une  vie douce  et  confortable. Par   contre, le notaire, qui  a  toujours eu  de  l'or,  cherche  l'amour. La  jungle  romanesque qui s'anime est  riche  en  fantastique, en  grotesque, en  satire, en  personnages. Ainsi, Demeryse, qui  ne  peut  pas se lever  depuis  sept  ans,  delivre  miraculeusement du feu l'or  de l'eglise; le nouveau professeur lance,  parses rituels  sensuels, !'invasion par  les zizis japonais; Gros-Douillette qui  a mis le feu  a l'eglise,  est brUle vivant dans  cette eglise qu'il  avait  deja  incendiee; les villageois brO.lent leurs granges afin de rompre avec  le passe;  et ils parient  sur l'or  qu'ils  n'ont pas encore  trouve. Ces actes  illogiques  accentuent le  tragi-comique du  roman   comme  le soulignent  les paroles du  jeune etudiant sabre: "Tu viens acheter  not'patrimoine, terre  par  terre pour  le restituer au grand capitalisme tentaculaire et multinational. Bourdage, t'es un traitre ala nation quebecoise."9  L'absence de charite, de generosite  et d'amour dans  le roman met  en  valeur  les dernieres  paroles  du  notaire: "L'or, c'est  de  la lumiere, n'est-ce  pas? Si vous ne pouvez pas trouver  la lumiere sur Ia terre, vous ne pourrez  pas la trouver dans  la terre.mo Symboliquement, Bourdage est crucifie  et transporte hors  du  village  sur  le toit  de sa Cadillac blanche. Cet  acte  inhumain devient  ainsi !'indication d'une action  positive, du refus de se laisser exploiter.
A LORS QUE  CHEZ CARRIER le fantastique est toujours accom­
pagne  du  grotesque, chez  Benoit,  au  contraire, i1 fonctionne plutot  comme struc-

CARRIER & BENOIT

ture. Dans son premier roman  ]os Carbone, l'auteur cree un milieu idylliquc:  Ia fmit  ou habitent  des etres qui  cherchent  Ia solitude  et l'harmonie. Ce n'est  que lorsque Ia realite penetre cette idylle que Ia violence domine. Benoit cree souvent des personnages  irreels ou  excessifs; il fabrique   une  realite  a  Ia fois etrange  et connue.
Dans Patience  et Firlipon, un roman d'amour, Benoit se sert de Ia structure  du
conte de fees tout  en situant  l'action  non dans  un  passe heroique  mais dans  un futur  concret. Cependant, tous les evenements sont controles par un realisme exi­ geant, suscitant  une ambiguite frappante. Patience,  Ia belle innocente,  ne possede pas une beaute  extraordinaire: elle est decrite  trap  minutieusement pour  exercer le charme  et le mystere de Ia Belle des contes :

Sa peau etait  blanche, cremeuse, ses cheveux, blonds et touffus, tombaient  libre­ ment sur ses ,epaules.... Ou plutot, elle etait belle, mais de cette beaute emouvante, chaude et fondante, qui fait dire d'une femme qu'elle a l'air  confortable.... Les
seins, la taille, les bras, les jambes, le ventre etaient  a l'avenant,  bien formes mais
sans rien de vraiment remarquable. Musdee, mais a point, rondelette, mais a peine,
c'etait, comme on dit, une femme mang,eable.11

Mais deja au debut  du roman,  Patience perd cette  purete  et cette innocence  qui Ia distinguaient  des autres femmes, devenant,  au  cours du  recit, de plus en plus ordinaire.   Firlipon  Roger,  l'amant, nomme  aussi  "le  Gorille,"  "n'etait pas  bel homme, loin de Ia.m 2  Ce heros ne possede ni Ia beaute,  ni Ia grace typiques des chevaliers des contes de fees; son aspect physique contredit  plutot son role d'amant irresistible :

La charpente etait massive, presque demesuree, les epaules, plus larges que le tronc etait  long, faisaient penser a une porte de coffre-fort, les traits avaient  quelque
chose epais et de lourd qui l'aurait  fait  passer pour  un demesure, n'eussent ete deux yeux noirs au regard pen;ant.13

Firlipon  n'est  ni brave,  ni heroique:  il est un  seducteur   brutal.  Son  travail,  Ia preparation  d'une   modeste  plaquette   historique   qui  }'oblige  a  consulter  cent
quarante-trois tonnes de livres, est banal, inutile  et ridicule.
Apres  avoir  seduit  Patience,  profitant  d'un  soir  ou  celle-d  regardait   le  feu d'artifice qui l'avait  mise dans un etat  d'excitation, Firlipon  tombe finalement amoureux.  Au lieu de parcourir le monde a Ia recherche  d'exploits  heroiques afin d'etre  digne de sa belle innocente,  Firlipon  parcourt  Ia ville, detruisant  tout, vio­ lant et battant des inconnus, echappant aux centaines  de gendarmes  qui le  pour­ suivent. La declaration  d'amour  qui suit ces evenements  annonce  non l'extase  du couple, mais le retour  au banal et au quotidien, un quotidien presque grotesque. L'exemple  le  plus  pousse est le  mariage  des  amants  qui  devient  une  occasion
d'exces a Ia Fellini et au cours duquelle marie  charme  deux femmes dans Ia cui­
sine tandis que Ia mariee est violee par les locataires.  Dans le dernier  chapitre,  le

42

CARRIER & BENOIT

reve de  Firlipon,  peuple  de  betes fabuleuses  et d'une  femme  blonde,  contraste avec le realisme exigeant du conte.
En bref, Benoit a reussi a respecter la forme du conte de fees tout en violant le
contenu  traditionnel. C'est  par le moyen d'un  style plein de grace et de pudeur,
par lequel il decrit scrupuleusement  les actions et les pensees des personnages que Benoit joue avec la forme traditionnelle  et qu'il fait la satire implicite de la societe actuelle.
Tandis que dans Les Voleurs Benoit nous donne la deformation, ou le contraire, du bildungsroman traditionnel, dans Les Princes, nomme d'apres  le traite politique de Machiavel,  il propose ce qui d'abord  parait etre une utopie. 11 cree des le debut une  societe insulaire,  bien  hierarchisee,  peuplee  d'etres  insolites:   des  Hommes Bleus, des monstres, des chiens qui  parlent  et se gouvernent.  Bien que  ces etres soient etranges, Benoit, en adoptant un style sabre et rigoureux, semble, au debut, jouer le role d'historien. 11 cree pour  nous un  monde  nouveau  et en presente le milieu, les habitants, les coutumes, et les lois. Egalement,  la carte  de la ville qui precede le roman,  indiquant quartiers,  rivieres, voie, et chateau,  donne  plus de credibilite au recit. Les chiens sont des etres pensants qui font partie d'une hierar­ chie sociale bien  definie, dont !'instance  supreme  est le Grand  Conseil.  Ainsi le fantastique est ente sur la realite.
Les maximes de la morale traditionnelle,  etablies dans le roman  sous l'egide de "la loi," ne sont pas respectees. Un acte, interdit par cette loi, declenche I'action: Ronule, un des Hommes Bleus, tue un chien et le devore. Le fantastique, qui  joue
un role dans la creation  de cette societe utopique,  ne tarde  pas cependant  a etre
supplante par  la realite.  Franc;ois Ricard  a perc;u avec exactitude  le passage du fantastique au reel et l'effet de ce mouvement sur le lecteur:
Le  depaysement, qui  a d'abord pu  rassurer  le lecteur  en  lui  permettant de  main­ tenir  entre lui-meme et ce monde  de cruaute une confortable distance, ne conserve  pas bien  longtemps cette  vertu  protectrice. L'univers romanesque, en effet, a beau etre  aussi etrange et  irreel  qu'on voudra, sa description et  Ia  narration des ev.ene­ ments  qui s'y produisent se fait avec tant  de  justesse et tant de coherence, et sur un ton  si uni  et  si depourvu de  tout  vain  eclat  comme  de  toute   intention d'epater, que  l'invraisemblance, au  bout  de quelques pages, devient de  mains  en  moins  evi­ dente, de  moins  en  mains  sensible,  au  point  que  le lecteur a  tot  fait  de  l'oublier presque  compli  tement
par  le plus  realiste  des recits.14
11 n'y a aucune  indication  de la part de Benoit, ni de la part des personnages, que le recit est invraisemblable.  Tout  evenement, tout illogique qu'il  paraisse, est  pre­ sente comme un fait indisputable et done doit etre accepte comme tel par le lecteur. L'utopie,  annoncee  dans  le deuxieme  chapitre,  sombre  dans  le desordre  le  plus inhumain. Le regne du plus fort, designe dans le roman  par le decret  non-officiel "devore  ou tu seras devore,"  rappelle la deformation  moderne  du  traite politique
de Machiavel.  Pousse a son degre extreme, cette regle n'apporte pas de regne uni

43

CARRIER & BENOIT

et puissant, mais Ia destruction presque totale des chiens et celle de l'ingenieur  du massacre, Kroknell. Bien que cette oeuvre appartienne au genre fantastique, elle ne respecte  pas cependant  un  element  essentiel:  ce qui  Irwin  appelle  Ie jeu. 15
Pour Benoit, le jeu, si jeu il y a, est en realite un stratageme qui cache des inten­
tions serieuses: a savoir, une IC($on morale.
La tache  de l'ecrivain  quebecois, telle que l'explique  Benoit, serait  de "tracer un portrait  vrai des Quebecois, un portrait  qui fasse Ia part  des chases, qui  rende compte de nos plaies comme de nos zones de chair intactes.m6   II est necessaire de dire  Ia verite  sur  I'homme  quebecois  afin  de  "precipiter l'effritement   de  cette image avilissante de nous-memes que nous avons heritee de nos maitres, c'est hater notre liberation  a tous."17 Benoit, comme Carrier,  con oit
fonction de Ia purification, de l'exorcisme que peut exercer un realisme impitoyable. Chez Carrier,  le grotesque et le fantastique  sont des procedes litteraires  essentiels a Ia demystification de Ia societe quebecoise. Le grotesque  distingue les traits mythifies du Quebecois tandis que le fantastique souligne les actes et les perceptions qui, en realite,  ne sont pas encore  realisables mais qui  annoncent deja  un  Que­ becois libre et sur de lui-meme. Dans les oeuvres de Benoit, le fantastique devient plus complique  car il penetre Ia structure  meme du recit. Fran'Sois Ricard a bien reconnu  Ia discipline et Ia maitrise du metier que  possede Benoit:  "Qu'est-ce, en effet, que Les Princes sinon !'elaboration  d'un  vaste univers imaginaire  dont  toute Ia coherence et le fonctionnement  dependent  a chaque instant  de certaines  con­ ventions prealables, rigoureusement etablies au debut de Ia narration et respectees ensuite de fa<;on quasi systematique?"18   Le theme  structural du  roman  est com­ plete par Ia forme litteraire elle-meme. L'oeuvre qui en resulte demande  du lecteur une  sensibilite  et  une  connaissance  peu  ordinaires.  C'est  pourquoi  !'oeuvre  de Carrier  continue a charmer de nombreux lecteurs; elle leur est plus accessible. Les images  grotesques,  Ies evenements  fantastiques   ne  masquent   pas  Ia  narration; l'humeur, bien que  passager, rachete  un  recit qui  risque de deprimer complete­ ment. Dans les romans de Benoit, au contraire, rien n'intervient pour reduire chez le lecteur l'intensite et I'accablement  de sa vision du monde.

NOTES

1 Franz Hellens souligne ceci: "comme le poetique, le fantastique  n'est  qu'un  des caracreres de !'oeuvre litteraire. C'est une fac;on de voir, de sentir, d'imaginer," dans Le Fantastique reel (Bruxelles: Sodi, I967), p. I  I.
2   Ibid., p. 6I.
3 Roch Carrier, ll est  par la, le solei[ (Montveal:  Editions du Jour,  1970), p. 65.
4   Ibid., p. I 09.
5  Ibid., p. 123.
6  Ibid., p. I 35·
7  Ibid., p. I 36.
8  Roch Carrier, Le Jardin des delices (Montreal:  La Presse, I975), p. 8.

44

CARRIER & BENOIT


9  Ibid.,  p. 174·
10 Ibid.,  pp.  209-ro.
11 Jacques Benoit,  Patience et Firlipon (Montreal: Editions du  Jour, I 970),  p. I I.
12 Ibid.,  p. I3.
13 Ibid.
14  "Deux romanciers de trente ans,"  Liberte,  I6, no. 2 ( I974L  95-96.
15 W.  R.  Irwin, The   Game  of  the  Impossible:  A  Rhetoric   of Fantasy  (Chicago: Univ. of Illinois  Press,  I976), p. I90.
16 "La  Tache du  romancier,'' Liberte,  I3, no. 2  ( I97 I), 72.
11 Ibid.
18  Ricard, p. 97·


THE JIL PURDY POEM IN THE JITHENS JIRCHJIEOLOGICJIL MUSEUM:
Douglas Barbour

another too long hot day in Athens & im unhappy with  the  place 	these people  not the greeks i know in  books or on Kriti     not  know  but  meet  feeling somehow safely  at  home    not  at  home
but  feeling  like  that 	not  here    Athens
is out  to get me    my tourist  drachmae till we enter the relative  coolness of
the  archeological museum

wander among the statues  &  jewelry 	the armour of too many  ancient wars    corpses fed  back  to earth     their  coverings only
to be dug  up for this display

& then  in  one  room some perfect marble physiques behind me
i find it:
on the wall    a single arm    the  hand gesticulating   finger  lifted 	(no    not  that 	but) as the man's rhetoric lifted  the crowd

& so waking  too early  next  morning
as the  men  yell to assemble  the  market
just behind our 'quiet in the centre  of town' hotel i know 	that  arm  was for someone    yes

45

POEM

the al purdy  dream  poem  announces
& yet you will have  to do    you know what  such a long lost arm  would  mean

& the  al purdy  dream  poem  begins  to speak of those centuries lost    when  the  lost
arm  gestured  lonely deep in earth &
now it's in the open  air 	(more  or less)
but still    alone
not  just the  sculptor long  dead
& unknown  but  the sculpture	that
orator   philosopher  whomever	hortative before  his audience	&
there  it is    lonely thru  the eons
that  arm  so full of human gesture

as the  crowd  rose & roared  approval the  man's  eyes bright  with  promise (&  the artist's  too    promising
what  immortality to that  famous  speech we never heard)
only the al purdy dream poem wandering too the world looking
for such signs of a human past broken  as all people  are  broken
by the  earth  which  crushes  stone  or smooth marble

that  arm  spoke to me
or:	the al purdy  dream  poem  did

saying    it is like that     it is always  like that
drinking cold cretan  wine in Aghia  Galini
cold  canadian beer in Ameliasburg
& wondering about  the dark 	the  arm in the dirt  now
speaking so softly    i cant  quite  hear

so much  is lost    & yet so much is found
sometimes  angrily  awake
in a city you dislike & wont  ever comprehend too early  in the  hot  morning
flies buzzing above  you in the still  dark  room

june 1978


GUILT

The Prison of This World
 






Jennifer Waelti-Walters




IN ALL   HER  EARLY woRK, Marie-Claire Bl.US is bscinated by
three  major  themes:  sin, guilt and  powerlessness, but  nowhere  are  their  roles in
Quebec society schematised  as clearly as in The Execution ( 1968)/ her first play. On  the surface  The  Execution is the story of an absurd  and  gratuitous  murder set in a boys' boarding-school,  and  as such its action is brutally  disconcerting  in the manner  of that  of Gide's Lafcadio in Les Caves du Vatican and the theme of Camus'  Le M alentendu. It is a very stylized piece, however, in which there is far too much  discussion and  too little action  to provide  a  gripping  drama. Clearly then  it should be read otherwise and it seems, upon reflection, that  the play is in fact a description  and  indictment  of Quebec  society, its values and  above all its codes of behaviour  both implicit and  explicit.
The  Execution presents a school run by monks-a society in which values are
taught  to  men  by men;  a society controlled  by the  church  and  in  which  that church  is felt  as  the  dominating force.  It  is, however,  a  force  which  remains invisible. This  is thus  a  male  society to  which  women  are  extraneous.  Indeed women appear  very briefly in the play in the roles traditionally  attributed to them by the Church: mother  and sister -virgin nun  (and so sister in both her forms). In  both cases they are used or perceived as victims of their  men-folk and,  true  to tradition,  adore  their sons and brothers while being abused by them both materi­ ally and emotionally.
The  character-structure of the  play thus  provides a  parody  of  the  world  as
described  in  Christian   writing.  And  The  Execution  provides  a  parody  of  the church's  teaching  also. Eric, the child who is perfectly innocent is killed, Lancelot and  D'Argenteuil, imperfect  but  innocent  people, are  punished  and  Kent,  the truly wicked one amongst  them,  emerges unharmed. The  question  is, of course, whether  divine  justice is less imperfect  than  that  of the  Church  which allows a Christ-figure  to be sacrificed again within its very walls.
The  Catholic  church  is therefore the major  object of criticism. Its doctrine  of original sin is illustrated  and  many  aspects of guilt are explored,  particularly  in the discussions between Kent who instigated the murder and thus is morally guilty and  Stephane  who carries  it out  and  therefore  is legally guilty. The  concept  of duality  that  is the very basis of Christian  culture is drawn  to our  attention  over


47

BLAIS

and  over again,  as the opposition  between sin and  purity,  guilt  and  innocence, and  the role of the Devil in Christianity  are discussed and  illustrated.
Above all, the Church  is seen as a prison within  whose walls everyone is held captive. The school is full of bars; the world outside is impassable  because of the snow and  cold;  the  prison in  which  Stephane,   Lancelot  and  D'Argenteuil are held is purely symbolic -a visual representation  of the sin and guilt which bind mankind  in its human  condition.
Once again, however, the dual nature of occidental  perception is made apparent
as two kinds of freedom offer ways out of captivity: escape through  death  is given to the innocent  Eric  (escape presumably into  paradise) , and  Kent  creates a sort of liberty by his rejection of all human emotion and  therefore his rejection of guilt also. He has freedom in this world but it is freedom  of a faustian sort and in him we sense very occasionally a fear of death  and  ultimate  judgment.
The physical prison thus represents the other  prisons whose bars are more redoubtable: the  prison of school, education  and  religious training,  which is the prison of social values and that of the mind, the prison of irrational   (and  socially fostered)  emotion. Both of these prevent the human  being -in this case Stephane
-from taking effective action:  Stephane  neither  refuses to kill Eric nor accepts his responsibility in the murder  and his attitude  is reflected in his situation  when no-one  believes his confession. He stands  between  Christ  (Eric)   and  the  Devil (Kent) and proclaims his love of the former  while doing the bidding of the latter
-the perfect illustration of man  the sinner.
This is a brutal and pessimistic play, for not only is man seen as a helpless sinner but all hope of human  justice is denied in the face of man's  imperfection  and  his weakness is illustrated  at  a  social level also.  Not  only  does  the  right-thinking Christian -Stephane-give in to the wiles of the Devil, but on a lowlier plane all his liberal and  right-thinking  protestations collapse before the calculated  ruth­ lessness of Kent.  Here  we have a lesson in the successfulness of naked  power and cynicism over idealism and innocence. Power creates victims and men must choose which side of the struggle they will espouse. Stephane, our  "everyman," is caught not only in the combat  of ideals between good and  evil, but  also in the practical struggle for success in an unjust  world. His lesson is stark and  hard: he can live or die, succeed or fail, be the aggressor or the  victim, and, simultaneously,  in the same struggle he can be wrong or right, guilty or innocent,  sinful or pure. Yet the success of a martyr,  which he tries to claim, is no longer to be had.  In  the world of The  Execution strength  goes with evil and  with  manliness,  goodness is weak and  attributed to  women  and  children.  (Eric  is  14·)   Men  who espouse it  are to be scorned.  This  is a curious  code of  behaviour  to be found  within  a society that  has as its totem  a Good Man  depicted  in his deepest  abjection  as crucified victim, and it sets up an interesting dialectic with the previous code discussed here: that  of man  between  God and Devil.

BLAIS

It would seem that  the social structures created  within  a strong  religious context have  become  empty   of  significance  for  society  today  and   that   power  and   the rhetoric of power  are  all.


h.:E ENTIRE  PLAY TURNS  on  the  exercise  of  cynical  power which  is manifest both  in its character development and  its overall structure. Kent controls  everyone  by his language, his skill in debate  and  personality. He  compels Stephane to kill Eric  although in discussion the  things  he, Kent, stands  for are  no better  and  are considerably less acceptable than  those defended by Stephane. The difference lies in the  orientation of the  characters : Stephane is a thinker, Kent  a man   of  action. Their  predilections provide   a  chart   of  standard  oppositions as
we see:


Stephane
justice guilt cemetery books
ideal murder
faithfulness obedience /hypocrisy weakness
escape situation
die for others lucidness
 
Kent
violence liberty forest action
perverse murder betrayal
power control
revel in situation die for self only will

extra-ordinary nature  of action 	normality of action
(expect world to be changed) 	(maintain  routine)
tormented 	 cold and hard humiliated 	proud

Stephane is good,  thoughtful, yet  he vacillates  because  of  his breadth of  under­ standing. Kent  is self-centred and  willful. His energy is concentrated and  directed to his ends.  Hence he can  move  crowds  and  dominate individuals.  Indeed, in  a scene  terrifyingly reminiscent of the  power  of  the  political  and  religious  dema­ gogues  of history,  he persuades all his classmates  to  assume  the  responsibility  for Eric's  murder. Only  one  of  his fellows understands what   he is  doing:  Lancelot says "Tu ne presides  pas, tu ecrases"  and  with  fine irony  Kent  makes sure  that  it is he, Lancelot, who is accused  of (Kent's)  crime.
That this  is a drama turning upon  in justice  and  rhetoric is underlined by the references to Phedre in whose name Eric is killed and to Electre which Helene, Stephane's sister, is reading at the end of The  Execution. The  structure of the  play shows this  power  of language and  the  fundamental opposition   between  rhetoric

49

BLAIS

and  justice very clearly as it moves through  the same progression from false trial to transfer of guilt twice. The acts are perfectly parallel.

Act I

Scene I
 Scene II 	Scene III

Choice of victim false trial

Act II
Scene I, II and III Confessions
 Discussion
of guilt, etc.



Scene IV and V Discussion of
innocence, evil, etc.
 Transfer of crime
(I  )  physically to Lancelot
( 2)  psychically to class


Scene VI and VII False guilt
attributed


It is interesting  to note that  justice is not a major  theme  in this play, nor indeed is crime. The  main  spoken interest  lies in  the  attribution or  self-attribution   of blame and  an exploration of the subsequent sense of guilt. The  play is a study in the making of a victim and in the maintenance of power.
There  is, however, a third message transmitted  implicitly in The Execution, not
this time by the overt illustration of a set of values or code of behaviour  but rather by the violation of a code of ideals. Here we leave the social plane as well as the religious one and enter the realm of literary convention. Eric is our Prince Charm­ ing, the  beautiful,  pure and  innocent  hero who should  reign  triumphantly over evil at the end of the story. Yet Eric is the victim of a senseless and bloody murder,  and Lancelot  is accused of the crime. If we consider first the names of these two characters we see that through their defeat the whole hero tradition, the chivalrous and godfearing search for the good, the beautiful  and the holy is called into ques­ tion, rejected as a code appealing  to children only, and  a code of ruthless expedi­ ency takes its place as man's mode of successful operation  today.
The  play offers the elaboration  and  juxtaposition  of the three  codes operating in a contemporary  Catholic society:  one provided  by faith  and  dogma,  one  by daily experience,  and  the  third  by literature  and  tradition, and  all brought  to­ gether in a ritual of explanation.
Stephane  is a latter-day  everyman or pilgrim trying to make progress in a con­ fusing world -confusing  because the three  codes are  incompatible. In  the  first he is caught  between the Devil and Christ;  his desire pulls him towards the good though  he is not firm in his choice. In the second he can choose to be powerful or weak, aggressor or victim, and his inclination leads him to want to be in a position of strength. Finally, reader in a world of books, he must opt for reality or fairytale, cynicism or idealism,  the world or the book in fact. Trapped,  then,  in  his own indecision, seeing all too clearly the conflicting demands  made  upon him, he sub­ sides into dream  behind the bars of the  prison society has created.
Here, as in Marie-Claire  Blais' other works to this date, the ordinary  person is

so

BLAIS


a helpless victim in an intolerable situation. Instructed  by his education  to believe in moral values, justice and aspiration to higher things (of which Eric and Lance­ lot are the symbols)  he is also taught  by his religion that  he is a poor weak sinner who will always fall prey to the Devil. This creates an intellectual  and emotional dilemma  sufficient  to  incapacitate any  thinking  individual -hence  Stephane's  indecisiveness. The  interesting  thing  is that  this double-bind  situation  is created and  maintained by one and  the same institution:  the Church. In  this way man can be held subservient, in a state of  paralysing guilt at all times, blaming himself if he does not improve  his situation and guilty of some kind of sin if he does.
Kent  is therefore  shown  to be right in that  the only way to break  out of this
vicious circle, this prison of the mind, is to take on the characteristics  of the Devil and attack  the Church  and  its God directly. His behaviour,  however, is inhuman, dehumanizing and  anti-humanistic; as such  it  is unacceptable to  the  likes of Stephane.  The  prison is intolerable,  the way of escape is unacceptable; it is no small wonder that  Stephane thinks of suicide. But there  again  he is caught in yet another  trap  because suicide is a mortal sin.
Guilt: the prison of this world. Stephane-everyman  feels guilty all the time he stays within its walls, and is guilty (according  to the rules of the establishment  at least)  if he escapes them.  As long as he accepts the ritual  of blame  he has been taught  to practise, he will remain  a  prisoner, punished  by others  or by himself.
The  Execution  is a bitter  analysis of the imprisonment,  even the  killing, of a people. It is a presentation  of the spiritual  and rational  conflicts created by tradi­ tional dogma and  education  in a modern world and is cast in the form of  an in­ verted fairy-tale -one in which the prince is defeated  and the agents of  wicked­ ness triumph  -in order  to provoke an unconscious emotional  reaction as well as an intellectual  one? The  play is a revolt against the Roman  Catholic Church  and an indictment  of its hold over a society, a society reduced  to powerlessness by the opposing nature  of the demands  made daily upon each of  its members. It  is also a revelation  of the  power  of rhetoric  to create and  transfer guilt;  from  Pontius Pilate to Phedre  and  on to Kent, the path  is clearly delineated  and  it is the men of the Church  who have  used it most frequently. Guilt  is the weapon  by which a Christian  adversary  may be rendered  helpless. Once  a sense of sin is bred into a people it has no way of escape:  it is a  nation  of potential  victims waiting  for condemnation. The  Execution  is a title with a double-edge:  execution takes many forms and  here all of them are sinful.


NOTES

1 Marie-Claire Blais, L'Execution (Montreal:  Editions du Jour, 1968).
2  La  Belle Bete  works on  this principle also. See J. Waelti-Walters, "Beauty and
Madness in Marie-Claire  Blais' La Belle Bete,"  Journal of Canadian  Fiction, no.
25/26  ( 1979),  pp. 186-g8.

51

VIOLENCE ET VIOL CHEZ AQUIN

Don Juan Ensorcele




Francoise Maccabee Iqbal







LA VIOLENCE TRAVERSE  L'OEUVRE  AQillNIENNE  sous  dive.-s masques. Empruntant principalement dans Prochain Episode' Ie visage de l'espion­ nage, du terrorisme et de la revolution, elle se refere dans un premier temps trans­
parent  a une  violence d'inspiration   politique  mue  par  un  ideal  social, dans  un
deuxieme temps opaque,  a une soif de vengeance contre le mal de vivre, la vie se resumant   "a une  reptation  asthenique  et  a !'interminable  experimentation  de
l'ennui" (PE,  p. 23)· Dans  Trou  de  memoire,2    la  violence se drape  dans  une etoffe tissee des fils du cri, du blaspheme, du discours independantiste, du viol, du suicide et de !'homicide, d'ou elle participe de la violence verbale, sociale, physique et psychologique, sa fonction de catharsis et de revendication  virile compensatoire etant ouvertement  reconnue par le narrateur. Avec 1' Antiphonaire3  et Neige noire,4 le costume se depouille de sorte que seuls s'entrecroiseront desormais les trois fils
du viol, du meurtre et du suicide, a la difference cependant que l'un optera  pour la
quantite, l'autre, pour la qualite,  I'Antiphonaire  multipliant les actes d'agression
physique et psychologique, Neige noire se contentant du raffinement  sadique.
Dans ce survol, deux elements retiennent notre attention, l'un a trait au deplace­
ment de la violence revolutionnaire vers le viol apres  Prochain Episode, l'autre, a
ce qui en est la consequence, la femme-victime.  Dans  chaque  cas, neanmoins,  le
sacrifice demeure,  sauf que le bouc-emissaire change: la femme  vient occuper  la place d'un  peuple que la revolution revee, orgie de violence analogue  a un  bain
de sang,  aurait  surement  aneanti  et  non delivre  eut-elle  eu  lieu.  II importe  de souligner  des maintenant la  fugacite  du  theme  de  la  revolution  politique  chez
Aquin, fugacite qui infere que la revolution ne saurait  se reduire  a cette connota­
tion politique, ce que corrobore en somme l'absence de ce theme dans }'oeuvre d'imagination qui precede et qui suit Prochain Episode, a !'exception  de quelques passages dans Trou  de memoire. Du reste, a leur sujet, le narrateur Magnant invite

52

AQUIN

a plusieurs reprises a une lecture au deuxieme et au troisieme degre, tantot en comparant la  "jouissance  collective," que  declenche l'un  de ses discours  separa­ tistes, a un "viol impudique au terme duquella partenaire  multiple a echappe  un cri rauque  de plaisir"  (TM, p. 45)  et ce, d'autant que  l'orateur  precise que son glorieux discours n'etait  que manoeuvre  d'un stratege en seduction feminine  (TM, pp.  46-47), tantot  en confessant  que  c'est  grace  au  viol  d'un  nombre  toujours croissant de belles inconnues qu'il  finit par pouvoir s'identifier  au  revolutionnaire  dont  il projette  l'image   (TM,  pp.  1 I 1-20).  Enfin, mentionnons   que  Leandre Bergeron a deja demystifie le revolutionnaire de Prochain Episode qui se mue, sous sa plume incisive et percutante, en "cowboy revolutionnaire."5
Cette  presence passagere et particuliere  de la revolution suggere qu'un  drame
personnel et profond  a pu, a la faveur de la crise nationale, se jouer au niveau de la collectivite, drame  qui se deroule sans eclat dans le premier roman-"memoires" et qui hante de ses sourds accords les fictions autobiographiques consecutives. Dans ces pages, nous nous mettrons a l'ecoute de ce drame chiffre en quete de dechiffre­ ment.  Evoquer  chiffre  et  dechiffrement,  c'est  convier  au  depart  le  mysterieux cryptogramme dont  un heros a herite a son insu  (PE). Or, d'apparence anodine, le cryptogramme a de capital  que son "amas  informe de lettres majuscules"  ( PE, p. 2 I) reproduit  les mots magiques d'une  tablette d'envoutement, laquelle servait dans la sorcellerie antique  a vouer  un ennemi ou  un adversaire  aux  dieux infer­ naux.6 Des lors surgit une double interrogation, d'une  part, quel est ce sortilege qui lie le heros aquinien?  d'autre part,  y a-t-il  une  filiation  entre  le  malefice et  la violence a l'endroit  de la femme? Nous chercherons a y repondre  en explorant  les meandres de la route qui porte les traces de la premiere femme-victime.
Ces traces, elles se trouvent  dans Prochain  Episode et la victime se presente sous les traits de l'epouse-mere  que le heros a abandonne pour le mains subrepticement (pp.  6o-63). 11 est revelateur  que  l'ensorcelante  K I'eclipse  totalement  car  aux yeux du heros aquinien,  qui  est un emule de don Juan, seule importe l'amante­ vamp a conquerir, aussi se detache-t-il  infailliblement  d'une  conjointe  'legale' ou de celle qui risque de le devenir. Sur ce point, Magnant  est typique:

Quand  Colette a divorce ... j'ai distance cette chere Colette de plus en plus.... Pourtant, elle avait procede 1egalement contre Thomas .a seule fin de faciliter notre rapprochement.... Mais-je ne sais trop pourquoi-sa manoeuvre m'a incline  a
me separer, moi aussi, mais d'elle! Je me suis alors engage dans un nouveau com­
bat.... Colette, Joan ou plutot:  Joan I, Joan II ... une femme et une autre ...
( TM, PP· sg-6o).
Ainsi, chaque  roman  se situant  dans le prolongement de Prochain  Episode  quant a 1' "histoire" de la femme  desertee, y a-t-il sollicitation a ne pas passer outre  sa premiere  incarnation. Du  reste, l'insistance  dont  temoigne la repetition  de ladite
histoire a l'interieur du  recit ne peut qu'attirer !'attention sur ce que  recelent ses
deux versions.


53

AQUIN

La premiere narration,  Ia plus breve, s'attarde surtout  a Ia culpabilite d'un  pere deprime.  Celui-ci a Hkhement fui ses deux enfants  et il desire se suicider devant son incapacite  a commettre un quelconque  hold-up en vue de les secourir financie­ rement. La paternite ici invoquee a de marquant qu'elle est caracteristique de cha­ cun des romans. Dans les uns et les autres se pen_;oit cette absence du pere charnel en regard  de Ia presence d'un  pere spirituel  aux attributs solaires. En effet, pour ce qui est de son inexistence, le "pere  indigne  et  degenere"  de Prochain Episode ne manque  pas d'homologues:  dans Trou  de  memoire,  le futur  enfant  de RR  a un  pere qui  se suicide avant  sa  naissance;  dans  I'Antiphonaire, d'une  part,  les hommes ant  fait  des enfants  a  Christine  sans se saucier  de leur  progeniture  ou de Ia mere, d'autre part, Albert Franconi vit separe de ses deux filles depuis quatre  ou cinq ans; dans Neige noire, Michel Lewandowski  n'est  pres d'une  de ses filles qu'a  titre d'amant. Par contre, Ia glorification du pere heroique s'opere par !'iden­
tification du  protagoniste  a BalzacjFerragus/ de Heutz  ( PE)' par  celle de P. X.
Magnant au soleil (TM), de Christine  a Jules-Cesar  Beausang  (A) ou encore de
Nicolas Vanesse au conquerant  Fortinbras  et a l'auteur-geniteur  (NN).




DANS LA   PERSPECTIVE  PSYCHANALYTIQUE,  Ia substitution d'un  heros au pere appartient  au passage de Ia latence a !'adolescence. Cette tran­ sition se designe, sur le plan des fantasmes,  "par  un glissement de Ia  valorisation d'une  toute-puissance motrice, guerriere, marquee  par l'analite, vers une devalori­ sation  massive de l'image  paternelle  a laquelle  est substituee  celle  du  heros. Ce passage constitue  une  vraie  revolution.m Cette  epoque  est  celle  ou  le  gan;on devient membre  d'un  groupe domine  par Ia figure du  meneur.  Ce heros, reel ou imaginaire,  devient  centre d'attraction et  d'interet   pour  ses  fervents  adeptes  de sorte que l'investissement libidinal  du  Moi, que  le Surmoi  monopolisait  aupara­ vant, se deplace sur lui. En raison de ce deplacement, au cours duquel  le meneur prend  Ia place du  Surrnoi individuel,  le cachet  homosexuel  predomine  dans  Ia sexualite de groupe, ce qui n'elimine pas l'activite heterosexuelle, mais une activite alors "brunie par l'analite" selon I'expression de Fain  ( d'apres EA,  pp. x8, xg, 22). Cet auteur  precisera encore que Ia regression a  ce passage de Ia latence  a }'ado­ lescence s'effectue chez certains adultes qui se sont maries sans avoir vecu pleine­ ment  leur  adolescence. Dans  pareil  cas, le  mari  echappe  a  Ia mainmise  de son epouse maternelle  et rend sa puissance a  l'homme:

Le meneur, fantasme commun, est "le mari degage de tout lien avec Bobonne (i.e., epousejmere) ." Sous son influence le groupe de males se degage du  matriarcat,
pour un court moment. La femme jusque la toute-puissante au foyer va devenir
substituivement  la  femme chatvee, mesestimee, qui  va  servir  d'exutoire  sexuel
(EA,p.22).

54

AQUIN


A la lueur  de ces considerations  et en tenant  compte  de  la  toile de fond  du groupe  revolutionnaire, la  premiere  version de 1' "histoire  alambiquee" contient les elements  de  la  phase  initiale  en  ce qu'un   mari  se libere  de  l'epousejmere toute-puissante:

J'ai abandonne rna femme et mes deux enfants ... Je n'avais plus la force de con­
tinuer a vivre ... j'etais accuie au desastre, couvert de dettes et  je n'etais plus
capable de rien entreprendre,  plus capable de rentrer chez moi ... j'ai fui comme
un Iache (PE, p. 61).

La  deuxieme  version, elle, fournira  les elements qui  completent  le  profil de la regression ci-haut  esquissee. Dans cette version enrichie et commentee,  de Heutz imite le heros-narrateur dans son role de pauvre here. Son  jeu de miroir captive
et fascine le  heros a tel  point  qu'il  lui  vaut  de passer du  rang  ennemi  a celui
privilegie d'hypnotiseur:

A vrai dire, la puissance de H. de Heutz m'envoute encore plus qu'elle me terrifie. A qui ai-je affaire au  juste? A l'ombre metempsychee de Ferragus? Cet inconnu que je regarde m'attire ... je reste pantelant devant lui, incapable de diriger mes pensees vers un autre  objet et de combattre l'attirance  morbide qu'il exerce sur moi (PE, pp. 87-88).
Cette  citation  et son contexte  rendent  manifeste  le  transfert   de  la  puissance  a
l'homme  et  la  mobilisation  de  la libido  homosexuelle qui  l'accompagne. 11 est interessant  de noter que "c'est  a partir  de !'observation  de cette foule a deux que
constituent  hypnotiseur  et  hypnotise que  (Freud)   va  comprendre  les liens  libi­
dinaux  unissant  une foule"  ( EA,   p. 2 I ) . 11 est egalement  interessant  de signaler que  des emanations   de  l'analite, propre  a la  sexualite  de  groupe,  se degagent
tantot  de l'orgie revolutionnaire ( PE)  OU  du choeur orgastique  des singes voyeurs et  des  partisans  separatistes   ( TM) ' tantot  de  la  prostitution   d'Antonella   et  de Christine  (A) ou des blessures et de la manducation  de Sylvie mutilee  ( NN) .
La poursuite de !'investigation  nous ramene a la seance d'hypnose et a son inter­
ruption.  Une complice, tapie dans l'ombre depuis le debut  a epier les mouvements
du  heros, intervient  et sort de Heutz  du petrin, complice dont  la  chevelure  rap­
pelle etrangement celle de K. Cette position mediane de K entre les deux hommes nous projette  devant  un  triangle,  autre  constante  de !'oeuvre  romanesque.8   Ce premier  triangle  se compose  d'une  figure heroique,  d'une  figure filiale et d'une deesse lieuse, laquelle debouche  sur la mere en raison de sa filiation avec le pays.
L'image  de la deesse lieuse rallie autour  d'elle toutes les heroines aquiniennes, d'ou  l'emporte  leur feminite  nocturne  qui est feminite inquietante et redoutable. C'est sans doute dans la derniere  personnification de cette deesse lieuse que ressort le mieux son association avec la mere. Beaute ensorcelante, Sylvie Vanesse est une jeune epouse qui  a  une  liaison  incestueuse  avec son  pere.  Frustre  et  jaloux, le mari  Nicolas se vengera  en immolant  Sylvie en sacrifice, immolation  qui s'accom-

55

AQUIN

plit selon un rituel sadique. Qu'il  y ait  un  reglement  de comptes sous-jacent  au sadisme, c'est ce qu'illustre  l'episode repete du  pendentif  qui  devoile en Sylvie la manipulatrice, la castratrice  et la fille de feu.  En  effet, la description  de l'enig­ matique  pendentif au moyen duquel elle violente Nicolas insinue que I'eclat solaire, symbole male, est son apanage: "On  distingue bien l'hyacinthe de Compostelle qui est le coeur obscur de cet ostensoir" ( NN, p. 42) .'J Ainsi, l'homme lese se transforme en justicier anxieux de retablir l'identite  usurpee et de soigner sa virilite blessee, ce faisant  il metamorphose  une Gaia  devoreuse en  mere  nourriciere,  ce que  trans­ mettent  la  tetee  et !'absorption  de sa chair  a  l'apogee de l'acte  sacrificiel  (NN, pp. 237, 238, 242).
Les composantes   jusqu'a  maintenant discernees  d'un   pere  meprisablejfigure
heroique, d'une  mere castratricejfemme amante  et d'un  fils conquerant/fils con­ quis n'aboutiraient-elles qu'au  classique triangle oedipien? En !'occurrence, chaque recit romanesque  ne serait que variante de ce drame  unique qui s'elabore dans les profondeurs?  C'est ala rencontre de don Juan  que ces questions acheminent car il faut, pour y repondre, marcher sur les pas du celebre amoureux a l'exemple des divers protagonistes.  Comparant don Juan  au  heros classique, Michel  Fain  cons­ tate  de prime  abord  celui-la est un  heros contradictoire par  rapport  a  celui-ci:
Alors que le heros classique ne de !'imagination d'un poete se detachait de la masse pour assumer le role du pere et ce, apres avoir occis le monstre totemique, don
Juan  tue les peres reels a la douzaine et finit victime du  monstre totemique. II
n'assume jamais le role patemel, il recommence encore et toujours le meme sce­
nario et ne connait le repos que des mains du convive de pierre ( EA, p. 30) .

Par la suite, il induit  que ses meurtres repetes symbolisent non pas une castration du pere rival mais un refoulement de son existence, cette repetition  visant a vrai dire "au  maintien  de la masse homosexuelle des freres" puisque  par  elle "il lutte pour que ces derniers ne creent pas la famille"  (EA, p. 30).
Cette  recherche  du groupe homosexuel penetre  l'oeuvre  romanesque  pour  par­
fois s'exposer  avec transparence,  parfois se derober  dans l'opacite.  Evidente  dans les couples lesbiens que forment Joan-RR (TM) et Eva-Linda (NN), elle sous-tend aussi la communion  et la complicite entre les freres revolutionnaires comme entre H. de Heutz  et le heros ( PE), entre  Ghezzo Quenum et Magnant ( TM) comme entre  Christine  et Antonella  (A), ou encore  entre  le cineaste  et les "spectateurs masques" de Neige noire. Meme l'oeuvre d'art a charge  de vehiculer cette pour­ suite, ce qu'elle  fait  par le biais des deux  guerriers  qui  ornent  la  commode  en laque  du  Chateau d'Echandens (PE),  par le tableau  des deux  Ambassadeurs  de Holbein  (TM) et  par  I'invention de la gemellation  entre  Fortinbras/ Amlethe  et Hamlet/Amlethus ( NN).
Parce  que  le desir de don Juan  de maintenir  le groupe  homosexuel  des freres empeche  la constitution  du groupe familial, il previent  du  coup "la  renaissance d'un  patriarcat renove." Or, le patriarcat empeche signifie le regne du matriarcat,

AQUIN


d'ou  cet herosjanti-heros ne serait  en somme  qu'un instrument au  service  de  la deesse-mere  toute-puissante. Ainsi done  resurgit,  par  l'entremise du  donjuanisme,
le culte  en  existence  a l'origine des temps  "quand Dieu  etait  femme," pour  re­
prendre le titre  d'un livre  desormais  celebre  ( d'apres EA, pp.  go-g I).
C'est en etudiant le modele  parental d'un don Juan que  Fain  eclaire !'expulsion du  pere par  le fils et le culte  de la deesse-mere. 11 montre que  don  Juan est un fils sans pere. Comment? Parce que ce pere lui-meme se donne  inconsciemment aupres
de son fils le role  d'un frere  aine,  attribuant de la sorte  celui  de cadet  a son fils.
Comme pour  l'aine, le cadet  est le fils bien-aime de la mere,  le pere provoque son exclusion  du couple  forme  par la mere et le fils:
Reagissant alors en frere a1ne impuissant et amer,  (le pere)  assure non pas la  de­ faite de !'image  paternelle,  mais sa quasi-inexistence ... ayant fait inconsciemment de ce fils-frere cadet  un objet du Moi fascinant 'eliminant !'influence de son propre Surmoi, illui confere de ce fait le statut de chef de clan disposant de la femme sans entrave  (EA), p. 33).
11 est  expressif  que  Fain  relie  a la situation de  cadet, et  par  consequent a don Juan, une aspiration manifeste chez Aquin: I'aspiration  a etre  redempteur. Selon lui, "la  redemption ressemble  beaucoup a l'amour inconditionnel de la mere  pour son  dernier-ne" (EA, p. 32)   et  ce,  parce  que  Jesus  represente  a la  fois l'enfant
parthenogenetique de  la  Vierge   (inexistence du  pere)   et  une  forme  juvenile  de l'lmage divine  qui  demeure eternellement agee  de  trente-trois ans,  age  donne   a don  Juan. Chez  Aquin, le messianisme  qui  s'infuse  dans  les romans, apres  s'etre
proclame sans  equivoque dans  le recit  intitule "Les  Redempteurs,mo s'avoue des les ecrits de  jeunesse:
Comme  je n'avais  pu trouver  aucun endroit  pour coucher  dans tout Jerusalem,  et qu'il se faisait tard,  je me rendis au tombeau du Christ.  Le soir etait  frais;  j'entrai sous la crypte  de Joseph  d'Arimatie  et refermai  la pierre  sur }'entree ... D'abord
on pense un peu a Jesus:  je commenc;ais meme de m'emouvoir  ,a son souvenir. Je
me sentais des penchants  de l'edempteur,  et, couche dans cette  ambiance evange­
lique, il me semblait  que  je venais de mourir  pour les peches des hommes. Je fer­
mai l'oeil en Dieu.U

11 ne saurait echapper que  le theme  des deux  freres,  tantot invoque, se glisse dans  chaque fiction  romanesque. C'est  cependant dans  Neige noire que  ce drame du  pere-frere rejete  s'exprime avec  le plus  d'eloquence puisque c'est  lui  que  les
references  a Hamlet  et  les extraits  de la  piece mettent en scene.  En  effet, i1 y a,
d'une part,  le frere cadet  Claudius qui a pris couronne et femme  a son aine, le pere de  Hamlet, d'autre  part, Fortinbras qui,  s'il  echappe a la  mort  a titre  de  frere
jumeau de Hamlet, n'y echappe plus lorsqu'il  devient  successeur de son pere adop­ tif. L'echange et l'intrication des rOles de pere et de frere  aine sont  dans  ce cas si pousses que  le fils Fortinbras/ Amlethe sera  "par une  ambiguite de  l'histoire ... enterre sous le nom  de  Fortinbras (pere)  dans  son propre pays"  (NN, p. 194).12

57

AQUIN
 

APRES  CE   PROCES  DU
 



PERE  d'un don  Juan, a Ia  mere  de

comparaitre, d'autant que Ia resurgence  de son culte  ci-haut indiquee met en relief que  c'est elle, en  demiere ressource, qui  commande a son fils de dominer  violem­ ment  Ia femme, domination que le heros aquinien s'assure en ayant  recours  a son viol ou a sa reduction a un objet ephemere de seduction. Fain  allegue que "Ia  mere
d'un emule  de don  Juan n'est  pas n'importe quelle  mere" ( EA,  p. 33). Au depart, il  y  a  en  elle  une  femme qui,  pour  combler   un  manque  narcissique de  base,
cherche un substitut phallique dans son mari.  Elle  tente  done  de faire  jouer a ce
dernier  le role de l'homme desire, ce a quoi  le mari  se derobe -ouvertement  ou
discretement -en  raison  de son identification au  grand frere.  De  ue, tera  ses espoirs sur  son fils :

Consciemment  elle espere que  ce garc;on lui  apportera Ia  gloire  qu'elle  n'a  pu obtenir  de son mari. Inconsciemment  il porte l'espoir qu'il  deshonorera  les femmes ayant  atteint  cette  respectabilite  qu'elle  n'a  pu  atteindre. Cette  constellation  en­ traine chez le fils une sexualire post-pubertaire denuee  d'inhibition  mais ignorante  d'amour  (EA, p. 34).

Que les emules de don Juan dont  les exploits et prouesses amoureuses s'exhibent d'un roman  a l'autre soient fils d'une deesse-mere  et d'un pere-frere aine,  c'est  ce
que confie dans son carnet  secret le plus exhibitionniste d'entre eux, Pierre  Xavier
Magnant. A l'examen, l'enchainement des revelations de  ce conquerant noue  ici un noeud  conforme au propos de l'analyste puisque maintes de ses observations s'y
reflechissent,  a savoir  peur  interieure de castration, reaction d'agression, refus du
role paternel, destruction de Ia famille,  repetition d'un meme  scenario, retour  a Ia
mere:

Je vis dans la terreur,  parfois l'eprouvant avec honte, parfois l'engendrant.... Engendrer  la  terreur: oui,  j'aime  faire  peur.  J'aime provoquer  des  realites  poli­ tiques  qui  m'effraient; j'aime  aussi  troubler  des  vies innombrables....  Je  viole, chaque  nuit, un nombre toujours croissant de belles inconnues  que j'abandonne terrifiees.... Je sais quel triomphe  destructeur je vais desormais  chercher  ... dans les rues quand  vient cette periode chargee  d'effiuves nyctogenes, pendant laquelle une  quantite  indeterminable et ininteressante  de couples  s'unissent  en  accomplis­
sant des gestes 'equivalents ... je tiens a conserver  cet ecart  d'initiative entre  rna
puissance  incomparable  et  celle des autres  hommes  qui  s'abolissent  dans  un  flot
visqueux,  quand  ils ne le laissent  pas courir   jusqu'au   delta  de  muqueuses  d'ou leurs  enfants   partiront pour  reprendre,  a quelques  changements pres,  la  meme chanson de mort ... j'ai d'autres  preuves a faire que celle de rna puissance genitale
aupres d'une  seule et meme femme qui ne meurt  jamais, qu'elle  s'appelle  Joan  ou je ne sais trop comment  ... (TM, pp. 117-18).

L'absence d'amour ou de communion affective  que  Michel Fain  souligne  chez le don Juan se constate dans cet extrait. Cette absence  s'explique du fait  que sa cons­ titution  narcissique est telle qu'il  ne ressent pas Ia perte  de l'objet, d'ou  une multi-

AQUIN


plication des  femmes-objets, ce  que  Magnant appelle  fort  pertinemment  "pro­
longer la guerre de succession" ( TM,  p. 59).
Cette  derniere reftexion  s'inserant dans  un  contexte  d'exclusion de  sa  vie  de cette  Colette  qui venait  de divorcer  a seule fin de se rapprocher de lui, elle accen­ tue le rapport d'exploitant a exploitee  que  le seducteur entretient avec la femme. Or,  ce meme  rapport prevaut chez le jaloux  aquinien qui,  lorsqu'il est en  proie  a sa  jalousie, ou  profane sa partenaire a l'instar d'Olympe Ghezzo Quenum  ( TM)' ou la brutalise a l'instar de Jean-William Forestier  et de Robert  Bematchez (A), ou  la  mutile  et  l'assassine  a l'instar de  Nicolas  Vanesse  (NN).  Dans  ces cas  ex­ tremes  ou  se  conjuguent violence  physique  et  violence  psychologique, le  com­ pagnon n'epouse !'attitude  et  le  masque  du  Grand  lnquisiteur que  pour  mieux torturer et  manipuler la campagne,  Christine le decrit  bien  qui  consigne  dans  le detail  une  crise delirante de son amant Robert:
II m'humiliait carrement ... il savait fort bien que son attitude etait  vindicative, intensement  vindicative  et consciemment  vindicative  ... il m'a  obligee de  parler.
... Je  me confessais de tout  ... meme des plus anciens incidents  ... ceux qui se rattachaient alors au triangle  que nous formions, Robert,  Jean-William et moi. Et sur ce point, il ne voulait  rien moins que tout:  l'heure  de chaque  rendez-vous ... la sequence de plaisir physique dans chaque rencontre, le minutage de mes orgasmes quasiment  ... les moyens contraceptifs  utilises.... J'etais  en larmes.... II  m'inter­ rogeait avec une froide rage ... et m'annonc;a sans aucune emotion  qu'il allait bien volontiers se priver de repas afin de continuer  cette "conversation" ...  (A, pp. 76-
77. Voir toute la sequence,  pp. 73-82).

Sans  respect  pour  l'autonomie de  Christine, ce que  reclame  au  fond  ce  Robert tyrannique et susceptible, c'est  la securite  de l'attachement de  l'autre. De  meme Olympe aupres  de  RR   ( ™) et  Nicolas  aupres  de Sylvie  (NN)   cherchent  mono­ pole et exclusivite  de l'interet et de l'amour. En d'autres mots,  un enfant  a besoin des soins de sa mere.
Que  l'on  analyse  chez le heros aquinien l'emule  de don  Juan, le redempteur, le jaloux  ou  r,etre  narcissique/ 3   que  l'on  analyse  dans  l'oeuvre le  symbolisme   de l'eau, celui  de la femme ou  bien  la  proliferation des habitacles, c'est  a la  croisee des chemins  l'eternel retour ala deesse-mere  toute-puissante: envoutement  d'au­ tant  plus malefique qu'il  est clandestin!

NOTES

1 Prochain  Episode  (Montveal:  Le  Cercle  du  livre  de  France,  1965);  desormais designe par PE.
2  Trou   de  memoire   (Montreal: Le  Cercle  du  livre  de  France, I 968) ;  desormais designe par TM.
3  L'Antiphonaire (Mont:Peal: Le Cercle du livre de France, 1969); desormais designe par A.
4  Neige noire  (Montreal: La  Presse, collection  Ecrivains des deux  mondes, 1974);
desormais designe par NN.

59

AQUIN

5 "Prochain  Episode et la revolution," Voix  et Images  du  pays VI, pp.  I 23-29· Peu avant de  conclure son article,  !'auteur ecrit: "Notre heros  est  un  grand   malade. Dans  ses moments de grande  depression  ... il constate son  impuissance ...  l'em­ prisonnement de  son energie.... L'·energie  bloquee  se retourne contre  elle-meme.
. . . D'ou  ce besoin de destruction de soi, de suicide,  de risque fou. Dans  le deuxieme temps  de sa maladie, dans  le pole 'agression' l'energie vitale  bloquee  est surexcitee.
. . . C'est  la £ebrilite et le desir intense d'eclatement. Ce sont les tentatives de destruc­
tion  et de mort.  Et c'est l'appel a la revolution devastatrice.... A ce moment-la, la
vevolution   n'est   plus  la  liberation d'un  peuple   opprime. Au  contraire, elle  n'est
qu'un incident-instrument a l'aneantissement-cure d'un malade" (p.  I 28). Ajoutons qu'au dire  de  plusieurs  personnes  que  nous  avons  interviewees, Les Damnes  de la terre de Frantz Fanon   (Paris: Franc;ois Maspero, I 970)  ont  profondement marque Hubert Aquin. Ceci  nous  paralt significatif, d'abord, de !'influence d'un livre  sur
un esprit  puisque la pensee de Fanon  nourrit le discours  et !'action !'evolutionnaires d'Aquin, ensuite, des correspondances occulets  entre  hommes et ·evenements  et  ce, parce  que le psychiatre Fanon  procede  .a une psychanalyse de la violence  qui  met en relief les relations d'exploitant a exploite  entre  colonisateur et colonise,  relations qui gouvernent les echanges  entre  personnages de !'oeuvre aquinienne comme  nous  le verrons.
6  C'est  de  Clermont Doyon  que  nous  tenons  ce  renseignement communique  orale­ ment  en mars  I978.  II y a une illustration et une description de la tablette en ques­ tion dans  le Dictionnaire des antiquites grecques et romaines d'apres les textes et les monuments de  Daremberg et  Saglio,  tome  V,  pp.  4-5.  Cette tablette,  trouvee  en Afrique, est aujourd'hui propriete du  Louvre.
7  Michel Fain,  "Reflexions a  partir de  certains aspects  de  la  sexualite masculine," dans  Eros et Anteros de Denise Braunschweig et  Michel  Fain   (Paris: Petite Biblio­ theque Payot,  collection  Science  de !'Homme, no.  I70,  I97I).  Desormais  designe par   EA.  C'est   nous  qui  soulignons  en  liaison  avec  les  pvecedents  propos  sur  la revolution.
8 Il  y a proliferation d'exemples. Mentionnons:  QuenumfRR/Magnant, Magnant/
.Joanf·editeur, MagnantjColettejThomas   (TM);  Jean-WilliamjChristinejRobert,
RenatajChigi/Antonella,  FranconijChristine/Robert,  FranconijSuzanne /Robert
... (A);  NicolasjSylviejMichel,  EvajNicolasjSylvie,  NicolasjLinda/Stan,  Ham­
letjGertrudejFortinbras (NN).
9  Voir  ace sujet  et au  sujet  de la deesse lieuse  notre  livre  Hubert  Aquin  romancier,
Quebec, Les Presses de l'Universite Laval,  Vie des lettres  quebecoises   I6,  I978,  pp.
237-240.
10 Paru  dans  Ecrits du Canada  franfais V  ( I959), pp. 45-I I4.
11 Hubert Aquin, "Pelerinage a l'cnvers," Blocs erratiques (Montreal: Quinze, collec­ tion  "Prose entiere," I977), p. 21. Ce  texte  a  d'abord ere  publie  en  I949  dans  le Quartier latin.
12 Les projections de Nicolas en Fortinbras, le "heros rejete," ainsi  que  l'ambivalente rivalite fraternellejmasculine qui  jaillit  de !'oeuvre  romanesque suggerent que  le
frere  cadet  s'est fait,  a son tour,  usurper son titre  et s'est  retrouve dans  la  peau  de
l'alne a la  naissance d'un  autre fr·ere. Le  manuscrit inedit d'un  roman d'Aquin,
"L'Invention de la mort," developpe longuement cette  traumatisante blessure  nar­
cissique.  Voir  a  ce  su jet notre  article:  "L'Appel du  Nord  dans  N eige noire:  La
quete  de Narcisse," Voix  et images, 5, no 2  (hiver I98o), p. 377, note  I6.
18 Voir  ace sujet: "L'Appel du  Nord  dans  Neige noire."


6o


ANDRE MAJOR ET LANGACEMENT

Les '"'"Histoires de deserteurs"  (I9JO-I9J6)*

Jacques Pelletier

D.Ig68 A '974,DU vent du d;able a L'Epouvantail,Majm
ne publie  rien, si l'on  fait  exception  des Poemes pou.r durer, reedition  en 1969  de
poemes anciens accompagnes de quelques  inedits, et de deux  courtes  pieces radio­ phoniques, Le desir et Le perdant en 1973.1. Ce silence ne correspond pas toutefois  a une  absence  d'ecriture. Des 1970,  en effet, il travaille a  L'Epouvantail, roman qui  constituera en  1974le premier  valet  d'une "suite" qui sera  baptisee  en 1976 "histoires de  deserteurs" apres  avoir  ete  d'abord  definie  comme  "histoire d'une survivance" en  1975.2
Cette  production est elaboree, ecrite et publiee durant le regne  de Bourassa,  de
1970  a  1976,  done  a  un  moment   bien  delimite  de  l'histoire COntemporaine  du
Quebec. On  se  rappellera que  Robert   Bourassa,  succedant a  Jean Lesage  a  la direction du  parti  liberal   du  Quebec, sort  vainqueur des  elections  d'avril  1970
qui  opposent ce parti ala fois a l'U.N., parti  au pouvoir, et au  P.Q., ne deux  ans
plus tot et qui  reunit l'essentiel  des forces neo-nationalistes: ce parti enregistre alors une premiere percee, obtenant 24%  des voix exprimees  (presque deux fois et demi
le score realise par le R.I.N. et le R.N.  aux elections de 1966). A l'automne 1973, le  parti  liberal remporte a  nouveau les elections  qui  ant  lieu  a la  fin  du  mois
d'octobre tandis que  le P.Q. atteint labarre de go%  des voix  exprimees. Ce qui apparait alors  une  defaite  (le parti  n'a  fait elire que  quelques deputes et bien des militants sont  cruellement de us)
represente la seule  alternative serieuse  au  parti  liberal,  l'Union  Nationale faisant
figure de formation politique vouee a disparaltre: les donnees  du  jeu politique  sont done  profondement modifiees,  ce qu'on   realisera  pleinement avec  la victoire  du P.Q. en novembre 1976.
Si l'affrontement, sur  la scene politique  institutionnelle, met  aux  prises le parti
liberal  et le P.Q., sur  le plan  social, il oppose  le mouvement ouvrier  organise  au regime  de Bourassa. On  en  verra  des manifestations particulierement eloquentes lors des "fronts communs" de  1972  et de 1975-1976. Par  ailleurs,  le mouvement
* Cet  article constitue Ia  troisieme partie d'une etude a paraitre dans un  livre  en  preparation,
Le roman  quebecois  contemporain: une lecture  politique.

61

MAJOR

syndical, durant   la  meme  periode,  affronte  aussi  durement les employeurs  du secteur prive comme en temoignent les "greves historiques" fameuses de la United Aircraft, de Firestone, de Canadian Gypsum, de Quebec-Telephone, etc. Ces con­ flits apres  (avec  l'Etat comme avec les employeurs  du  secteur  prive)  provoque­ ront une radicalisation  ideologique dans les centrales  syndicales et  trouveront  un echo deforme dans les "groupes  politiques" qui apparaissent  alors. Le P.Q.,  pour sa part,  developpe  un "prejuge  favorable"  pour  les travailleurs  tout  en  evitant toutefois de s'impliquer  trap  activement  dans  les luttes syndicales, se contentant  generalement  d'appuyer les revendications des travailleurs  tout  en leur  prechant  la moderation  et faisant  appel  a la "bonne  volonte"  de l'Etat et des entreprises privees. Reste  que  le "prejuge  favorable"  rencontre  un  echo  certain  aupres  de larges secteurs du mouvement ouvrier qui voteront  pour ce parti lors des elections de novembre 1976.
Sur le plan  culture!, la situation  evolue aussi. La  problematique "parti priste"
de la litterature a ete abandonnee eta cede laplace ala problematique de la "que­ becitude"  qui  en  est  d'une  certaine  maniere  un  prolongement,   mais  deforme, travesti. Le "joual," chez V. L. Beaulieu et M. Tremblay, ne correspond  plus en effet a une revolte politique mais a une volonte "litteraire":  il s'agit  de Creer un langage  nouveau  pour exprimer  une civilisation nouvelle,  d'inventer en quelque
sorte une nouvelle langue apte a exprimer adequatement un nouveau  pays. C'est
la une tendance  importante qui apparait  dans le champ  culture!  au tournant des annees '70.  Autre  tendance  significative:  la  contre-culture  (Main  Mise qui  en sera !'expression  la plus repandue  est lancee en 1970)  qui  ralliera  de nombreux jeunes desenchantes  du  politique et desireux d'assumer  leur  "vecu"  hie et nunc. Derniere  tendance  importante enfin:  la culture  revolutionnaire dont  les tenants s'expriment  dans un certain nombre de revues "theoriques" nes au cours des pre­ mieres annees '7o:   Strategie, Champs d'application, Chroniques, etc.  Comment  concilier la  politique  revolutionnaire  et la  culture?  C'est  la  question  centrale  a laquelle essaient de repondre  les militants  et artistesjecrivains animateurs de ces revues.
Major  n'appartient a aucune  de ces trois tendances. Ayant  renonce au  joual, il
ne se sent guere d'attrait pour la "quebecitude." 11 est de meme reticent devant  la "contre-culture," phenomene  d'origine  americaine  dans  lequel  il ne se retrouve pas. Enfin, ayant  rompu avec le marxisme de sa jeunesse, il ne se sent  manifeste­ ment  pas concerne  par les preoccupations  des nouveaux  intellectuels "marxistes­  leninistes."
Ceci dit,  dans sa recherche  d'une  voie nouvelle, il va se reposer, sur  d'autres
bases, la question  qui  etait  au  centre  de sa reflexion  au  debut  des annees  '6o: quel est le rapport  entre l'Histoire et la litterature? Comment  penser et mettre en forme ce rapport?

MAJOR


Cette  interrogation survient dans  la foulee d'une evolution  qui  l'amene a  pren­ dre ses distances avec 1' Action  N ationale et son nationalisme conservateur  et a se rapprocher du  P.Q. En  1972,  dans  un  article  public  dans  La  Barre du   jour il repudie le terrorisme pour  lequel  il avait  eu  des complaisances naguere et  il fait siennes les theses exposees par  Vallieres  dans  L'Urgence de choisir.3   En  1973, ala  suite des elections  du mois d'octobre, il revendique publiquement et fortement son appartenance au  P.Q. dans  un  texte  public  dans  Liberte  en  janvier   1974.4  En
1975, il participe ala  creation de la revue  Interventions avec  d'autres ecrivains et
intellectuels du P.Q. qui ne desesperent  pas de voir le socialisme etre  pris en charge par  ce parti.5
En septembre de la meme  annee,  il publie  dans V oix et I mages un  article im­
portant sur sa conception de la litterature qui  releve pour  l'essentiel  de la  proble­ matique "sartrienne"; l'ecrivain ecrit  pour devoiler le monde  et, ce faisant, il con­ tribue a sa maniere a la transformer ( ce qu'exprime bien le neologisme: langage­ ment) .6  C'est  cette conception de la litterature qui sert de toile de fond,  d'horizon theorique a la suite  romanesque qu'il  publie  au  meme moment.
Or,  assez curieusement, il semble que la critique n'ait pas per(_;u cette  dimension dans  les "histoires  de deserteurs." Andre  Brochu,  rendant compte L'Epouvantail,
s'attarde surtout a l'analyse de  la  structure formelle  du  roman et  notamment a
!'organisation temporelle, fort  ingenieuse, de sa  narration. Fran(_;ois Ricard  met bien  en  lumiere le  caractere "ouvert" du  roman   mais  n'aborde, pas  plus  que Brochu, le probeme de sa signification. Pierre  L'Herault souligne  tres  rapidement que  le heros,  l'espace et la  thematique de L'Epidemie  "ont quelque chose  de  de­ passe"  mais  il s'empresse  d'ajouter que  "l'aventure ne se situe  pas  ici au  niveau
d'une  recherche thematique,  d'un  engagement politique, mais   a  celui   d'une
recherche formelle." Et il conclut  que  l'on se trouve  "en  face  d'une oeuvre solide­
ment   charpentee, solidement etablie,  en  dehors  de  references  socio-politiques." 7
Dans  les trois  cas, on  le voit,  tout  se passe comme  si on  hesitait   a aborder  le
probleme central de la signification et de Ia fonction  de ces textes. Cette  derobade,
moins  accusee  chez  L'Herault que  chez Brochu  et Ricard, est etrange et suspecte. Elle indique a tout  Ie moins  qu'il  y a dans  ces productions matiere a questionne­
ment: on  ne valorise  pas innocemment Ia seule dimension  formelle  d'une oeuvre au  detriment de son sens sans souligner  du coup  que celui-ci fait  probleme. Com­
ment  expliquer Ie malaise  evident  des critiques,  leur  hesitation a attaquer  resolu­
ment  Ia question de  Ia signification   de l'oeuvre? II me  semble  que  Ia  reponse  a
cette  question doit 'etre cherchee dans l'oeuvre elle-meme,  dans  son aspect  ambigii et deroutant.



L'Epouvantail,  PREMIER VOLET DE  LA  SUITE  romanesque, se presente  au  premier  abord  comme  un roman  policier. La  premiere partie  du  recit

MAJOR

est orgamsee  autour  d'un  meurtre -celui  de  Gigi,  une  barmaid, ex-amie  du heros, Morna  Boulanger sou onne
turee autour  du chef-enqueteur,  l'inspecteur  Therrien, qui effectue des recherches
a Saint-Emmanuel, lieu de naissance et refuge probable de l'assassin hypothetique. Rapidement cependant  on  se  rend  compte  que  le  meurtre   a  une  importance secondaire  et que c'est le presume meurtrier  qui interesse surtout  le romancier; de meme, dans Ia seconde partie  du roman,  Ia recherche  policiere cede rapidement Ia place d'une  part  a l'analyse de Ia personnalite  du chef-enqueteur, d'autre part a l'evocation  de Saint-Emmanuel. Insensiblement  on passe done du recit policier classique  (crime  declenchant  Ia recherche  de l'assassin)  a Ia chronique  d'un  vil­ lage perdu -physiquement et historiquement-du Quebec. Dans les trois autres valets de Ia chronique  (si I'on y inclut  Une  soiree en octobre)   c'est  Saint-Em­ manuel  qui  sera  egalement  le lieu  priviiegie des evenements  et,  on  le verra,  le micro-cosme, Ia representation  symbolique  du  Quebec  d'aujourd'hui,  ce qui  ne manquera pas de poser probleme.
Le narrateur de L'Epouvantail, tout  compte fait, ne nous dit pas grand  chose
sur Morna  Boulanger. On sait seulement qu'il  vient de sortir  de prison, qu'il  est originaire de Saint Emmanuel, qu'il se sent perdu a Montreal, ville qui lui semble hostile, qu'il  ne s'accepte  pas comme Quebecois  francophone-exigeant  qu'on l'appelle  non pas Boulanger, mais Baker, on ne sait trap  pourquoi,  Major  ne fai­ sant  qu'esquisser  cette thematique-enfin qu'il  est prisonnier  de son passe, con­ damne  a toujours  poursuivre Gigi depuis qu'il  a fait  un  jour l'amour  avec elle dans  un  champ  de ble, cet evenement  ayant  en quelque  sorte scelle  son  destin.8
L'analyse de cet enfant perdu s'arrete  Ia. De meme, a un autre  niveau, Gigi, Mar­
line  et  leurs  protecteurs  de  Ia  petite  pegre  proletarisee  de  Montreal   ne  sont qu'evoques: leur  destin  n'est  pas  vraiment  explique  par  une  mise en  contexte precise  et  rigoureuse,   tache   que   l'auteur  semble   s'etre   gardee   pour   Saint­ Emmanuel.
Dans ce premier  roman, done, le projet9   de Ia chronique n'est pas clair:  il y a oscillation du faux roman policier a Ia representation  sociographique d'un  milieu choisi pour  sa valeur  representative.  Le  projet  de  Ia chronique-qui s'est sans doute precise en cours de redaction-n'apparait tres clairement  que dans L'Epi­ demie, second valet du cycle.
La dessus on ne pourrait citer exemple plus significatif que l'epigraphe qui figure en tete  du  roman: "Ce  sont  d'etranges  survivants,  prives de  traditions,  et  qui semblent  vivre de n'importe  quoi plutot que de Ia terre ou ils habitent. Peut..etre ont-ils tout perdu, y compris le gout de l'avenir.  Quand ils se reunissent, c'est pour continuer  a oublier en buvant  plus qu'il n'est convenable" ( texte tired'U n Village quebecois au  XXe siecle, de Paul  H.  Prot). II s'agira  done de dresser Ia  mono­ graphic   ( imaginaire)  d'un   village  quebecois  a  travers  le  destin  individuel   de quelques-uns  de ses habitants et, au-dela, de s'interroger sur le  present et l'avenir

MAJOR

du Quebec comme collectivite globale dont Saint-Emmanuel constitue en quelque sorte un modele reduit.
Le projet, deja, etait mis en marche dans L'Epouvantail, les principaux  acteurs
de la chronique,  outre  Momo,  soit Therrien,  Marie-Rose,  Phil  et son pere Jos, Calixa, etant  evoques dans la deuxieme partie du roman inaugural de meme que les lieux ou ils consument leur vie a petites doses: le magasin general, l'hOtel ou ils passent de tongues soirees a essayer de noyer leurs ennuis dans  l'alcool, la foret dont quelques-uns  vivent et qui sert de refuge aux autres lorsque, comme Morna, ils sont poursuivis par  la police. De meme etaient mises en  place deux des  prin­ cipales intrigues  de la suite romanesque: les amours de Therrien et d'Emerence, celles de Marie-Rose et Morna. Mais cet univers ne trouve sa representation  exten­ sive que dans L'Epidemie.10


LE  PERSONNAGE PRINCIPAL de ce roman  est l'inspecteur Therrien, qui  est a la fois un  etranger- n'etant  pas originaire  du  village qu'il semble  dominer  du  haut  de sa  maison  promontoire-et un  familier, y ayant
ses habitudes depuis longtemps. Therrien  est, dans le domaine affectif, un impuis­ sant  et un  voyeur. Amoureux  d'Emerence,  il ne la  dispute  pas au  gros Jerome, proprietaire de l'hotel  de Saint-Emmanuel qui en a fait sa femme, et  lorsqu'elle s'offre a lui, il se derobe et se contente de la photographier  vicieusement. Amoureux pusillanime, il se revele au  surplus  pietre mari  avec Julienne,  soeur  d'Emerence  qu'il  a epousee et qui l'abandonnera, lasse de son indifference. Legros Jt rome encore plus mediocre que Therrien: lui non plus n'a passu aimer Emerencen  qui finira par le quitter  pour  Florent Dupre, le maire du village et l'homme  politique en vue de la region. Phil,  le gan;on  boucher, est egalement  un mou  qui  n'a  su aimer  ni Gigi ni Marie-Rose  que lui a volees Morna. On  pourrait  ainsi continuer longtemps  !'enumeration  des  personnages faibles  et  ternes  qui  peuplent  Saint­ Emmanuel, a !'exception  des freres Boulanger, ces solitaires qui font bande a part, echappant ainsi a la condition  pas vraiment miserable, mais mediocre et resignee des residents du village.
Saint-Emmanuel, par  ailleurs,  est  represente  comme  un  "village  vivant  au
ralenti une sorte de patiente agonie,m2   comme un "village-fanti3me  transforme en
hospice pour impotents,m3 habite par des "mourants qui font semblant de vivre."14
Therrien, de sa maison-promontoire, eprouve la sensation de dominer "ce pays de rien du tout-ces maisons naines a travers lesquelles l'etroit  ruban gris de la route semblait  s'ecouler,  puis  se  tarir  dans  la  carriere,  derriere  la  boulangerie-de dominer  ce croquis et d'echapper, lui, ala derive lente qui avait  commence ale gruger, a le ranger et a le  pourrir du dedans.m 5  Plus loin, le narrateur  precisera dans des termes voisins:  "Et  ce qui le terrifiat le plus, ce n'etait  pas cette maree

MAJOR

destructrice,  c'etait  de demeurer 13.,  cramponne a son soc, isole comme  sur  une lie alors que dehors tout disparaissait, s'enfon ait
dissimulaient plus ces centaines de chalets proliferant  comme des champignons sur le flanc decime  de Ia montagne.  Oui,  cramponne sur  son  promontoire, avec  le
sentiment  de vivre au-dessus du  vide, attendant de cruler  dedans  d'un  instant  a
l'autre.m6   Saint-Emmanuel, en somme, et pour faire vite, apparait pour l'essentiel
comme un univers en decomposition, frappe  par  une "epidemie" aussi cruelle que mysterieuse, forme de morts-vivants, qui tout  a Ia fois fascine et remplit  d'horreur un Therrien  indissociablement lie a cette communaute d'une  part et conscient d'en
etre different  par certains cotes ( ne serait-ce que par sa lucidite)  d'autre part.  Je me contente  pour  l'instant  de souligner  cette  donnee,  me  proposant,  apres  un examen rapide  du troisieme valet de Ia suite romanesque, de formuler  une inter­ pretation  de cette mise en situation.
Les Rescapes, troisieme  ( et  provisoirement?)   dernier  valet  de  Ia suite  roma­
nesque, relancent  d'une  certaine maniere l'entreprise dans une nouvelle direction. Therrien,  personnage central du roman  precedent,  disparait  violemment,  victime d'un  meurtre  ( ou d'une  tentative  de suicide, on ne sait trap) tandis  que  Morna
revient au  premier  plan, suite a son evasion de prison:  il prend  le maquis  avec
Marie-Rose,  tentant  d'echapper  aux  recherches  de Ia police et de refaire sa vie. Mais il n'est pas le seul personnage important du roman  qui nous fait assister a Ia
reussite sociale du gros Jerome,  devenant  maire  de Saint-Emmanuel puis depute liberal et insuffiant  une vie nouvelle au  village:  "Mais  sa  plus grande  satisfac­ tion, ecrit le narrateur, etait  quand  meme d'avoir  mis en vente des  centaines  de
terrains  au  s'etablissait  une  population  estivale grace  a laquelle  le village avait
cesse de pericliter,"17  vie nouvelle qui ne provient  pas d'un  developpement  endo­
gene mais d'une  operation  purement  artificielle qui  ne transforme  pas vraiment les habitants  du village qui demeurent, dans leur tres grande  majorite,  des "morts­ vivants." Tandis  que Jerome  "monte," Florent  Dupre,  qui a quitte son  travail  et
sa famille  pour  Emerence, "descend": il est progressivement  reduit  a vivre aux
crochets de celle-ci qui le trompera  avec son  patron,  provoquant  du  coup  son
depart. De nouveaux  personnages, d'importance secondaire, apparaissent: Cherry, l'epouse de Gene, frere de Jerome, Palma, Manchottc, Labranche, etc. Le  narra­
teur s'interesse, en ordre  disperse, a l'un  et a l'autre, donnant   ainsi,  volontaire­
ment au  non, un caractere  disparate,  eclatC18 a son roman  qui se termine  d'une
certaine  maniere  en queue de  poisson ( quatre  ans apres  on attend  toujours  une
suite qui ne viendra  peut...etre jamais).
Ce qui guide Major,  on l'a vu plus haut, dans l'elaboration et l'ecriture  de cette suite romanesque,  c'est une certaine conception "sartrienne" de Ia litterature  per­
<;ue comme  entreprise  de devoilement  du  reel  ( et  par  Ia meme  agent  de  trans­
formation du  reel, puisque montrer  c'est en soi contribuer  a changer  Ia  percep­
tion de celui-ci) .

66

MAJOR

Ceci dit, se pose tres concretement  la question du  decoupage du  reel a repre­
senter,  du  fragment   ( etjou  des fragments)   de  realite  qui  seront  au  centre  du tableau.  Ce decoupage, a son tour, n'est pas le fruit du hasard: il est le resultat de la vision que l'ecrivain  entretient  du reel, il est done realise, produit  a partir d'un point  de vue  precis, de la  vision du  monde  propre  au  romancier   ( et  a la  com­ munaute a laquelle il se ref ere).
Or !'oeuvre,  il n'est pas inutile de le rappeler, a ete elaboree et ecrite durant  le
"regne de Bourassa," a partir d'une  vision critique du regime se nourrissant essen­
tiellement de l'ideologie neo-nationaliste vehiculee par le P.Q.19 Si cette prise de distance  par  rapport  au  regime liberal  permet  incontestablement  a l'ecrivain  de montrer  les faiblesses de celui-ci -songeons par exemple a la presentation  lucide du  caractere  artificiel  des transformations realisees par  le gros Jerome  a Saint­
Emmanuel-i1 n'est pas sur qu'elle lui permette  par ailleurs de saisir les contra­
dictions  propres  a l'ideologie  neo-nationaliste  dont  la  principale  est peut<tre  la
perception  du Quebec  comme "classe ethnique" ( ainsi que le definissaient Dofny
et  Rioux  au  debut  des annees  I g6o) , comme  communaute homogene,  grande famille, provisoirement  divisee, a reunifier  ( c'etait  le theme  central  de la  propa­
gande des partisans  du "oui" lors du referendum  du 20 mai).
Cette limite  n'est  pas sans consequences comme l'illustre  fort  eloquemment  la representation  de Saint-Emmanuel qui apparalt comme le symbole de la societe
quebecoise sous Bourassa qui ne serait formee que de survivants condamnes a une
fin derisoire, a mains qu'elle ne soit sujette a un sursaut, un reveil collectif qui n'est
rien mains que certain.  Et, par ailleurs, les personnages qui ne sont pas des morts­
vivants  sont  soit  des "deserteurs"  ( comme  Morna  renonc;ant  a son  identite  et
fuyant  sa communaute-il  en va de meme, d'une  maniere  differente,  pour son
frere Calixa),20  soit des spectateurs  impuissants comme Therrien. Celui-ci, d'une certaine  fac;on, represente  les intellectuels, a la fois membres  de Ia communaute
et isoles, marginalises  dans  celle-d:   intellectuels impuissants,  conscients de la degradation de leur societe, mais n'agissant  pas pour en freiner le processus (qui apparalt comme inexorable) .

cETTE  MISE EN SCENE de ]a realite quebecoise inspiree par l'ideologie neo-nationaliste a  bien sur  une  portee critique  indeniable   (que  man
analyse de  I976  ne mettait  pas suffisamment en lumiere;  j'en profite pour  faire, sur ce point, man  autocritique)  mais limitee  dans la mesure ou elle ne rend  pas compte  de  ce qui  bougeait  dans  la  periode  representee  par  l'ecrivain   ( et  pas seulement  dans  le mouvement  ouvrier  dont  plusieurs greves temoignerent  de  la
vitalite mais aussi dans le milieu rural traverse par d'apres  luttes visant a stopper
son hemorragie  au profit des villes et sa mort lente) .

MAJOR

De ccttc limite, de cette  restriction de champ,  de  ce manque  de  perspective,
Une Soiree en octobre constitue un excellent exemple.
Cette  piece sur les evenements  d'octobre  1970,  Major  a  choisi de la situer  a Saint-Emmanuel  ( l'integrant, du  coup, dans  son  cycle)  surprise  dans  sa  tran­ quillite  par  cet episode de bruit  et de fureur.  Les principaux  personnages  de la piece, sauf Antoine  ( "le cabochon"?)' un pequiste en fuite, appartiennent a l'uni­ vers deja mis en forme dans les romans. Legros Jerome, devenu depute liberal, se barricade  dans son hOtel, craignant  (ou feignant  de croire)  a une revolution  im­ minente.  Phil, le ga on
cieuse conditionnee  par la propagande  officielle; lui aussi a peur et fait confiance
a la police. Seule Cherry, la danseuse de l'hotel, n'est pas dupe: elle sent bien que cette crise n'est pas vraiment serieuse, mais elle n'en  a pas une comprehension politique, d'ou les limites de sa critique. La morale de la piece-qui sombre pro­ gressivement dans des drames de la vie privee: obsessions sexuelles de Jerome  et de  Phil, aspirations  romantiques  de Cherry,  etc.-c'est  que  la  crise  d'octobre,  ainsi que le dit l'auteur en preface, "est toujours  Ia, toujours  possible, du  mains tant  que les Cherry, Jerome, Antoine, Ben et Phil seront  ce qu'ils sont." 21
Sans doute mais cette "lec;on" est un peu courte. En realite un autre choix etait
possible, qui  aurait  eu  pour  "acteurs  les grands  responsables  de  la  crise"22   et l'auteur  en est conscient. Cependant  il a effectue un choix different  qui escamote les donnees essentielles de la crise qui se situent  d'abord au  niveau  politique.  11 aurait  ete bien plus instructif  par  exemple de faire  voir comment  la crise a  ete fabriquee et exploitee par le pouvoir ou encore de montrer quels problemes l'action terroriste posait a ses propagandistes tant au niveau  moral que politique. Dans sa preface, Major,  pour  justifier son choix, fait appel ala notion sartrienne  de situa­ tion -limite qu'il  pretend  avoir  appliquee,  ce qui  n'est  pas faux,  encore  qu'il aurait  pu en faire un tout autre  usage dans le sens que  je viens d'indiquer, ce qui aurait  eu pour merite de mieux faire ressortir les veritables enjeux  de la crise.
En somme, autant la piece de theatre  que  les romans  renvoient  a !'ideologic
neo-nationaliste  du debut  des annees 1970 dont  ils expriment  la dimension  pro­ gressiste (par  rapport  au regime en place et a la societe qu'il  tient sous sa coupe) et les limites (la conception du Quebec  comme une communaute familiale). Par la, Major  et son oeuvre se demarquent des positions ( et des productions) a Ia fois des tenants  d'une  contre-culture  a-historique  et a-politique et de ceux d'une  cul­ ture  revolutionnaire trouvant  ses fondements  dans  l'histoire  et  les traditions  du mouvement  ouvrier  posees comme axe central  du  processus historique.

NOTES
1 Poemes  pour  durer  ( 196o-Ig6g)  (Montreal:  Editions du  Songe,  I g6g). Le  desir,
suivi deLe perdant  (Montreal: Lemeac, I973).
2  Ce  "deplacement" est  interessant: en  I 975,  Major inclut dans  sa  suite  les  trois romans de sa chronique publies  jusqu'ici,  plus la  piece,  Une  Soiree  en  octobre  qui

68

MAJOR

date  de cette  annee-la et  le Journal d'un  collectionneur de  frissons ( recit  autobio­
graphique?) ' livre alors  a paraltre ( tou jours non  publie en  1980) . En  1976, "l'his­
toire d'une survivance" est devenu  les "histoires de deserteurs" et ne comprend plus
la piece de theatre et  le livre  (autobiographique?) annonce l'annee pr,eoedente. Ce
"glissement" signifie-t-il  plus  qu'un changement d'appellation? Voila  une question a laquelle l'analyse nous  permettra peut-etre de repondre.
3 "Un long detour," La Barre du  jour (hiver  1972), pp.  36-49·
4   "Le  29 octobre et apres," Liberte  (janvier-fevrier 1974), pp. 73-96.
5  Sauf erreur, cette  revue  n'a  publie  qu'un seul numero, consacl'e  pour  l'essentiel  a la
crise d'octobre 1970.  Un  second  numero,  annonce sur  le theme des deux  Canada,
n'a  jamais  vu le jour. La  revue  comptait notament parmi ses animateurs: Fran  ois
Ricard, Andre Brochu, Pierre Turgeon et Jacques Godbout.
6   "Langagement," Voix  et images  (septembre 1975), pp.  120-24.
7  Compte-rendu pubHe dans  Liures et auteurs quebecois 1975, pp.  38-41.
8  Le  narrateur, evoquant les  retrouvailles de  Momo  et  Gigi  a Montr,eal  apres  une
separation de  plus  de  deux  ans,  ecrit: "Et   quand   elle  l'apperc;ut grima ant
espece  de  sourire, elle avala autant d'air qu'elle  pouvait, respirant sa sueur  epicee
avec !'impression, la certitude meme,  que  tout  s'etait deja  passe et que ce n'etait la que la reprise d'un  euenement  oublie"  (p.  17, je souligne). Et  plus  loin, decrivant
la situation de  Momo condamne a fuir  apres  le meurtre de  Gigi,  il ecrit  encore:
"C'etait lui maintenant qui allait  courir,  aussi desorienre  qu'une bete  prise de pani­
que, simplement parce  qu'un dimanche d'ete  il avait  entralne Gigi dans  un champ
de  mais"   (p.  141). Il  y a  done  pour  le  personnage de  Momo  ( comme  pour  les
autres)  a  l'origine des  conduites presentes   au  evenement originel,  une  sorte  de
"traumatisme de la naissance" qui  pese sur lui comme  une chape de  plomb  dont  il ne peut  se delivrer. Cette  fatalite qui  s'acharne sur  les personnages n'est  pas  sans rappeler l'univers de Faulkner dont  elle est, on le sait, un  trait  central. De meme il y
a quelque chose de "faulknerien" dans !'utilisation "technique" que Major fait de la temporalite, devoilant peu  a peu,  dans  un  mouvement de  va-et-vient du  passe au
futur, la v'erite de ses personnages et des evenements qu'ils  vivent  (richesse  formelle que  la presentation lineaire que  je fais ici ne prend  pas en compte-mais ce n'est pas la mon  propos,  qui est plutot de signaler  et de degager la signification du  t,emps uecu ( comme destin,  fatalite) sur laquelle  je reviendrai.
9  La  notion  de  projet renvoie  ici a I'intention  de !'auteur ( soit  telle  qu'il  l'a  definie explicitement lui-meme, soit  telle  qu'on peut  la  degager a la  suite  d'une lecture attentive de  !'oeuvre)  a la  fois  quant au  mode  de  narration-recit policier  vs roman   descriptif  fa on                                                                                                         a
mettre en scene-milieu de la petite  pegre de Montreal vs univers  ferme  de Saint­ Emmanuel. Je  precise cette  notion  qui  peut,  semble-t-il,  faire  problt:me  si  j'en  juge
par !'article de Fran<;ois Ricard consacre  a refuter une  analyse  produite par  moi en
1976 sur les "histoires de deserteurs" (re "Andre Major neva pas, il ecrit," Liberte,
109  [janvier-fevrier I 977], pp. 67-74) .
10 A !'inverse, plusieurs intrigues et personnages de L'Epouuantail disparaissent: ainsi en va-t-il,  par  exemple, du  personnage du "cure," St-Pierre, client  de Gigi qui  joue un  role  central dans  "l'affaire" du  meurtre de  la danseuse et  auquel le narrateur s'interesse  de pres durant quelques chapitres, lui donnant de la consistance et de la
profondeur, et qu'il  abandonne ensuite  a son sort  (cet abandon tenant, a mon  avis,
au changement d'orientation de Ia suite romanesque).
11 Cet abandon est presente comme  un denouement logique,  previsible,  "programme" depuis   deja   longtemps,  des   les  commencements  de  !'union  d'Emerence  et   de

6g

MAJOR

Jerome. Decrivant la "nuit de noces" des epoux, le narrateur ·ecrit:  "II  lui semblait
(a  Jerome)  s'enfoncer a chaque  seconde,  plus  profondement dans  le courant irre­
versible  de  cet  echec initiaf'   (p.  59· Je  souligne). On  retrouve  la a  nouveau le
"mythe des origines" (.a la resonance  faulknerienne tt-es nette) deja  mis en  forme
dans  le premier roman.
12  L'Epidemie, p. 74· Je  souligne.
1s  Idem, p. 83. Je  souligne.
14  Ibidem. Je souligne.
15  Idem, p. 35· Je souligne.
16  Idem, pp.  g8-gg. Je souligne.
17   Idem, p.  107.
18  11 est  vrai  que  "la  liste des principaux personnages de  Ia chronique" qui  suit  le roman peut  aider   le lecteur  a se retrouver de  meme  que  le  dessin  des  lieux  qui l'accompagne eclaire Ia topographie du  recit   ( un  procede qui,  Ja encore,  rappelle Faulkner).
19  Dans  le  "portrait" de !'auteur p11esenre au  debut d'Une  Soiree  en  octobre  (texte vraisemblablement ecrit  par  celui-ci; il s'agit-Ja  d'une pratique courante dans  les milieux  de !'edition) il est precise que  celui-ci  est  "fascine" par  "le  problt me becois dont  Ia de lui semble  une  identire collective que  !'absence de  pouvoir  reel
sur  l'Histoire rend  de plus  en  plus  hypothetique" ( Une  Soiree en octobre  [Mon­
treal: Lemeac, 1975], p.  18).
20  D'ou Ia pertinence, en un sens, des deux  titres  de  Ia suite  romanesque qui  est  a la
fois effectivement Ia "chronique d'une survivance" et la mise en forme  "d'histoires
de deserteurs."
21  Une  soiree en octobre, p. 17.
112  Idem, p. 16.









C.:ziN.:ziDIJIN FR.:ziGMENTS
 


John Baglow


z.  quarry

not  the glimpse  through leaves, a red/gold screen ensuring
the  getaway,  myths  borne  home
instead

but  all around  us the precious  threads

POEM

ii.  exile

years spent  trying
to leave  that  vile town-

house  after  house  st-lambert swells in the road,
mouthing its riddles at my back


m.  fireweed

sprouts  in the livingrooms through the carpets as though
ice were  breaking

the delicate walls ajar, engraved with  leaves, aiming their  windows at  the  troubled moon.

at daybreak the voices refuse  to scatter.


w.  prism

the one exact  light was here.  leaving
the seasons  to the eye

1s now
on  the  far  side of the mountain, the  trail  long  cold.


v.  this magazine



dry. and  that  one
 keeps  the  powder

is here  for a little  time yet. on with  your clothes
at first light. shiver at  first frost.  this
is basic  training:

POEM

forward, if someone  can  find the  horizon 	or  the  way back, the  new man  wisely
scrounging a meal.



vi.  forum

in chaste  valleys the old  play their  stately  checkers
as though in a trance

the young barge past, shouting poems, or words to that effect. another game  before sundown, exchange of kings.


vu. tamarack

will advance not so far north  the tundra invades  the  eyes. far  enough to avoid  the prickly  pear - pelee welcoming  spring. between  these brackets anything goes.


viii. branching out

your  body
so much  dead  weight after  the act, something left behind.

the  red candles  blown out, the barricades down  at last. a merciful lack of
mere  speech.

POEM

tx.  storm warning

midsummer sun dripping honey,

stone  tents
at  the outskirts of space,

the  blue dome intact

-the fiery night
is swollen  beyond its banks

loosening us,
wearing the earth  away


x. it needs to be said

johnson,  evans, etc., their  black  world
stopped in the law's  name

kiss the alien soil; their  bodies become canadian


xi.  fiddlehead

fingers unaccustomed to the ancient chords, numb with  our
long  winters     strings quivering with  practice -

virgin  forest  redefined. noble  animals,
silently  grazing.     near the stone-heap
the settlers,  giving voice.




73

LA LAMPE DANS  LA FENETRE

The Visualization of Quebec Fiction




Eva-Marie  Kroller







ON SEEING CLAUDE JUTRA's FILM Kamau,.<ka  ( 1973) and Jean  Beaudin's Cordelia ( 1979)  and]. A. Martin photographe  ( 1977), one cannot  but  notice  the  repeated  references  to  windows.  Although  the  camera's insistent focus on windows is, in each case, realistically motivated  (and  an all too obvious  part  of each  heroine's  everyday  existence), it  soon  becomes  clear  that these windows also establish a metaphorical correlation  between  the female  pro­ tagonists and  the way in which they respond  to their  environment. More speci­ fically, the  window  can  be  seen  to  embody  the  imprisonment  of   nineteenth­  century  Quebecoises like Elisabeth  d'Aulnieres,  Cordelia  Viau,  and  Rose-Aimee Martin  in their sexual and  domestic  roles; but,  conversely, the  image  may also function  as an opening into self-recognition and  release.
To  appreciate  the  changing  metaphorical values of the  window-image   (and
others  closely related)   in Jutra's and  Beaudin's  films also has, I would  like to argue,  a  retrospective  bearing  upon  the  texts that  two of these films are  based upon, Anne Hebert's  Kamouraska  ( 1970)  and Pauline  Cadieux's La Lampe  dans la fenetre ( 1976). Both Kamouraska  and Cordelia originate  in  husband-woman­ lover triangles, but the connections between text and  film differ. Jutra's visualiza­ tion and  patterning of cues found in Hebert's  novel enhance  its sense of authen­ ticity:  Quebec  architecture  is seen to provide a  natural metaphor for the  prison which  Elisabeth's  spinning  memories  have  created  for  her.  Cordelia,  since it  is directly based upon a criminal case history, provides the opposite relation between text and  film :  here, the text contains  meticulously collected  data  regarding  the Viau case. The  film orders these in the logic of an artistic genre, a logic which, in
itself, is an ironical statement upon the irrationality  of Cordelia's case. J. A. Martin
may be placed between Kamouraska and Cordelia, both chronologically and metaphorically. Although  it is not  itself based  upon  a  literary  or  documentary model, it derives much of its impact  from re-defining  the visual leitmotifs found

74

HEBERT


m  Jutra's and  Hebert's   Kamouraska   on  the  one  hand  and   in  Cordelia  and
Cadieux's  book on the other.
The element of movement  is probably the feature in which]. A. Martin  photo­ graphe differs most strikingly from Cordelia and Kamouraska. The setting in the latter  two is literally confined:  Elisabeth and  Cordelia spend time in gaol or else remain  in their respective homes. The fact that  Elisabeth  moves from a house in Sorel to another  in Kamouraska and  yet another  in  Quebec does  not widen her field of range;  these houses have become almost interchangeable in her memory. Conversely, Antoine Tassy, Elisabeth's first husband, and her lover George Nelson travel  freely;  Nelson  escapes into  freedom  to  Burlington,  across  the  American harder; Isidore Poirier, Cordelia's husband,  leaves his young wife behind  to seek work in California.  Rose-Aimee, however, refuses to let her man go on yet another photographic trip through Quebec and  Maine without her. The  Martins travel in a cart,  "une  charrette," a  means of transport  frequently  associated  with spunky women -ranging  from  Brecht's  Mother  Courage   (evoked,  as  an  allegory  of Quebec,   in  Gaston   Miron's   "L'Octobre")  to  Antonine   Maillet's   Pelagie-la­ Charrette  ( 1979). Among the means of transport we see in Cordelia are carriages with men spying on  her and  the cart that  carries Cordelia  to gaol. Similarly, car­ riages in  Kamouraska are oppressive miniature  houses, an  impression much  em­ phasized in Jutra's film; "Secouees par le mouvement rapide  de la voiture, Elisa­ beth  d'Aulni,eres et sa belle-mere, Mme Tassy, demeurent  aussi  defendues, l'une contre !'autre, que  des noix entrechoquees  dans un  sac."'  For  Rose-Aimee, the cart becomes a genuine means of escaping her home and the five children crowded in it. All through  the first sequences of the film we see Rose-Aimee nervously trying to clear space  around  her, chasing the children outside, forbidding  them to play in her presence. As long as her mind is preoccupied with her home, the cart, too, remains  a "mobile  home."  Even  when  she has begun to renew  her self and  her marriage  with J.  A., a miscarriage reminds them of the  biological limitations  of her newly-found freedom. One of the most powerful scenes of the film, one realized entirely without  dialogue,  shows Rose-Aimee lying on the cart,  suffering through a  miscarriage.  Her  body  is  hidden  under  the  covering of the  cart  which,  here, becomes an ambiguous combination  of protection and  confinement,  especially so
since J. A. sits apart  helplessly looking on. Yet the  couple also teams up to  pull
the cart,  literally  and  metaphorically, out of the mud.  That scene, again,  has a negative correspondent  in Kamouraska  which  uses the ancient  romantic  ploy of a sleigh overturning to  throw  the  lovers into  each  other's  arms.  What  at  first appears  as the delirious  fulfillment of erotic desire, soon serves to  project  Elisa­ beth's ever-increasing  solitude:  "Nous  restons dans Ia neige. Couches sur  le dos. Regardons  le ciel, piques  d'etoiles.  Frissonnons de  froid.  Longtemps  j'essaye de me retenir  de  claquer  des dents."  Not  surprisingly,  the  sleigh scene  under  the stars is immediately followed by images of captivity. At the Governor's Ball, Elisa-

75

HEBERT

beth  is "prise,  entrainee,  poussee, tiiie. Capturee" by her scandalized  aunts, 2    a scene which Jutra  frames by using oppressively low ceilings in his film.
Rose-Aimee's resurrection as an individual  is accompanied  by clothing imagery that, following the Christian tradition of the soul divesting itself of its earthly shell, gradually  releases her into her freedom. From  the beginning of the film, clothing serves as a synecdochic expression of Rose-Aimee's efforts to leave the chrysalis of conventionality  and  of her fears to forfeit  its  protectiveness.  We first see  Rose­
Aimee doing  the laundry  and  folding sheets;  coming  close to  J. A. for  the  first
time during  their  trip together is a result of her  pulling  the cart  out of the  mud and  having  to  take  her clothes off. Before they  enter  the  hotel, she  clears  the clothesline with  which she has festooned the  cart  and  worries about  "faux-plis" in her dress. Listening to a couple noisily making love next door makes her aware that  houses are  not  necessarily protective if they are  not  her own;  thus she falls asleep fully clothed -her dress a substitute  for an environment she feels safe in. Yet her personal liberation,  temporary as it may be, culminates  in her enjoyment of a wedding-party, at which she sings a naughty  song about  a woman  removing
her clothes; J. A., the photographer  of the wedding, temporarily  assumes her role
by sitting apart,  holding a tired child.




CoRDELIA, ALL  THROUGH  THE FILM, is locked not  only in her clothes but also in her skin:  she suffers from  a skin disease, and  the film cor­ roborates  the  restructions she experiences through  her  illness by showing  her  in tight  clothes, buttoned  up  to her neck, that  scarcely seem to leave her  space  to breathe in. As her trial proceeds, Cordelia increasingly loses control over her body until she degenerates into an animal in her cell, helplessly exposed to the stares of the villagers. In  direct opposition to Rose-Aimee, who re-possesses her  body, the images of her  past, and, finally, her house, Cordelia  loses power over  all of her existence. In the final sequence of the film when she is prepared  for execution she is seen in a tight  black dress, with straps  around  her  knees and  hands,  her  face covered with a black veil, the noose around  her neck. The last sound we hear from Cordelia is her laboured,  anxious breathing.  The  film's  credits are superimposed on  a shot  of Cordelia's  deserted  home,  "La  maison,  maintenant deterioree,  les persiennes pendantes,  les vitres brisees, il n'y a  plus de  porte.... Une  jeune fille
... lance  une  pierre  dans Ia bay-window  qui  n'a  pas ere brisee."3   Kamouraska,
again, seemingly contrasts with Cordelia. Elisabeth is forever shedding  her clothes in crumpled  heaps about  her; in one of the crucial scenes of both  the novel and the film, Nelson orders her to strip, and  the couple  make love behind  a window brightly lit by a lamp. But nudity in Kamouraska does not imply freedom and resurrection. On the contrary:  during her wedding-night, Elisabeth  regards "avec

HEBERT


effarement ses vetements  jetes dans la chambre, en grand  desordre, de velours, de linge et de dentelle."  George  Nelson, the seemingly ideal counterpart to Antoine Tassy, orders her to strip  in order to humiliate  her, and she describes their love­ making on top of her crushed  clothing as an act of murder,  with "Son sexe dur comme une arme." The men in Elisabeth's life try to divest her of her individuality by giving her clothes to other women; Antoine presents them as gifts to his whores; George uses Elisabeth's  best dress to bribe Aurelie Caron. Elisabeth's marriage  to Jerome  Rolland  has forced  her to make do with the left-overs of her hopes and passions. When }erome,  on his death-bed,  more states than  asks: "Elisabeth,  tu as eu bien de la chance de m'epouser, n'est-ce pas," she replies in terms of clothing: "Jerome, sans toi, j'etais libre et je refaisais rna vie, comme on retoume  unman­ teau  use."
Throughout Kamouraska, Elisabeth is seen framed  by a window, looking out into the present as well as into the world of her memories. The gothic and metony­ mic implications  of this  motif in Hebert's  novel and  in  Jutra's film  have  been thoroughly  analysed  elsewhere  and  need  not  be repeated  in  this  context.4   The  motif of Elisabeth framed  by a window suggests confinement, suffocation, solitude, responses corroborated in Jutra's film through  the  use of  tiny glass-panes set in solid house-walls.  ].  A.  Martin   photographe, on  the  other  hand,  develops the window-motif  by interpreting it as a means of  framing  a moment  of sharp  self­ recognition.  In  one take, Rose-Aimee, occupied  with the laundry,  glances out  of the window at the grandmother who is napping in the garden. The first shot shows the grandmother from Rose-Aimee's perspective; then, the camera  angle changes to show Rose-Aimee, framed  by the window, as she, in turn,  would be seen from the garden.  The  exchange  of angles  corresponds to Rose-Aimee's mounting  fear that  her marriage will result in a life like the grandmother's, and  in contentment
that J. A. is "travaillant pis y bait pas."5  Shots directed from the interior of a room
towards a window, as well as angles showing Rose-Aimee in the frame of a  win­ dow or a door are soon established as one of the visual leitmotifs of the film. The  final sequences of the film close the circle of these enclosure images  by  showing the Martins arriving back from their journey. Rose-Aimee looks at her home which now appears spacious and fresh: "R'garde la maison ... y m'semble qu'etait  pas si grande que a
and  exterior  angles and  their ironical  implications  as modes of seeing things  are
particularly  revealing in scenes where J. A. is unable or unwilling to get involved, an attitude  which Rose-Aimee likens to his profession as a photographer  where he
hides his head  "toute la  journee en dessous de ton maudit  voile nair,  a rien  en­
tendre  pis a rien  voir."  When  the  Martins  give a  ride  to a small  boy and  sub­
sequently stay at his house so that his father can fetch a priest for his dying mother, J. A. is seen, outside, urging  Rose-Aimee to leave. She responds, "On  peut pas la laisser comme a                        J. A. refuses. A little later,  J. A. lets the boy


77

HEBERT


look through  a  close-up lens he is polishing, only  to  have  him  called  into  the house by Rose-Aimee:  "Julien! Ta  mere voudrait  te voir."  In  contrast  to  J. A.,
who remains outside, equipped with at least the mechanical  means to view things more clearly, Rose-Aimee's voice is heard  describing  pictures  of Rome  and  Ver­ sailles she is showing the children, while the camera  is directed  at a  window.
The most extensive use of the window-motif in Cordelia occurs while Cordelia is in gaol, standing  below the barred  window  of her  cell, hysterically  proclaim­ ing her happiness and freedom. The gaol scene is prepared  by  repeated allusions to "Ia lampe dans Ia fenetre,"  placed in Cordelia's  bay-window to attract  visitors, and a habit of her that is used by the villagers to push Cordelia to her condemna­  tion. When she and  Sam, her supposed lover, dance  a waltz  in her living-room, the camera moves back to show the couple framed  by the window as well as the silhouettes of villagers observing them. Cordelia, then, is trapped  not in memories the way Elisabeth  is, but in the contempt  and  distrust  her environment  projects upon her. Thus,  the  bay-window frames  the image  others  have made  of her. A newspaper article of December I 8,I 8g7, assesses the Cordelia  Viau case; it sums up its observation by drawing the reader's attention  to a photograph which, in its opinion, summarizes  Cordelia's predicament : "Cette femme se croyait tres forte et incomprise. Le monde dans lequel elle vivait lui pesait, elle revait d'une  existence de luxe et de folies et ne pouvant satisfaire ses gouts, elle singeait Ia vie elegante. Pour  s'en  convaincre,  il suffit de voir cette pauvre  femme  de  journalier  se faire
photographier   a cheval,  en  amazone,  chapeau   haut  de  forme  et  escortee  d'un
petit chien bouledogue. Une caricature  de Ia femme riche et elegante."6  Beaudin's film tells the story  of how this  photograph  came  into  existence.  Cordelia  sews herself a "robe  d'amazone" and  has her picture  taken  by a photographer whose
apparatus is as slow and cumbersome as J. A.'s. Shortly afterwards,  village urchins
throw  stones at  her  and  she comes home,  her  splendid  dress  ripped,  her  face bleeding. Isidore  receives a  photograph  in California   which  eternalizes  Codelia in a pose she held for precisely four seconds, yet a pose that  becomes part  of the public  evidence against  her. Photographs  in  Cordelia  are  primarily  police  evi­ dence, mugshots, photographs  used in the scandal  press. The  increasing violation of Cordelia's  privacy  begins with Paul Gravel,  journalist  of La  Presse, searching through  her clothes and old pictures. Her portraits  further  her entrapment in the prejudice  of others, a process underlined  in Beaudin's  film  through  the  use of a very still camera  framing  the heroine at almost all times of  the film. The  camera moves considerably  in  only three  sequences,  each  time  in  scenes when  a  large number of members of the community are seated together, "in  the church,  at the trial, and  at the hanging.  The  camera  tracks slowly  across the  townspeople  in a different  way each time, finally, directly accusing  the faces of legal murder."7
A similar method  of establishing the identity  of individuals  in a group  occurs in the miners' scene in]. A. Martin  photographe.  J. A. takes great care in arrang-

HEBERT


ing the workers for a group  photo;  he includes, against  the foreman's  orders, a boy who  has  been  fired  a few days before. The  men  are  ordered  to  keep still "pendant huit  secondes"  and,  while they  are  doing  so, the  camera  lingers on individual  faces  before  showing  the  final  product,  the  group  photograph.  Yet whereas the camera  in Cordelia becomes an accusing eye, singling out  Cordelia's
tormentors  from  their  protective  group,  J. A.'s camera  (hence,  by implication,
that  of Beaudin)   is a means  of bestowing individual  dignity  upon  those whose picture is being taken. The  group-taking  session coincides with the turning  point in the Martins' relation:  their ways of perceiving their environment  begin to complement each other. This convergence of perspectives corresponds to a gradual replacement   of old  photos,  in  the  film, by  photos  about  to  be  taken.  At  the
beginning of her quest she discovers, in various old photographs,  images of J. A.
and  herself that  she did  not  know about  or  that  she had  forgotten.  When  they stop at J. A.'s regular  hotel, Rose-Aimee, mistaken for an  unattached "creature de passage,"  contemplates  a photo of J. A. and  a woman  and  cunningly  asks a
bystander, "C'est  sa femme qui est avec lui?" At uncle Joseph's, Rose-Aimee looks at wedding-pictures  of herself and J. A. which her aunt  has preserved, and taunts J. A., when  one of the wedding-guests, her old admirer  Adhemar,  appears,  still
unmarried, obviously still full of tender feelings for Rose-Aimee. At the beginning of  the  journey,  taking  photos  together  is  a  painful  experience;  Rose-Aimee  is reduced  to being a hand-maiden, holding a backdrop,  collecting the money, and
suffering verbal abuse from J. A. Later, after Rose-Aimee has flared up at J. A.'s
behaviour,  she  participates,  through  her  presence and  commentary,  in  creating the miners' photo described earlier.




AMONG THE TEXTS AND  FILMS DISCUSSED, ]. A. Martin photographe is the only one which explores the partnership between a man  and a  woman,  thus  denying  a  permanent   entrapment  in  any  one  role  or  habit.8
Pictures  are  static  but  may  be looked upon  with fresh  eyes or replaced  by new ones. Rose-Aimee's energy and innocence in this respect contrast sharply with Elisabeth d'Aulnieres's cynicism. For her, pictures are lies. Their  rituals must be adhered  to in order  to maintain  a falsely decorous front  or  to freeze the  hypo­ critical misery of a scene in the past. In one of the early scenes of the novel, Elisa­ beth efficiently cleans up the disorder in the nursery, gathering  her children about her in "un  ... touchant tableau." Elisabeth's own negligent appearance, however, strikes one of her daughters  as "une  fausse note."  Little Anne-Marie's comment breaks the  illusion, "la  fausse representation  rompue.''  In  Elisabeth's  memories, the scenes of her marriage  and motherhood  appear  arranged  in the poses of con­ ventional  portraits  and  sculptures;  bride and  groom are  perfect  like a "Gravure

79

HEBERT

de mode pour Louis-Philippe de France"; both have the air of a "mannequin de eire," "une  poupee mecanique."  Antoine Tassy, in an attack  of self-mortification and  guilt, smashes the mirror  reflecting his face;  the fragments  busily recompose the image he has tried to destroy:  "Un  fragment  de miroir tient encore au-dessus de Ia commode de Ia chambre con jugale. La suie detache  en poussiere de velours. Degage un petit hublot de tain pur. Quel joli tableau se mire dans cette eau morte. Un portrait  de famille. Le pere et Ia mere confus se penchent  sur un nouveau-ne tout rouge."
Anne Hebert's  novel uses, as its framework,  the more than  conventional  genre of the detective  novel. Here,  however, its mechanisms  of repeated  interrogation and verification gradually tum  against themselves. Words and concepts assume uncanny  echoes and  acquire trap-doors of inverted  meaning: "La  matiere roma­ nesque, tout  en mimant  certains  gestes du  roman  policier  se  metamorphose   en aventure   politique   et  metaphysique."9     Kamouraska   re-sensitizes  conventional  motifs; Jutra's film confirms this process. ]. A Marlin  photograp-he subjects  the same motifs to a  radical  re-definition by releasing  the  "woman in the  window" into a lush countryside10  and into a dialogue with her  man. Cordelia, in its com­ bination of visual beauty and oppressive atmosphere, appears  as an anachronism; not surprisingly,  the film has been criticized for its self-indulgent  exploration  of surface textures.11  Here, then, are the limits of  exploring a single subject  through chronologically separated  texts and films-the trap-door  of traditional conceptu­ alization may close again. Cordelia's bay-window should, more appropriately, have
been "une  fenetre  a guillotine":  the film not only executes her but, in retrospect,
also obscures the truth  glimpsed through  Rose-Aimee's  and  Elisabeth's  window.
For these (and  other)  reasons, feminist writers like Nicole Brossard, Louky Bersianik, and  Suzanne  Lamy have expressed their distrust  in the representative­ ness of any one of the traditional  literary genres. In one approach  to the creation of the Gesamtkunstwerk, Louky Bersianik incorporates  strongly  integrated  visual allusions in her mock-Platonic dialogue, Le Pique-nique  sur l'Aero pole ( 1979) .12
The  redefinition  of conventional  philosophical  and  literary  forms  goes hand  in
hand  with a defamiliarization  of print through  the insertion of black pages, scrib­ bled notes, incomplete  sketches. Book design is no longer  merely  decorative  but part of l' ecriture; writers express their distrust in the printed  word as an adequate symbol of truth that defies the tradition of linear argument which the printed  word stands for.13  The  text of Le Pique-nique  sur l'Acropole  is interspersed  with black pages containing  Jean  Letarde's sketches, in white, of  different  kinds of windows. The  names of these windows are chosen to reflect, in  their  ambiguity,  upon  the
quotations  scribbled  inside the sketch. The  "jalousie  pour  fenetre  a guillotine,"
for instance, frames statements  by Aristotle and  Jacques Lacan  to the effect that
"La  femme est £emelle en vertu d'un  certain  manque de qualites"  and  that  "La femme n'est pas toute."  Similarly, the "meurtriere"  (murder-weapon; loophole)

Bo

HEBERT

condemns women to be "courtisanes," "concubines," "epouses," and "gardiennes." Revealingly,  most  of  the  affirmative  statements  concerning   women  are  made within windows of circular  or half-circular shape  (imposte,  vitrail,  judas, hublot, lunette), whereas  many  of  the  quotations  entrapping   them  in  their  traditional roles are placed within square  frames (meurtriere,  chausse-trappe, croisee.)  Win­ dows of circular  shape  and  the telescope (lunette) suggest words said in  paren­ theses, truths  glimpsed through  a spy-glass, much in the way in which  the black pages suggest  photographic negatives, with  the image  as yet  undefined.  Square frames frequently correspond  to the impact of linear print: they suggest definitive­ ness and orderly division into glass panes, at the expense of  cutting  the image per­ ceived  behind  them  into  equally  orderly  segments.  Bersianik,  then,  uses visual cues to enlarge upon the topics discussed during the picnic and, as it were, to open windows on  factual  documentation of the  statements  made  within  the  fictional context  of the symposium. Similarly, factual subjects are  released into fiction to find a promise of freedom.  Bersianik  includes the photo of a young  African  girl who has  just undergone  clitoridectomy; unlike Cordelia,  Adizetu  is not forever trapped  in her anguish. Released from the picture, she becomes an active partici­ pant in the women's symposium.
Visual allusions, as techniques constituting  an integral  part of l'ecriture, are an innovative  feature  in Quebec  fiction. Yet they also remind  one of other  literary periods in which writers felt that  the capacities of language  needed to be widened in order  to include  new views and  experiences and  that  verbal  communication ought to be complemented  by visual images. Such experiments  were, for instance, conducted  during  the Romantic Age when William Blake illuminated  his poems and those of others with illustrations that  frequently developed ideas only touched upon  in the  text itself, and  when  Friedrich  Schlegel postulated  the  novel as the all-embracing,  never-completed  genre typical of great national,  metaphysical,  and personal turmoil. Their art may be interpreted  as an attempt  at imposing adequate form  upon  the  fragmentary components  of an  emerging  ideology. Similarly,  it may be argued  that  the closeness of film, fiction, and  documentary in Quebec  is one expression of its artists' awareness that  the traditional  limits of ecriture must be transcended  to include  new forms of communication  both  linguistic and  pic­ torial, if an adequate expression of a politically and intellectually  re-defined Que­ bec is to be found.14

NOTES

1 Anne  Hebert, Kamouraska (Paris: Editions  du Seuil,  1970).
2   Suzanne Lamy  has shown  in her  book d'elles  ( Montveal: L'Hexagone, r 979)  how feminist  literature makes  use of "litanies" to exorcise petrified concepts. It seems to me that  Hebert's enumerations such  as the one  quoted  serve  the  opposite purpose, namely  to confirm  the action described.

8r

HEBERT


3  Jean Beaudin, Cordelia, scenario  et dialogue (National Film  Board,  I979), p. I72. I wish to thank  the NFB for making the scripts  of both  Cordelia and  J. A. Martin photographe available to me and  for  permitting me  to quote from  them.
4   Cf.  for  example, E.  D.  Blodgett,   "Prisms and   Arcs:    Structures  in  Hebert and Munro," in  Diane   Bessai, David  Jackel, eds.,  Figures  in  a  Ground    (Saskatoon: Western  Producer Prairie  Books, I978); Margot Northey, The  Haunted Wilderness (Toronto: Univ.  of Toronto Press, I976), pp. 53-6I; Yves Lever, "Kamouraska­ un film de Claude Jutra," Relations (mai  I973), pp.  I57-58.
5  Jean Beaudin, ]. A. Martin  photographe, dialogue (National  Film  Board   I977),
p. 4·
6  Pauline Cadieux, La Lampe  dans la fenetre  (Ottawa: libre expression,  I976), p. 24.
7  Mark Leslie, "Jean Beaudin's Cordelia,"  Cinema Canada 64  (April  8o), p. 38.

8 From  the  beginning of  the  film,  Rose-Aimee insists  that   the  outcome of  her  trip with  J. A. might  be "qu'on s'parle."
9  Albert  LeGrand, "Kamouraska ou l'Ange  et  la bete," Etudes fran aises,
p.  I I5.
1° Cf.  Marshall Delaney's comment on]. A. Martin  photographe in Saturday Night,
92  (December I 977), p. 95, comparing Beaudin's film with  "art and  fiction  dealing
with  that  time and  place"; unlike earlier  pieces,  ]. A. Martin is conceived  "against an idyllic  summer landscape."
11 Leslie, p. 38.
12 Bersianik's book was published  by vlb ·editeur; the  lavish  illustration of  Le  Pique­ nique  ... is undoubtedly connected with  Victor-Levy Beaulieu's own conception of the novel as a genre comprising all of the traditional literary as well as visual genres. In  his trilogy,  Monsieur Melville, for  instance, he  has  his narrator, Abel  Beauche­ min,  claim  that  "Ecrire ne constitue pas une orientation parce  que cela ne fait  que se recommencer pour  occuper tout  le champ de  ses fissures et,  par  cela  meme,  en produire de  nouvelles,  et d'autres encore,  jusqu'a !'extinction  de soi."  Victor-Levy Beaulieu, Monsieur Melville:  Dans  les  Aveilles   de  Moby  Dick   (Montl'eal:  vlb editeur, I978), p.  I4.
13 Not surprisingly, the editors  of La Nouvelle Barre  du  Jour acknowledge poet-artist Roland Giguere as one of those "qui  annonc;aient deja  les temps  de Ia liberte." See Ellipse, no. 23/24 ( I979), p. 24.
14 This   seems  to  be  confirmed   by  the  cameo   appearances  of  well-known Quebec singers  like  Claude Gauthier and  Gilles  Vigneault in  Cordelia, and   the  general mobility  of Quebec artists  between  different artistic genres.









OVERL)IND  POEM
 


Tom Wayman


This  autumn morning, the good grey asphalt winds  along  a shelf men  built
above  a lakeshore until  the  yellow  line
takes  the  traffic  up into a wooded  stretch
on a  hillside
among trucks  and  motorhomes, passing  a survey  crew's  markers, and  houses  and  a few stores
and  an open  gas station
that  could  be the outskirts of somewhere or a spot  with  a name  all its own
and  then  cresting over a rise with  far-off  mountains visible in  the  sunshine
then  woods  again,
in the  tire's  noise, and  the  motor's, and  me  travelling
among friends and  strangers,
happy  with  the car  and  the wheel and  the  new  day, singing
Long  live  the  Road.
May it last  as long as the  sea -
connector, distancer, hour  of peril and  joy,
escape  and  workplace and  executioner,
complete, yet constantly rebuilding. May I always  have
a good  car and a destination and  may  you roll, Road,
until  this  continent, drifting  west, touches Asia
and  they  link  you onto  another  continent,
pushing  you  forward into  new  corners of the  Earth, and  then  another  continent
where  you  descend  beside a river  for most  of a morning before  sweeping  out  to cross a broad  plain ...

ROMANS  DE LA PAROLE CET DU MYTHE)




"Petit .a petit, j'entrais dans mon histoire" -
 Laurent Mailhot

A




c&rE DE  LA PRODUCTION romanesque thCorique, exp<'ri­
mentale,   metaphysique-de  Nicole  Brossard    a  Louis-Philippe   Hebert   ou   a
Franc;ois Hebert -il  existe dans  Ia  litterature quebecoise  contemporaine une
fiction qu'il faut situer quelque part entre l'oral et l'ecrit, entre Ia tradition  et Ia modernite,  entre  l'epopee et Ia critique  (l'autocritique). Je  ne pense pas ici aux "dynasties" de Jacques Lamarche, aux tableaux de moeurs villageoises de Bertrand B. Leblanc ou a d'autres  veines d'un  pittoresque  date. Les textes done  je voudrais
parler sont d'une  autre  teneur:  ils melangent  le sang  a l'encre,  le vecu au  repre­
sente, le transmis au construit.
D'apparence  folklorique  ou  populiste,  mais  d'une   rhetorique   sophistiquee, ouvrant  le realisme au fantastique,  ces oeuvres plus ou moins romanesques  vont d'Un  dieu chasseur aux  Anthropo"ides, des cycles ferroniens  (Le  Saint-Elias,  La Chaise du marechal-ferrant)  aux "voyageries" de Victor-Levy Beaulieu, des deser­ teurs  d'Andre Major  a  L'Emmitoufle de  Louis  Caron,  des derives  de  Jacques  Poulin au "samedi  2 mai 1942" de Ia famille Tremblay. Ces romans ou  recits se situent dans le prolongement du conte (chez un Carrier,  un Ferron, un Theriault), a proximite  du theatre  (monologues, choeurs, decoupage). Alors que les romans de l'ecriture affichent une intertextualite europeenne, les romans de Ia parole sont plutot   (nord-) americains.  Ceux-la  sont  volontiers  intellectuels,  abstraits,  sche­ matiques,  brillants,  d'un  formalisme  etudie;  ceux-ci,  pragmatiques, se donnent  jusque dans le mythe une apparence  de naturel.

Au commencement de l'histoire

II s'agit de prendre Ia parole au mot, d'attraper les "histoires"  au piege, d'arti­ culer le je au il, aux ils. Remonter  a des affiuents, a une source? Fixer un Repere,  c'est-a-dire  devenir pere a son tour, "renouveler  !'alliance  avec le commencement de l'histoire," comme le fait Joseph Bonenfant  dans un roman  de l'ecriture, de Ia culture?  Remonter  le temps et l'espace sans quitter  le lieu  actuel  du  travail,  de
!'oeuvre.  Les "Pays d'en haut"  ne sont plus au Nord  ou a !'Ouest, hors frontieres,
ils sont  reperes,  dessines par  des  "cartographes  de  l'imaginaire." Les  Grands

LA  PAROLE ET  LE  MYTHE


MartJes entourent l'ile Madame, L'Emmitoufle se cache pres des marecages dulac
Saint-Pierre.
"J'ai ete parlant-sans l'etre-toute rna vie," observe Moi,  Pierre Huneau, dont le jeu pronominal n'est pas sans rappeler d'autres  Anthropo'ides:  "( dit Guito se dit Guito moi Guito  je me dis)." La "terre  promise" d'Agaguk,  la "montagne" sacree d'Antoine, L' Ile introuvable, le "paradis" erotique,  ecologique, ethnologi­ que, ant  toujours  a voir avec la tradition,  le mythe, la creation  continuee. Parmi taus les heros d'Yves Theriault, contestataires,  marginaux, minoritaires,  passion­ nees, cruels, delirants, le plus radical, le plus primitif est une sorte de poete naturel qui connait les signes et les pistes. L'initiation ( sexuelle, technique, socio-politique)  est d'abord un acces aux symboles, aux legendes (Le  Ru d'lkoue).
Plus haut  encore  dans l'histoire,  dans la prehistoire,  chez les Anthropoides  de
Gerard  Bessette, "l'epreuve rituelle de la parole" est "plus  eprouvante et plus ter­ rible (au dire de Lata) que le rite du coupoir." Et le texte n'a  pas ete coupe.... Chez  Bessette comme  chez Theriault ou Jean-Yves  Soucy, l'epopee  antique  est signalee par  la  chasse etja l'amour,  les epithetes  homeriques,  les  archaismes,  la solennite, le hieratisme.  Les "parolades" et "parolages" de Guito sont un brillant exercice scolaire.  L'hominien a  beau  "imager"-"penser  en  images,"  "se  rap­ peter des souvenirs ( visuels) ," selon la definition don nee en appendice -il n'ima­  gine  guere.  Le  roman  d'aventure(s)  des  Anthropoides  fait  partie  des sciences humaines appliquees.
Les Cornes sacrees de Roger Fournier  pointent vers une Antiquite  greco-latine,
des Humanites savoureuses, une Mediterranee ensoleillee. Des chroniques  beauce­ ronnes  ou  abitibiennes   (]ohnny Bungalow)  se tournent   avec  nostalgie  vers la Passe de l'enfance, de l'agriculture, de laguerre. Le Michel Beauparlant  de L'lsle au dragon est beau  parleur -"dans  le vide du  fleuve," avec ses bouteilles a la mer-plutot  que  bien  parlant. 11 est celui  "qui  ne  fait  que  parler,"  done  ni Gilles Vigneault  ni Rejean  Ducharme, malgre  ce qui  pretend  l'auteur/ qui  rat­  tache laborieusement sa dragonnade ecologique aux  Mille  et une  nuits- par  le petrole et les Arabes!  Va-t-on  du mythe a la parole ou du  "parolage" ( parlage)  ala mythologie?
Le cycle "du  plateau  Mont-Royal," de Michel Tremblay,  se concentre sur une
date,  un  jour, et rayonne  du  passe au  present, sans regression, sans fixation. Le decor de Pierrette et Therese  a l'ecole des Saints-Agnes  est visiblement theatral:
fa ades
Femme  d'a cote est enceinte  allait plus loin, non pas avec Duplessis et Godbout (chat  et chien), mais avec  les trois Parques,  Mauve,  Violette  et  Rose, avec la prostituee ouatouaise, le Violoneux, l'homosexuel, l'enfant, avec la grosse femme elle-meme remplie de lectures et de reves exotiques.
Avec son air  tres sage, Adrienne  Choquette   (Le  Temps des villages)  affirme tranquillement: "La  ou l'on  a commence a aimer ou a hair,  ta etait  le village."

LA  PAROLE ET LE  MYTHE

Mais ou commence  Ia passion? Ou  se trouve  le village actuellement,  sinon dans Ia fiction? C'est ici que le monde  a commence, prononce  avec assurance  Adrien Therio  au seuil d'un  "recit-reportage" plus anecdotique que fondateur. Ne com­ mence pas qui veut, ni ou il veut. "C'est  justement de commencer qui est difficile," reconnait  Victor-Levy  Beaulieu  (Pour  saluer  Victor   Hugo). II  faut  de  longs detours, via les U.S.A., On  the Road,  jusqu'au  XIXe siecle puritain. Ventre-de­  soufre  (Blanche   forcee) sera  pour Beaulieu ce commencement,  cet  enfantement  dans Ia douleur  et Ia violence.
Parole, parabole,  parolade, parade:  le romanjrecit quebecois cherche son com­ mencement, son histoire, son sens. "Mais  moi je n'ai  jamais commence. Mais moi je suis comme mon pays, je suis Ia demi-mesure meme de mon pays," ecrit Beau­
lieu a Ia fin de Monsieur  Melville. II est deji't beau  de pouvoir mesurer, fut-ce  a
moitie, l'immensite  d'un  territoire  imaginaire.  Beaulieu  mesure  sa  propre  "im­
puissance," son propre "echec" a ceux de !'auteur de Moby  Dick. Voila au moins une borne, une frontiere,  un horizon  a Ia mediocrite  ( "demi-mesure")  du  pays.
Hubert  Aquin se mesurait a Joyce, Jacques Ferron se mesure a Moliere, a Lewis
Carroll, a !'eloquence  indienne;  Emile Ajar et Le Clezio pourraient  se mesurer a Ducharme. Mais Ia demesure de Ia parole, du mythe,  passe les bornes et deplace les frontieres.  Ou  situer  telles nouvelles fantastiques? Rue  Saint-Denis,  est-ce au coeur du nouveau quartier  latin et de Ia boheme touristique?  Qui sont ces "hydro­ cephales adultes,"  ces "buveurs  attardes" que font  parler  Charbonneau-Tissot ou Michel Tremblay? Sont-ils sans commune mesure avec les enfants, les vagabonds, les aieux des "grands contes"? "Dans le contexte ou il s'ecrit aujourd'hui, le conte est une forme critique, une machine de guerre dirigee contre le roman et Ia vision historique du monde qu'il  transporte," remarque Gilles Marcotte. 2   Les machines
sont primitives, epiques, carnavalesques, theatrales.  La guerre  se fait  a l'interieur
meme de l'univers fictionnel d'Antonine  Maillet,  de Carrier, de Ferron....

Des grands-peres  aux "grands contes":  ils sont une  fois ...

Les grands-peres  qu'on  rencontre,  c;a et Ia, dans  le roman  quebecois contem­ porain-du  spectre  de  Serge  d'entre  les  morts  au   nonagenaire  Moi,  Pierre Huneau, sans compter !'immense Grand-Mere Antoinette d'Une  Maison  dans la vie  d'Emmanuel-sont  moins  des  personnages    ( emouvants)   que  des  moyens (efficaces). Plutot  que de parler  d'eux,  et meme de les faire  parler,  Ia narration passe par eux. Ils font le pont entre l'ici-maintenant du  conteur-scripteur et l'ail­ leurs-autrefois du mythe. lis sont une fois, multipliee, actualisee par chaque lecture. lis sont eux-memes auditeurs  des histoires lues ou ecrites par leurs petits-fils.
Le Vieux-Thomas de Roch Carrier  ( Il n'y a pas de  pays sans grand-pere)  est sauve-non pas de Ia mort, mais de l'attente sans objet, de Ia bouillie mentale­ par les histoires de Jean-Thomas, son quasi-homonyme. Ces deux Thomas, du nom

86

LA  PAROLE ET LE MYTHE

de l'ap(itre  du  doute,  ant  une certitude: "Les  paroles donnent  la  vie."  Elles la retiennent  aussi. Jusqu'a un certain  point. "Oh, pourquoi !'impuissance  des mots si facilement  vaincus  par la mort?"  demande  le ]os Connaissant  de Victor-Uvy Beaulieu. Facilement  vaincus? Grace ala memoire, a la tradition  orale, a l'inter­ texte, la victoire  de la mort  n'est pas absolue. Toujours,  un  mot  attend  l'autre,  attend  tousles autres. S'ils n'ont  pas un pouvoir direct sur la mort, les mots exer­ cent leur  action  sur la memoire et !'imagination du futur.  "Ne  restait  plus qu'a  s'exprimer  une derniere  pensee qui ne se formulerait  pourtant que de l'autre  cote du miroir, dans le pays immobile et blanc,"  peut-on lire  ( indefiniment)   a la fin des Grands-peres  de Victor-Levy  Beaulieu, au  moment  ou  le sabbat  envahit  la nuit,  ou des diables aux  "queues  puissantes" montent  "de  la cave et d'entre  les murs,"  bientot  suivis d'anges,  d'incantations,  d'exorcismes:  "tout  avait  gout  de chair  grillee et de sang trap  chauffe dans les veines." Milien, alias le Vieux, est vivant  jusqu'au  dernier mot.
Les premiers  contes de Roch  Carrier,   ]olis deuils, en  1964, etaient  presentes comme de "petites  tragedies  pour adultes,"  sabres, seches, desabusees sinon  cyni­ ques. La serie suivante,  parue dans les Ecrits du Canada  franfais en  rg6g, s'intitu­ lait  magnifiquement "Contes  pour  mille oreilles":  petits  drames  sans  tragique,  contes ouverts a une ecoute multiple. Les Enfants du bonhomme dans la lune, dix anx  plus tard,  sont  des recits plus ou  mains  autobiographiques,  des  Memoires d'enfance  pour adultes et enfants. N'allons pas jusqu'a dire, cependant, avec Rene Dionne, qu'il s'agit lad'"essais en forme de recits" et que "Carrier n'ecrit de contes que ses romans."3  Carrier  ecrit divers types de contes, du tableau  a la fable et au monologue. LaGuerre, yes sir! est un conte, meme au theatre.
"L'originalite du roman  quebecois consiste peut-etre  a tenir grande  ouverte la contradiction entre un desir de canter qui demeure extremement  vif, inderacinable pour ainsi dire, et une conscience non mains vive de la fragilite du recit, voire de son illigitimite."4  Ducharme, Victor-Levy Beaulieu, quelques autres  poussent au bout eta  ecartelement. Ils se font un sang d'encre, une histoire toujours a venir appelee, refusee, reprise. Ils ecrivent "a  perte"  ( Aquin), "de  force," devant  et derriere  le miroir, dans  une zone extreme qu'ils  ne veulent ni conquerir  ni brader.
Dans  1' "echec  fabuleux" de  Melville,  ce  qui  fascine  Beaulieu,  ce  n'est  pas l'echec,  c'est evidemment  la fable, le monstre,  le mythe  a  retuer,  a  recrire. Son Don Quichotte de la demanche est un microscope-telescope, un microcosme geant. "Nous sommes arrives bien au-dela de la continuite."  Nous sommes dans les cha­ teaux en Espagne, les romans de chevalerie, les moulins a vent. Nous sommes dans le sablier lui-meme,  dans  le temps repandu   ( comme du sang)' renverse, detrOne ( comme un roi). Dans le temps qui recommence sans commencer.  Mais ce pays
demanche, desarticule,  convient  a  la  gesticulation  folie  de  l'homme   rapaille.
Homme et pays, ecriture  et histoire se mesurent l'un a l'autre. Comment?
La ou l'ecriture se contente  d'adapter ou de mimer un discours, elle n'est fidele

LA  PAROLE ET LE  MYTHE

ni a ses origines ni a sa fin. Le commencement  de l'histoire  ( racontee)   n'est pas a retrouver, mais a inventer. De !'oral a l'ecrit, le pont est un passage incessant.
Le conte  fait  l'histoire, mais  une autre histoire, differente de  celle qui  construit le roman; non pas sequentielle, lineaire, axee sur l'ideologie du  progres,  mais revenant sans  cesse sur  ses pas,  retournant au  'grand  commencement' pour  en  repartir de
nouveau et, par  ce mouvement, ouvrir  le present  a l'infini  des possibles.5
Gilles Marcotte  suggere que,  pour  Ia conteuse  et romanciere Antonine  Maillet,
"I'Acadie est un lieu propice a Ia creation -a toutes les formes de creation -
dans Ia mesure meme ou elle n'est pas un vrai pays, dans  Ia mesure ou elle n'est
que Ia region, le 'coin', le 'boute'." 6   Et le Quebec  est-il, lui, un  vrai  pays? Ou? Pour qui? Les Romans  du  pays qu'etudie Gabrielle  Poulin sont les recits, contes, nouvelles d'un  territoire  (de  I') imaginaire.  Pays  de  papier,  du  sang,  des  jeux, "pays-manege" ou pays fantastique,  dans aucun  cas il ne s'agit  du meme pays. Sa seule parente -equivoque -est  avec le fameux  theme  du  pays de Ia poesie des annees soixante:  Terre  Quebec, !'Homme rapaille, Pays sans parole....
"Quebec de mes fesses!" et "maudit pays de zouaves," dit Limoilou, heroine a
Ia Ducharme de Jacques  Poulin ( Faites  de beaux reves). Par toutes sortes de greffes ( Le Coeur de Ia baleine bleue), d'errances ( M on cheval  pour un royaume), de circuits, de derives, les jeunes heros de Poulin se depaysent radicalement. Leurs messages sont bloques. Pilote sur pilotis, jimmy  emet des signaux  de detresse, des "questions pour les chaises." "Je suis pret a tout raconter,  mais je n'ai  jamais reussi a  parler  vraiment  avec quelqu'un," dit-il. Jimmy  pourrait   etre,  apres  quelques annees  de naufrage,  le heros des Grandes  Marees.  Pour  parler,  celui-ci dessine, ecrit:  "Dans  les bandes dessinees, i1 faut  obtenir  un  ton  intermediaire entre  le langage parle et le langage ecrit. 0    0    ."

La  parole comme lieu de travail
Depuis  quinze  ou vingt ans, le roman  quebecois est passe "d'un discours  hu­
maniste a un humanisme  du discours," note Jacques  Michon.  Apres Ia recherche
angoissee "d'un etre, d'une  verite et d'une  identite  de l'homme  universe!," on a
mis !'accent  "sur le sujet particulier  qui s'enonce  au Quebec  et sur Ia diversite de son langage."7 Au "Qui suis-je?" a succede un "Qui parle?" a Ia fois plus littcraire et plus politique,  ainsi que les questions connexes:  d'ou  parle-t-il?  a  qui?  com­ ment?  Le conte est toujours sans commencement, et le roman  sans fin.
C'est dans cette perspective qu'on  peut situer !'utilisation  systematique  dans  le roman  des niveaux  de langue  populaires, de !'autobiographic et du  temoignage, de Ia parodie,  de Ia rhapsodic. . . . "Les  limites de Ia litterature sont  desormais celles de Ia societe elle-meme, et non plus celles d'une  convention  ou d'un  public lettre  restreint,"  conclut  Michon.8  La-dessus,  je ne suis pas  d'accord. Societe et litterature ne coincident pas. Les barnes de l'une sont les seuils de !'autre. Les con­ ventions changent,  sans cesser d'etre  des conventions.  Par  dela Ia "solidarite  his-

88

LA  PAROLE ET  LE  MYTHE


torique" de l'ecrivain et du peuple (grace a I'integration des langages)' des clivages se manifestent, des ruptures s'annoncent. Une societe n'est jamais totale. Le public "lettre" est passee de la bourgeoisie liberale, clerico-conservatrice, aux milieux de l'enseignement, des  communications, et  a  divers secteurs  marginaux. Dans  la societe comme  en litterature, cependant, la somme des minorites  qui  parlent - fussent-elles la  jeunesse, les femmes-constitue rarement   une  majorite   (silen­ cieuse).
Le Dragon  multinational et polluant  de Jacques  Godbout  (L'lsle au Dragon) est un polichinelle a cote de la Baleine melvillienne de Victor-Levy Beaulieu. God­ bout  reussit  mieux  la  caricature politique  et  la  bande  dessinee  (voir  son  film lxe-13, interprete par  les Cyniques); Beaulieu traverse  l'actualite,  preferant  la passion a l'action. Le je de Godbout est un jeu grammatical, rhetorique, moderne; le je de Beaulieu est metaphysique.  Signataire  de nombreuses chroniques,  tribunes et lettres ouvertes, VLB  romancier  n'a  (presque)  rien  du  journaliste:   quelques allusions, quelques  des.  "Moi,  decalcomaniaque  reproduisant tout  mais  n'etant  jamais"  (Don  Quichotte  de la demanche)? C'est pousser la mauvaise  conscience trop  loin. Heureusement,  Beaulieu  repond  a Victor-Levy:  "Par la  deformation du mot, l'on entre dans une espece de paradis de la parole, dans un lieu de liberte dont !'experimentation  peut  debaucher  sur quelque  chose d'important (Race  de monde!).
De la parodie livresque ( M emoires d'outre-tonneau)  aux grandes "voyageries," par  toutes sortes de  nuits,  de  reves, de  delires, Beaulieu se dirige,  a  travers  les calembours,  viols du langage  et autres  violences, au  centre  du  monde  et de lui­ meme.  Sa  quete  a  quelque  chose de  la  geographic  intime,  cosmique,  d'Alain Grandbois.  La  navigation  du  romancier  croise les iles, rivages, etoiles,  feux a la derive du poete. lls plangent  tous deux a l'origine, ala racine, ala fin du monde.
La demiurgie de Beaulieu a des resonances bibliques. Race de monde!  est-il un titre de malediction ou d'amour? Un romancier nomme Abel, fils predestine, pre­ side a la destinee des Beauchemin.  La tribu  connait  l'exode, le desert, l'exil; elle a ses petits  rois, ses femmes-esclaves, ses prophetes.  Pour  rendre  Job  jaloux, la fidele France,  apres avoir  delegue Ruth  en vain, imagine  a ses cotes la  presence d'un  certain Abraham. Le "cantique" de Sagamo fob] est un long prologue (pp.
11-172) et un epilogue chantes  par la voix de France, campagne  delaissee, entre lesquels se glisse un bref intermede. "J'appelle ecriture tout ce par quoi je suis vecu
... ," ecrit le heros-victime de N'evoque  plus que le desenchantement de ta tene­ bre, mon si pauvre Abel. Cette  "lamentation" est un hymne  pascal, une Passion active, la mort et resurrection  du moi-je.
La vie peut-elle passer toute entiere dans (par)  l'ecriture? "La vie est des mots," mais "la vie ne s'ecrit pas, il n'y a que !'imagination de la vie qui s'ecrit ..." (Memoires d'outre-tonneau, dont  le sigle serait  M.O.T.). Alors, fors;ons (sur)
!'imagination. Il faut  que celle-d  l'emporte  constamment  sur la  vie. La lutte  est

8g

LA  PAROLE ET LE  MYTHE

epuisante, sans victoire ni defaite  definitives.  L'ecriture est elle-meme  de l'imagina­ tion en acte, en mouvement. Blanche  forcee, comme  toutes  les figures de Ia Baleine mythique, c'est le viol de Ia conscience  trap  claire,  l'irruption du  reel  (de  Ia mort,  de l'oubli) dans  le tissu des mots et des images.
Comment savoir,  non seulement   qui  je suis,  mais  "si  je suis vraiment et  que signifie ce mot  exister?" se demandait Malcomm Hudd. La question du  quai  dire ou du  pourquoi vivre ne peut s'aborder, difficilement, que  par  un  comment dire ( vivre). Ou,  par  ou commencer? II faut  d'innombrables recommencements pour qu'un sens,  une  direction  se dessine. Le  temps  a  besoin  d'espace, d'epaisseur ou lager sa memoire. L'oeuvre de Victor-Uvy Beaulieu, qu'on a  pu  croire surabon­ dante, baclee,  est  pressee  par  le  temps.  Elle  n'avance si  vite  que  pour   mieux
prendre sa  distance   par  rapport a elle-meme. Quel  chemin   parcouru de  Victor
Hugo  a Jacques Ferron, de Kerouac a Melville,  de Diogene a Don  Quichotte, de
Miami a Morial-Mort, de Satan  Belhumeur a Job,  a Jonas....
De  meme  que  Blanche  pourrait etre  "le  fantome d'Una, Ia forme  dont  Job  a revetu  l'absence de sa petite  fille,"9   ainsi  l'ecriture est Ia forme-pas seulement le  vetement-d'une absence  signalee:  celle  de  Ia  parole   immemoriale,  quoti­ dienne.   La  "tenebre blanche  de  l'ecriture," comme  dit  avec  bonheur  Gabrielle Poulin,  est une  contradiction indepassable: relire  ici le poeme  "Soir  d'hiver" de
Nelligan. Nul  chasseur-pecheur, nul  reporter ne  saurait capturer, dissequer   ce
Ventre-de-soufre. On  peut a peine eclairer  de l'interieur, par  intermittences, cette
bete scandaleuse. Tout commence et se termine avec  Ventre-de-soure. Non  plus un ventre   (de  femme) qui souffre,  qui  enfante, mais  un  antre (de  sorciere) qui souffle,  qui  insuffie.  Chez  Victor-Uvy  Beaulieu, Ia  parole  et  I'ecriture meurent,
vivent  l'une de  l'autre. La  "vraie saga" des  Beauchemin est  a venir,   jamais  a
smvre.

NOTES
1 Dans  une  entrevue  accordee a Andre  Renaud, "Jacques Godbout  romancier: le voyage, le dragon  et I'Amerique," V oix et images, 5, no. 1  ( automne 1979),  p. 30.
2   Gilles  Marcotte, "La  problematique   du  recit  dans  le roman  quebecois  d'aujour- d'hui," Revue  des sciences humaines  (Lille), 173, no. 1 (1979),  66.
3 Dans Gabrielle  Poulin, Romans  du  pays (Montreal: Bellarmin,  1980),  p. 135·
4  Gilles Marcotte, p. 61.
5  Ibid., p. 64.
s  Ibid., p. 65.
7 Jacques  Michon,  "Le  roman quebecois des annees soixante,"  The  French  Review,
53, no. 6  (mai  1980),  815. Voir  aussi Laurent Mailhot,  "Le  roman  quebecois et
ses langages," Stanford  French Review  (Spring-Fall  1980),  pp. 147-70.
8 Ibid.
9  Gabrielle  Poulin, p. 41 I. "Elle s'appelle Blanche. Qui  est-elle, sinon Ia memoire de
Job, comme  un immense blanc; Ia page blanche sur laquelle  il devra  faire surgir, une a une, les !ignes comme autant  de chemins du passe" (p. 417).

go

F]IIRY T]ILES




The fairy  tales  have  no simple endings. Hansel and  Gretel  do not go home. And that  spidery  wart  of a witch,
that  black-laced bitch  who  waits in  the woods of sly-eyed rodents
and  owls who  rotate  their  conspiring  heads, has  a  thousand and  one sugared  plans
to keep  you here  and  in pain.

In  the stinking saw-toothed dungeon  of  her  face  your gingerbread dreams dissolve.  The family  members  will cook one  another alive  (for  love,
they  say, for love). And  the dove
who once  returned you safe and  sound is now a crow,  sniggering
on  the  home's thatched  eaves.

There is no reconciliation. The  longer you stay  the  more sluggish your feet the  heavier your lids and  your  brain begins  defending those rusted  chains of fear.  Nor  is there  a hunter near with  glimmering axe, waiting  for
your sobs, waiting to rush in and split  the hag's  dry pod of a head.

Stealth, my dearest; childhood is over. Put  away  your  green  balloon  and  slam the  oven  door.  The  smell of her  sizzling flesh is not so bad as you imagined. Later, in  the blue  bruise of forest
you will  leave  your sister,
whisper  your own name  over and  over. You  will lie down  and  sleep
beneath the  clear  and  separate stars.
 


Kenneth Sherman



















































91





PLURAL QUEBEC

PAUL   CJIAMBERLAND,   Terre   souueraine.  Edi­
tions  de  l'Hexagone.
JACQUES   GRAND'MAISON,   Une   Foi  ensouchee
,dans ce pays. Lemeac.
JEAN-MARC  PIOTTE,   Un   Parti  pris  politique.
VLB  Editeur, $I2.g5.
DOMINIQUE CLIFT  and  SJIEILA  ARNOPOULOS,  Le Fait  anglais  au  Quebec. Editions  Libre  Ex­ pression.

SINCE THE ELECTioN of the  Parti Quebe­ cois  in  I 976  there has  been  a  veritable explosion   of  books   on  Quebec   and   its people,  including  sociological  and econ­ omic studies,  philosophical treatises, polit­  ical pamphlets, government white  papers, confessions,  observations  and  cries  from the soul.
Paul  Chamberland's Terre  souveraine falls into  the  last  category.  Actually  it  is a prose poem  marked by a "tristesse" and an  idealism   which  contrast sharply  with the cynical  attempts at manipulation of public   opinion  on  the  part  of  many  of the  province's politicians.
Unfortunately, Chamberland's vision seems often  to  be  far  removed  from  the realm   of   the   possible.   "Nous   pouvons faire  ici une  terre  de  paix, et  un  labora­ toire de la nouvelle humanite,"  he writes, alluding  to   what   could   happen  if  the people  were  to  opt  for  sovereignty,  pre­  sumably  in  the  Quebec Referendum. He goes on  to urge  that  the "imperatif care­ gorique" of  constant increase  in material production  be rejected as anti-human and anti-earth.
Poet Chamberland must have been devastated  when   Finance Minister  Jac­ ques Parizeau, attempting to reassure  the population that  there  would be no change  in Quebec's attitude to business and  com-
 merce,  stated that  sovereignty would  in­ volve  nothing more   than   the  cost  of  a case of beer.
Jacques  Grand-maison's Une   Foi  en­ souchee  dans  ce  pays is the  apologia of a priest  for  his desire  to enter  politics  as a candidate for  the  P.Q.  The author  does not   fear   to  criticize   his  own   superiors, notably  "le  cardinal irlandais  Carter de
Toronto  qui,   ,a   Ia   television    anglaise,
accusait les catholiques francophones de
pecher contre !'unite."
Nor does he spare  the intellectuals who "veulent promouvoir un Quebec indepen­ dent,   socialiste,   laique et  quoi  encore," but  who  have  chosen   to  ignore   the  will of  the  people.  Since  the  book  was  writ­  ten  before  the  recent  directive from  the Pope   that   Catholic  clergymen   must   not become active   politicians  and  since Grand'maison   repeatedly  states   that   he has no intention of abandoning the priest­  hood,  one  must   therefore  presume  that  the  Vatican has  pulled   the  plug  on  his aspirations.
One  of the intellectuals whom  Grand'­ maison   had  in  mind   perhaps  is  socialist Jean-Marc Piotte. His Un Parti  pris poli­ tique   is  simply   a  collection of  his  own articles  published  between  I963 and  I978, and  thus  it adds nothing new to the Que­ bec debate.
It does, nevertheless, underline how rapidly and  extensively  the  province has changed over  the  past  two decades,  pos­ sibly more  than  during the  previous  350 years of its history. Throughout the  book Piotte   reveals   the  dilemma of  so  many Quebec  socialists  and   Marxists:  on  the one  hand  they wish for  the  separation of Quebec,  which   would   then   be  able   to divorce itself  (vertical division)   from  the North  American capitalist system; on the other  hand they  are  obliged  to subscribe to the idea  of the  unity  of the workers  of Canada, indeed  of the whole of North America and  the  world,  against  the scions

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



of multinational capitalism (horizontal division).
Of  the  four examples of Quebec's pub­ lication explosion, Clift's and Arnopoulos' Le Fait anglais au Quebec is undoubtedly the   most   significant  in  terms  of  content and  implication. While  the   other books deal   with   past events  and  personal fan­ cies,  it  deals with   current  realities and  their  likely   effect   upon  the    future  of French Canada.
Curiously enough, the  book  does  not provide a  great deal   of  insight into the actual "English fact"  in  Quebec. The historical perspectives are  sketchy at best, and many  of the  observations are  broad generalizations. Rather  than "le fait  an­ glais," the  subject which Clift and  Arno­ poulos do   indeed treat  is  the  changing configuration of  the  "le  fait  franc;ais."
They point out, for  example, how  for years  pluralism was  thrust upon the  ma­ jority    of   non-francophone   Quebeckers, because immigrants  and the  children of immigrants   were     not    welcomed   into  francophone schools and institutions even when  they   wished to   be,   which  often enough they  did not  because of  the  asso­ ciation of  English  with   the   power elite.  The result   was  that  French Canada was able   to  evolve  quite exclusively, "en  fa­ mille" as  it  were.
The falling birthrate, however, brought Quebec leaders to  the   realization that French Canadians  were   doing to  them­ selves  what  the   surrounding  millions  of North  America  anglophones   had   failed to   do -unbreeding   themselves  out   of existence,  effecting   the   revenge  of   the empty cradle.
The solution was  Bill  101, the  Charter of  the   French  Language,  which among
other things obliges the  children of  immi­ grants to go  to French-language  schools  and     has    already  caused  a    dramatic plunge in  the  number of pupils attending English   schools.  New    Canadians  thus  now  become integrated  into the  franco-
 phone rather than  the  anglophone  com­
munity.
Ironically, as Clift and  Arnopoulos out­ line,  the  ultimate effect  of the  new  policy  will  have  to  be  either the  disappearance of  the  erstwhile exclusive  and somewhat xenophobic Quebec  "famille" society, or else  a  society  fraught  with   bitter  ethnic conflict.
Not   only    has   the   province  received thousands of  basically francophone  Hai­ tians, Belgians, and  North  African  Jews in  the  last  few  years,  but  however  reluc­ tantly, many   other  thousands-of   Ital­ ians,    Greeks,   Germans,  West    Indians, Spaniards,    South    Americans,    Asians, Poles,  Ukrainians and various other na­ tionalities -are being  integrated into the Quebec francophone community, not   to mention the  fact  that native anglophones have    been    rushing  to   take    immersion courses in  French.
The whole of  Quebec,  therefore,  is quickly being transformed into a pluralist society, whether  or  not  that is  what the framers of  Bill I o I had  in  mind.
In the books  by Paul  Chamberland, Jacques Grand'maison and Jean-Marc Piotte there is a strong tone  of wistful thinking combined with  a  hint of  nostal­ gia.  One   can   well  understand  why.  The Quebec of  the  future  will  obviously not  be  theirs  alone to shape, and the  Quebec they  have  known will  never be  the  same.

RONALD SUTHERLAND


REASSEMBLING GENRES

CLAUDE JASMIN,  La  Sabliere,  Lemeac,  n.p.
VICTORY-LEVY BEAULIEU, Les Grands-peres. vlb,
$6.gs.

"ON  EST DE SON ENFANCE comme on  est d'un pays": Germain, in Claude Jasmin's Revoir  Ethel   ( 1976)   remembers Antoine de Saint-Exupery's words and, thus, sum­ marizes the   thematic  centre  of   Claude

93

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Jasmin's work  to  date. His  two  primary concerns are  the  search  for  his  country, Quebec, and   for  a  lost  childhood. The two searches  are  interrelated; as Quebec battles   against   the   predominance  of  its anglophone environment, children lead a precarious existence   under   the  pressures of  parents  and   educational  institutions. In  Le  Loup  de  Brunswick  City  (1976), Jasmin adapts a news  story  of  a  young boy who  wandered into  the  woods  while his  family  was  moving  from  Quebec to the  United States,  grew  up  with  a  pack of  wolves,  and   made  his  way  back   to Quebec and  his lost childhood, years after American society had  reclaimed  him. The hero  of Jasmin's latest  novel, La Sabliere
( 1979), fifteen-year-old Clovis Jhie,  tries to retain  his childhood through his young brother, Mario, a retarded child.  Mario, like the wolf-child, is exceptional because adults cannot reach  and  train  him as effi­ ciently  as they  can  a "normal"  boy.  Clo­ vis  uses  his  young   brother  as  a  barrier between   himself  and   his  family  (signifi­ cantly,  there  are  no  other  brothers), be­ cause  Clovis  himself  is afraid  of growing  up. All summer  long,  he and  Mario play in  a  gravel-pit,  acting  out  the  historical  events  described in Clovis's encyclopedia. He   receives   the   volumes   through  vou­ chers  from  a  cereal  box, and  their  games are dependent on  the appearance of fur­ ther  instalments. When  volume  7 fails to arrive, the  Jhies'  games  are  stalled. Through the remainder of the summer, Mario and  Clovis  worry  about the  out­ come of the battle  between  Charles  Mar­ tel  and   the   Arabs.   Their  love   of   the colour   and  romance of  Islam  and  their latent fear  that   Christianity  might   have won  the  battle coincide with  their  dread  of  losing  their  childhood  dreams to  the restrictions of  adult  life.  But,  from   the beginning  of  the   novel,   the  range   and freedom of their  dreams are  manacled by the  cornflake  box  advertisements; even Mario's dreams are haunted by the heroes

94
 of American cartoons. In  a feverish  mon­ ologue,  he  mingles  them  with  the  exotic princes   and   creatures  of  Arabic  fairy­  tales, but it is obvious  that  Mickey Mouse and   Roy   Rogers   will,   in   the   end,   be stronger than  Aladdin and  the  Saracens. Clovis'  and   Mario's games  find  no  sup­  port   from   the   rest   of   the  family   who think   they  harm  Mario  psychologically. There  is talk of an  Uncle Ferdinand who ran  off to Africa  and  is blamed  by every­ one  for  his  irresponsible conduct  (here,  as  in   Michel   Tremblay's  La  Cite  dans l'oeuf, Africa  serves  as  the  metaphor of an  exotic   and   demonic dreamland,  un­ spoilt  by consumerism), but  Ferdinand  is obviously   too  far   away   to  help   his  ne­ phews.
Twice,  when  the  family decides  to have Mario consigned   to  a  mental institution, Clovis   tries   to   kill   his  young   brother. Clovis'  attempts at  mercy  killing  are  as much  directed against himself as against Mario, as much  a desperate wish to  pre­ serve  his own  childhood as  the  desire  to spare   Mario  humiliation.   Clovis's   pre­  occupation with  himself is reflected  in the fact  that   Mario remains  pale  as a  char­ acter  throughout  the  narrative; we  are told  that   he  is a  retarded child,  but  be­ sides his occasional stuttering and  his mis­ spelt  letter, Jasmin has  made   no  serious efforts to re-create Mario's exceptional psyche. As a result,  Mario assumes  an uncomfortable position   between  allegory and  realism,  and  his  parents appear  like perfect  ogres  to  a  reader   who  has  not been  convinced that  Mario, indeed, needs special   treatment.  His   portrait  is  espe­ cially   unsuccessful  when   compared   to that   of  the   wolf-child  in   Le  Loup   de Brunswick City and  the  many  other  chil­ dren   in  recent  Quebec  fiction   (e.g.,  in Jacques   Poulin's   Jimmy    Trilogy,   Ga­  brielle   Roy's   Ces   Enfants   de  ma   vie, Michel Tremblay's La grosse Femme  d'a cote  est  enceinte) . The final  impression the   reader  retains  from   La  Sabliere  is

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



that   there   is  something  too  cute   about Mario, and  something too  self-indulgent about   Clovis.  In  the  end,  Mario finds  a third  father in Don  Gabriel who promises to  tell  him   the  stories  Clovis's  encyclo­ pedia   missed   out   on,  and   Clovis  com­ ments   in  self-pity,   "II   tapote  la  petite  main  de  Mario. Mon  coeur  se serre.  On
dirait qu'il  en a pris possession a jamais."
While   Claude  Jasmin  is  preoccupied with childhood, the new vlb edition  of Victory-Levy Beaulieu's Les Grands-peres
confronts us, even  on the cover,  with  the representative of another group that  has received   much   attention in  Quebec  fic­ tion  in  recent  years:   les vieux. The  first and   last   pages   show   the   same   photo­ graph-that of an  old man's head,  seen from  the  back: "Le crane du Vieux  etait une  boule  de  poils  blancs  qui  poussaient  en  desordre." Most  of  the  narrative  of the   novel   unfolds   itself   inside   this  old man's  head,  a narrative  as  disorderly   (in terms  of  chronology)   as  his  white  hair.  Milien,  le Vieux,  lives the  last days of his life  pondering over  his  existence  on  the farm  in Saint-Jean-de-Dieu; memories  of his  children and  his  wives,  the  two  Mi­ liennes,  pass through his mind; he recalls the warmth of the animals he has owned. Age,  fatigue, and   sickness  blend  images of  the  past  and  present   in  Milien's  per­ ception, yet Beaulieu  has accentuated the transitions  between   dream  and   reality with  parentheses and  thus  made  it  rela­  tively  easy  for  the  reader   to  follow  the meanderings  of    Milien's  consciousness. The  long  sentences  and   lack   of  para­ graphing  may  suggest  a  chaotic interior monologue, but  the  presence   of  the  pa­ rentheses  indicates that   the  narrative  se­ quence remains firmly in the hands of the narrator who,  in  one  of  them,  confesses, "Rien  n'avait  lieu  que  dans  !'esprit de quelqu'un  immobile  devant  la  tasse  de caf,e froid,   un  livre  inactuel  devant  les yeux."  We  may assume  that  the  narrator speaking  here  is Jos Connaissant, Milien's
 novelist  grandson who  appears in one  of the other two Beaulieu novels about the Beauchemin  family    (Race  du   monde, Ig6g;  Jos Connaissant, 1970). Jos  Con­ naissant's  attempt to delve into his grand­ father's mind  is also an attempt to return to  the  origins  of  his  family,  their  rural  environment,  their   desires   and   beliefs, their   attachment  to   their   animals.  In Milieu's  mind,  not  only  past  and  present  are  blended,  but  also  men  and  animals. Lovingly,  he helps  the  cat  give  birth; he himself    laps    up    his    coffee,    "tlappe! tlappe! ... comme   un  chat," and  even the  garbage  can  in  the  kitchen  opens  up "toute  grande  comme   une   gueule   de chat." Ani nals are  also  bearers  of erotic  power; Milieu's   sexual  memories   of  the first  Milienne, a  fat  woman   he  adored, are   associated   with   a   stallion;  signifi­ cantly,  the  second  Milienne, a  thin  wo­ man  he detests,  is  seen drowning the  kit­ tens he watched being  born. In his attrac­ tion  to  animals,  sexuality   and   scatology are  fused;   through a  process  of  mental transfer, this fusion  also applies  to his attitude to women.  It is this element that, for   me,   spoils   a   brilliantly   conceived novel;   Beaulieu's  obsessively   anal   lan­ guage   becomes   unbearable  when   it   is coupled   with   the   notion   of   woman  as cloaca.
Les   Grands-peres,  first   published    in
1971  by Editions du  Jour and  winner  of the  Grand Prix  de  Ia ville  de  Montreal, was  saluted   as  a  landmark  in  Quebec fiction,  a  judgment  that   still  holds  true after   almost   a  decade  of  very  prolific novel  writing  in  Quebec.   Les   Grands­ peres  was  hailed   as  the   first  successful rural   novel   since   Le   Survenant;  some critics  pursued   its  literary ancestry   back even  further  by  comparing it  to  Albert Laberge's La Scouine   ( 1918).  Moreover, Les Grands-peres  marked the  triumphant entrance  of   grandfathers  into   Quebec fiction, after  years of domination through "la   mere   canadienne-franc;ais,"  not   to

95

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



speak  of grandmothers of grand-mere Antoinette's calibre.  Since then,  Roch Carrier has published Il n'y a pas de Pays sans grands-peres ( 1977)  and  confirmed the  literary presence  of les  vieux.  Beau­ lieu's  novel  is a writer's  probing into  the rural   world  he  left  behind   to  go  to  "le grand   Morial":  les  grands-peres, despite  their    passionate    involvement   in   their world,  are  doomed  to  die;  they  live  on only  in  their  grand-children who,  to  use Joyce's   words,   "forge   in  the  smithy   of [their]  soul  the  uncreated conscience  of [their]  race." Needless  to say, Beaulieu's novel  is  not  a  return to idyllic  regional­ ism;  its  association  with   La  Scouine   is derived   from  the  fact  that  Laberge  was one  of the  first  writers  in  Quebec to  ex­ pose  the seamier  side of village  life.  The  presence  of a  narrator who  is  himself  a novelist  indicates that   Les  Grands-peres is the mental reconstruction of a lost time and   place;  writing  is   thus   not   simply recording,  but   literally  creating  an   old farmer's  consciousness  and,  in  doing  so, re-defining  a  literary  genre   much   des­ pised by the writers  of  the Quiet Revolu­ tion.   Beaulieu's  Les  Grands-peres    joins the   many   other   literary   works  in  con­ temporary Quebec whose form  is a result of  ironizing, destroying, and  re-assembl­ ing  traditional genres  that  no longer  suit the  reality  they  purport to enclose.

EVA-MARIE KROLLER


REGIONAL  QUEBEC

HUBERT DE   RAVINEL,  Les  Enfants  du  bout  de la vie. Editions  Lemeac,  n.p.
JACQUES  BRILLANT,  Le  Solei[, se cherche  tout
l'ete. Editions  Lemeac,  n.p.
BERTRAND   LEBLANC,    Y   sont   fous   [e   grand monde!  Editions  Lemeac,  n.p.

THESE   THREE WORKS, which   all   ap­ peared  in   Editions  Lemeac's   "Roman quebecois" collection, illustrate an impor-

g6
 tant    current  in   contemporary   French­ Canadian prose fiction: the  trend toward  works of an  increasingly  regional  nature. Hubert  de  Ravinel's  collection  of  short stories,   Les  Enfants  du  bout   de  la  vie, deals  with  the  problems  of senior  citizens in  east-end  Montreal.  Jacques Brillant's extremely  traditional novel,  Le  Solei[  se cherche  tout  l'ete,  is set  in  various  parts  of  the  Gaspe  peninsula and  attempts to do for  the Gaspe  what  Antonine Maillet's novels have  done  for  Acadia. The  events of  Bertrand Leblanc's much   more  inno­ vative  novel,  Y   sont    fous   le   grand monde!, unfold  in  the  Matapedia  River valley, between Riviere-du-loup and Campbellton, N.B. The  very narrow perspective on  French-Canadian life  pre­ sented   in  each  of  these  works  leads  one to accept Roch  Carrier's affirmation that  the  only  literature  which  is  possible  in Canada is a  regional  literature.
The ten  short  stories  which  make  up Les Enfants du  bout  de la vie all concen­ trate on the financial and emotional crises undergone by elderly characters who  live in  poverty  and  desperation in  run-down tenements or sterile,  dehumanizing homes for  the aged. Two  of the stories,  "L'Invi­ tation" and  "Le   Pere   Noel,"   relate   the experiences of  lonely pensioners  who must spend  Christmas alone  due   to  unfeeling relatives and  bureaucratic inefficiency.  As the title of the collection suggests, the characters de Ravine!has created are like children, abandoned  by society  and  de­ prived    of   everything  except    the   basic necessities  of life. The main characters in "Monsieur  Charbonneau   et   Rose,"  for example, are  respectively  blind  and  deaf, as  well  as  poor  and  alienated  from   so­ ciety.  In   all   the  stories,   the  day-to-day difficulties   of   Montreal's senior   citizens are   set   against   a   background  of  rapid  social  change, urban renewal  and  inade­ quate social programs administered by inefficient   and    insensitive    bureaucrats. The world   to  which   de  Ravine! intra-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



duces  the reader is one in which  there  are few  pleasures   and   from   which   the  only escape  is death.
Each  story  in  the  collection is  told  in a  very  simple,   almost   documentary-like style,  sometimes with   a touch   of  irony. The  plots  are   neither  complicated  nor very  skilfully  constructed. In fact,  most, if not  all,  of these  stories  are  more inter­ esting   from   a   sociological   rather   than  from  a  purely  literary point  of view. By far   the   best   story   in   the   collection   is "Hectorine   Page,"   which   describes   in detail   an   elderly   widow's  search   for   a suitable home  and  a  cure  for  the  loneli­ ness  which   drives   her   at  one   point   to count  the  number of  meals  she has eaten  alone   since   her  husband's  death.  With one exception, these  chronicles of human suffering  are  told  from  the  point  of view of an  omniscient narrator, whose  appar­ ent  objectivity helps  to avoid  the senti­ mentality which  might have  otherwise marred the  book.
In  the  tradition of  the  Quebec roman du  terroir,  Brillant's Le  solei[ se cherche tout   l'ete   follows   the   evolution  of  the Gaspe  region  from  the  Depression to the mid-rgso's. To  some  extent, it  is an  his­ torical   novel,  as  one  of  Brillant's  main concerns  is the  political  and  religious life of  the  inhabitants of  his  beloved   "finis­ tere  paradisiaque,"  before  and   after  the Second  World  War. The main  character of  the  novel  is  a  fisherman  whose  wife becomes  the  mistress  of  the  local  abbe, and   who  seeks  revenge   not  only  on  his wife  but  also  on  the  illegitimate son  she has  by  her ecclesiastical lover.  The  very loosely constructed plot  includes, not sur­ prisingly, a moose-hunt sequence, which culminates with  a  detailed and  very realistic  description of  the  butchering of the  carcass.  Throughout the  novel,  his­ torical   reality   is  combined  with   melo­ drama to  produce a  disconcerting  mix­ ture of realism  and Romantic idealization of  the  life of  this  "peuple renebreux."
 Brillant,   whose  style  is often  reminis­ cent  of  the  stylistic  excesses  of   Philippe Aubert  de Gaspe, deliberately uses archaic expressions  such   as  "la  gent  feminine" and  "l'hymenee" and indulges in frequent lyrical descriptions of  nature and  of some of his characters. In many  ways, Le Soleil se   cherche   tout   l'ete  is  a   nineteenth­ century  novel  which  tries  to  portray life in  a  part   of   Quebec  which   has   never really  emerged  from  the  nineteenth cen­  tury.   Its   basic   themes   are   remarkably similar  to  those  of  much  of  Newfound­ land  literature: isolation,   physical  hard­ ship, suffering  and  death. As is often  the case in both Newfoundland and Quebec literature, the physical setting acquires  a symbolic  meaning. Like  the  land,  where the  sun   rarely   stays  for   long,  even   in summer,  the  inhabitants of the Gaspe peninsula  live in a world  where  the forces of darkness  are  more  powerful   than   the forces of light, where evil systematically triumphs over  good.
The diary   form   of  Leblanc's  Y   sont fous le  grand  monde! enables  its  author to  present  a  satirical and  frequently  hu­ morous   view   of  life  in   the   Matapedia valley  of  Quebec in  the  1930's,  as  seen through the   eyes  of  a  naive  but  some­ times  precocious  nine-year-old boy. The fact  that  the young  diarist's name  is Ber­ trand   is not  the  only  indication we  are  given  that  the novel is to a large extent autobiographical. The  events of   the novel,  which  span   a  period   of  approxi­ mately  one  year,  include the  young  nar­ rator's first  stay   in  hospital,  excursions  with   his  Acadian   father  to  horse-races and   lumber   camps,  and   the   inevitable hockey  games,  sleighrides, and   St.-Jean Baptiste  celebrations. Everything  which happens  in  the  novel  is filtered  through the consciousness  of Bertrand, who often fails  to  understand  the   adult  world   in which  he spends  much  of his time, a fail­ ure  which  leads  him  to adopt the skepti­ cal  attitude expressed  in  the novel's  title.

97

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



The  charm   and  also  many  of the  weak­ nesses of the  novel  result  from  its  basic premise  that  "un   p'tit gars  de  neuf  ans,
$a  peut  pas comprendre."
By far  the  most  interesting aspect  of
Y  sont   fous  le  grand  monde!   is  the  at­ tempt  to reproduce the  spoken  language of the characters as faithfully  as possible. The  youthful Bertrand's attempts to spell English  words  (which he does not recog­ nize as such)  are extremely amusing.  The reader    unfamiliar   with   English   might easily  be  confused   by  his  references   to Sister  Loqueouelle  ("Lockwell")  and  his descriptions  of   an   ail-riche-sept-heures ("Irish setter") and l' homme-beurre-  jac­ ques   ("lumberjacks").  Also   interesting from a linguistic  point  of view is the con­ trast  between   the   joual spoken  by Bert· rand's  father  ("Papa lui  y a  !'droit de dire  moe  pis toe  ...")  and  the language of his mother, who  always  uses standard French, particularly in front  of her  chil­ dren.  Aside  from  questions  of  language, Leblanc also  uses  the  fiction  of  a  nine­ year-old   narrator as  a  vehicle  of  social satire  and  as  a  pretext  for  a  somewhat superficial  treatment of social and  econo­ mic   problems.    While   Leblanc's   latest novel is certainly no  masterpiece, it  does make  interesting reading and  is undoubt­ edly one  of  the  best  novels of its type  to be published in  the  last few years.

RICHARD HODGSON


TRITE PARABLE

ROCH   CARRIER,  The  Garden  of Delights,  trans.
Sheila  Fischman.  Anansi, $6.gs.

RocH  CARRIER'S   LATEST   PARABLE  is  a trite  black  comedy  that  is old cider  in an old  bottle.   In   some   ways,  The  Garden of Delights  is a departure from  Carrier's first  four   novels,  but,   like  those  earlier ones, this one  is didactic and  exposes  the savagery  in  Carrier's vision of  man.  Os-

g8
 tensibly   a  tale   of  greed,   manipulation, and  destruction that  evokes the more obvious  emblems in  a  medieval allegory of  vice   (the   covers  reproduce  Hierony­ mus Bosch's Garden of Delights triptych), the book squanders its opportunities to be more  than   just this.
The victim  in  this  tale  is not  an  indi­ vidual   but   an  entire society  of  Quebec villagers  who,  it  is evident, are  still  very much   constrained  by  the   customs   and institutions of  an  outmoded  culture. As one Chou Racine puts it, "When we were brought  up   they   taught    us  more   fairy tales  than   real  things." And  religion,   as Carrier implicitly believes, is probably one of  the  largest   breeders  of  such   useless fantasy.  Religious indoctrination  has  ap­ parently  created a society of folk  simple­ tons who believe  that  true  gold lies under  "the rocks  of  life."  These   are  a  people who  are   "owned"  by  institutions. They  are  "always  customers,  never   partners," and  to the  extent  that  their  products are priced   by  foreign   powers,  their  freedom is  limited.  Here   Carrier  is  surely   right, though  hardly  unique, in  seeing  an  in­ veterate, subtle  relationship between  eco­ nomic  dependence and  cultural  freedom.
But  who  is the  enemy?   As a  contem­
porary  tale,    The  Garden    of   Delights could  hardly revive  old  anti-British  feel­ ings,  and  so settles  on  the  Americans as a foe. The resourceful, determined, cold­
bloodedly ambitious rogue-hero, J. J.
Bourdage, is passed off tellingly enough  as
the  Vice-President of an  American  com­ pany.  He  comes  on  as a latter-day "good  guy"   with   his   white   hat   and   shining  white  Cadillac. When  he begins the mad­ house  antics by buying  a round for every­ one   at   the   Auberge  du   Bon   Boire,  he creates the  impression of a Western  hero,  generous  in   spirit   and   free  with   coin. Even  his  speech  sounds  American in  its rhythm and  colloquial  ease:   "A  Heaven on  earth ain't  something out  of the  past, it's  right  in  front  of us. There's scientific

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



proof.  You  have   to  get  out  of  the  god­ damn  past  you're  sitting  on  like you once sat  in  your  mothers'  bellies.  Today's al­ ready   the   past.   The  future's out   there  ahead of you, sputtering like the motor  in a sports  car ready  to jump  the first mile." If this  recalls  Sam  Slick  or  one  of Mark Twain's sly, glib flim-flam  figures, it's probably supposed to do so. Bourdage, in fact,   is  none   other  than   an  ex-convict, sworn to redressing the damage inflicted upon  himself  by several  indignities of personal  circumstance. He  is obsessed by the  image  of  gold  and, a  keen  reader  of human  vanity and  weakness, he  is  a smooth  crook.
There's nothing radically American about  Bourdage's dishonesty, guile, or am­ bition,   but   his  style   and   attitudes   are what   set  him   apart  from   the  common  man   in   this   French   Canadian  setting: "On  the  road  he  has  chosen,  truth does not  exist.  Nor  falsehood. All  that  exists is the next step to be taken. All that  exists is  the  uncertain  earth of  the  vast  night  where  he must  put  down  his foot for  the next  step."
Bourdage spreads the  rumour that  the local   graveyard  is  full   of  buried   gold. The villagers  respond   with  manic  greed, and  anarchy becomes the prevailing norm by which  we measure the myriad  vanities of man.  Carrier parodies human nature, and   his  characters  are   stereotypes that don't really  have  credible lives  of  their own.  They   are   what   their   names  sug­ gest:   no  more,   and   no  less.  The  Cure  lusts secretly  after  Miss Catechism; Tris­ tesse Lachance, steeped   in  goodness,  has an   unhappy  life;    Mme.   Genereux  is overly  generous with  her  ample   bosom;  and  so forth. They pass  to and  fro,  play out  their  follies,  and  spill  maxims  along the way in  the very manner of a parable. We are never allowed to forget  that  there is a  moral   to  this  tale:  "When you look for  the  truth  in life,  you're  bound  to get dirty"; "Money that's earned dishonestly
 always gets its revenge  in the end"; "The poor  are  a  lot  happier  than   the  rich." The trouble  is that  none  of these is more than  banal,  and  despite   the  bawdy  ele­ ments, the absurd  passions, and the racing tempo,   Carrier's novel  hardly  ever  gets beyond  conventional satire.
There  could   hardly   be   any   surprise about  the fiery ending,  the figurative ser­
pent   sinuously   finding   its  way  in   this
"garden,"  or   the   bloody   fate   for   the rogue-hero. Carrier works his way through one calculated irony after  another, setting down symbols without expanding them, relentlessly pursuing a  generalization about greed  and  folly, and  his  many  in­ felicities  of style make  for  a bumpy  jour­ ney across a darkly  limned  hell.  Like  his society   of  villagers   who   don't   give   up (especially  when  they're wrong), Carrier puts  his energy  and  will  to a sturdy  test, but  this novel  is not  likely  to  be remem­ bered as a stylistic advance for its author. Indeed, Carrier's writing has never  again  been   as  powerfully  concentrated  or   as seductive   as  it  once  was  in  La  Guerre, Yes  Sir!  and   The   Garden   of   Delights exposes some of  Carrier's literary  failings  as  much   as  it   does   Sheila   Fischman's uneven  translation.
Admittedly The  Gard,en of Delights is
a quick  read,  but  this is not  to say that  it is a graceful  one. Cliche  appears to be Carrier's mode  of parody  and  irony,  and strong images are indiscriminately mixed with weak, vague ones   ("like things slipping  into  oblivion"). Carrier often strains after   a  poetic  effect  but,  unhap­ pily, the  results  are  not  always sound  or even  sensible.  It is one  thing for  him  to call  a winter  scene  a "black  jungle," but what,  oh  what, does  he  mean   when  he writes  that  "Winter is a  long  night   that  neglects   to  grow  dark"?   Is  winter   like one  long  night  without  variation of  hue or  colour?   (Not  true!)   Is  winter  simply dull?  (Again,  not so.)  How  can  you have

99

BOOKS IN REVIEW



a night  without dark? Carrier could  sim­
ply  mean  much  less than  meets  the  eye.
I  applaud the   ribaldry,  the   tall-tale episode    the  occasional   rhetorical  paro­ dies   bt
donsomething about   her  lumpy  liter­
alism?  She  is, of course,  labourig
a handicap when  it comes to findmg witty
English    equivalents  for   French  naii_les that  are  emblematic puns.  What, for  m­ stance   could   she   ever   do   about   such names' as  Gros-Douilette, Petit  Lecourt, Aristotle    Fait-Toute,  or   Ti-Queue,  ex­ cept   allow   the  comic  points   to  emerge  from  the    sounds   and   connotations? Hence  Gros-Douilette has a downy  sense in  acc rd
Petit   Lecourt isn't   just short,  but  short­ sighted  as  well;  and  Ti-Queue  looks_ for "tail."  Aristotle Fait-Toute   says   thmgs succinctly  in bursts  of  aphoristic wit,  but when  we come  to Bourdage, Caillouette, Imelda Boucher, and  Demeryse,  we need the help  of a dictionary to obtain  the full comic  point.  We  discover   that   Boucher is a good  name for a seamstress, one  who stops a hole  by a stitch  in  time;  and  that  the  notary  Caillouette must  have  pebbles ( cailloux)  in  his  head  at  times;  or  that the  neurotic Demeryse, usually  rooted  to her  bed,  feels obliged  to risk her  life and limb  in  a  burning church  ( demeurer  en
reste avec ... ) . The best  name  is  prob­ ably  Bourdage's, for  it  connotes  both  a fibber  and  a blunderer (from  debiter des
bourdes and   faire une  bourde).
Carrier's parable is quite  without R. K. Narayan's delicacy  and  subtlety,  Donald Barthelme's grotesque inventiveness, or Jorge  Luis  Borges' intellectual sophistica­ tion.  It confirms  our  impression  of Car­ rier's   skill  with   parody   and   surrealistic images,  but  it  does  nothing to extend  its author's  talent. Carrier fails, not  because he has  attempted too much,  but  because he  hasn't attempted enough.

KEITH GAREBIAN


100
 ORDERED MADNESS

ANDRE  MAJOR,   The   Scarecrows   of  Saint-Em­
manuel. McClelland  &  Stewart, $10.00.
VICTOR-LEVY BEAULIEU,  Don Quixote  in Night- town. Press Porcepic, $ro.oo.

REVIEWING TOGETHER novels by different authors is seldom  a congenial task.  Usu­ ally  it  is  the  differences that  necessitate attention,  differences which  don't readily lend  themselves   to  improvised contrasts. Such  is the case with two relatively  recent  Quebec  novels,  AndMajor' 'epou­ vantail  and  Victor-Levy  Beaulieu  s  Don Quichotte  de  la  demanche. They   do  of course  have  certain  things   in  common. Both  were  originally  published  in  1974 and  appeared three  years  later  n translations by the very busy Sheila  Fisch­  man.  Both  have  exclusively  Quebec set­ tings and  make  use of traditionathemes like the  conflict  between  generatiOns  and  the   differing  atttractions   of   city   and country. Certain critics  might   ven
that   the   respective  protagomsts  are    n some sense symbols of the torn,  uncertam life of modern Quebec. Overall, however, the similarities are far less persuasive  than the  differences, and  it  is to Sheila  Fisch­ man's credit  that  she  has  modulated her approach to render as clearly  apossible the  distinctive  approach  to subject   mat­ ter, narrative distance, and  point  of view, to  mood,  tone, and  irony  in  each  novel.
Of  the two, Major's The  Scarecrows of
Saint-Emmanuel (L'Epouvantail)  ap­ pears  the more  straightforward, though it incongruously  juxtaposes the  violent  ac­ tion of an  urban gangster thriller with the more  leisurely  pacing of  a countrified de­ tective  story.  Its  first  part   takes  place  in Montreal  among  the  pimps,  prostitutes, hoods,   and   transvestites  who   frequent low-life   neon  strip-joints like  the  Para­ dise.  Bt
does  have  its  own  order and   coherence which  are  upset  by the appearance of the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



central figure,  a tough, swaggering coun­ try  boy  named  Momo  Boulanger.  The second   half   of  the   narrative  is  set   in Momo's birthplace, "a  hole  in  the  woods called  Saint-Emmanuel de  l'Epouvante," to which  he  is unceremoniously returned after  the stabbing death of his former girlfriend in  Montreal. Yet  even at  home his  presence  constitutes a threat to  that particular order. He  is there  less than  a day  when  an  unseen  townsman  revenge­ fully  attempts to  kill  him.  As  Momo   is taken   to  hospital, Inspector  Paul-Emile Therrien,  who  has  come  to  arrest   him, not  only  enters   the  action   of   the  novel but  replaces  Momo as the  apparent cen­  tre of narrative attention. The remainder of  the   novel  concerns  the  rural   police­ man's  rather   bumbling  efforts   to  track down   the  man  who  shot   Momo in  the shoulder.
A  curious   shift  of  attention it  would seem.  With   interest keyed  upon   Memo, Major offers  a sort  of village  comedy  of manners, Therrien  dreaming of  his  im­ minent  retirement,  toying   with   his   in­ competent   partner,   flirting    decorously  with  a former  girlfriend (now  the  aging wife of the obese hotel  owner) , and  deal­  ing  sensitively   with   the  townsfolk.   The  question of Momo's fate is not,  however,  totally  lost from  sight.  Even  as he  lies in hospital, it  is clear  that he  remains   the victim, the scapegoat. In Saint-Emmanuel (ironically,  "God is with   us"), "no  one wanted to  suspect  that   Momo might  be innocent" of the  murder of Gigi.  Neither is Therrien  interested in getting involved  in  the  Montreal side  of  the  case.  More­ over,  the one  man  who could clear Momo of the frame-up, a former priest  named Saint-Pierre, takes  refuge  in  other  alter­ natives  rather than  calling  the  police.
Overall, then,  the effect of the  novel is to take  the  reader behind   the  sensation­ alist  headlines of  a  typical  tabloid   story
-"Call  Girl  Victim of  Knife-Wielding
Madman." It presents  the  circumstances
 and  background of the  crime  and  allows the reader  the chance to consider  its underlying  causes.  At  the  same  time  it reveals  the cruelties and  injustices  inher­ ent   in  the   two  social   orders   presented  and  the  peculiar aura of   doom  a  char­ acter    like   Momo   carries   in   his   very nature.
Momo  Boulanger, or  Mo  Baker  as he
likes to be known,  is a figure  not  unlike Faulkner's  Joe   Christmas  in   Light   in August. Like Christmas, he seems plagued by oppositions in his own  blood. Rumour has  it  that   his  mother  (whom   he  never knew)  was an  Indian, and  his passion for knife-throwing scarcely   lessens  that  im­ pression  in   the   town.   Neither  does  his family,  all  of whom  are  labelled  "differ­ ent";  accordingly, within  the  insulated little  world  of Saint-Emmanuel,  they are proud  outsiders who  are  content  to  live at a  remove from   regular  activities. Momo,   however,   is  a  special   case,  for unlike  his relatives  he  is feared  and  des­ pised.  He  is the  pariah of  the  town,  his swagger   angering   the   men   even   as  it proves exciting  to some of the young girls (thus  further  angering the  men). And, like  Joe Christmas,  Momo  is  curiously innocent, both  in  his inchoate ideas  and his  lack  of  awareness  of  the  effect   his presence   creates.  His   instincts,    though often  violent,  are  of  a  pure,  simple  na­ ture.   In  seeking   out   Gigi   in   Montreal after   his  release  from   prison,  he had  in mind  some  idea  of  revenge  (she  had  re­ vealed  Momo  as  a  thief);  more  impor­ tantly,    however,    he   maintained   some vague   romantic  hope  of   regaining  the great  moment in  his  life  when,  as  teen­ agers,  they had  first  made love. Later he dreams   of  going  "north" to  escape  the swirl of brutal  events  that  have  confused  and  wounded  him.  Accordingly, his  life, like  Joe's,  might   well  be  imaged   as  a containing circle,  going nowhere. Indeed, for  all  his  furious   activity,  he  is  more acted  upon  than   he  is a man  who  acts.


IOI

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



It is this aspect of the novel that  Major impresses  upon  the  reader  by his  organi­ zation  of  the  narrative. In  the  first  two sequences    of   events,    for   instance,  he chooses  to  begin  in  media  res with  Mo­ rna's  painful  regaining  of   consciousness after   brutal  beatings  at   the   hands  of Gigi's  pimp  and  his thugs. Momo is never in  control of  his  fate,  however  much  he strives   to  make  his  presence   felt  or   to prove  his courage, toughness,  and  mascu­  linity.
Andve  Major does  not strive  obviously to make  Momo an  explicit  example of modern or  Quebecois alienation. In  The Scarecrows  of Saint-Emmanuel, it  is  ra­ ther   the   presentation,  the   drama,   that  dominates.  Major  minimizes   his   intru­ sions, letting the various characters speak from  their  limited  perspectives.  One  im­ portant result  of   this  is  that   the  reader  gains  a rich sensory awareness  of the  two settings. Momo's acute  sense of smell for instance,  does  much   to  create   the  im­ pression  of  Montreal in  the  novel.  Yet for  all   the  palpability and   vividness  of the   settings,    beyond    the   bleakness   of Montreal and   the  coziness of  Saint-Em­ manuel, beyond  the expectations aroused  by the gangster and detective  story forms, the   reader   remains   aware   of   Morna's  dilemma.  He  shows  himself  to  be  many things  to  many  people: hick,  thief,  wild Indian, lover,  punk,  bore, even  madman. Finally  he  becomes  "killer," the  perfect  stooge  for  the  set-up   arranged by Gigi's pimp. In  fact,  though he would scorn aid if  it   were  offered,   he  is  constantly  be­ trayed  by those  who  might  help  him,  by Gigi, by Saint-Pierre, and  by his "home," just as Joe  Christmas is failed  by woman, minister, and  community. Of all the scarecrows of Saint-Emmanuel, he is the one  who  most  arouses   fear,  dread, and anger   wherever he  goes.  Hence,   he  has the  ability with  Joe  Christmas to  reveal the  hollowness  and   limits  of  the  people around  him.   What  he  is  defines  what

102
 others   are   not.   Nothing,  however,   can save  him  from  the  confusion, the  unde­ fined   alienation,  the   innocence,   which accompany his  disruptive power.
While    Major's  novel   underplays   its literary  dimensions,  Victor-L,evy   Beau­ lieu's   Don  Quixote   in   Nighttown  is  a highly self-conscious literary  performance. Its  protagonist and  centre   of  conscious­ ness  is  Abel  Beauchemin, a  27-year-old Quebec  novelist  who  is suffering from  a "peculiar   sickness,"   which   at   its   most serious  might  be termed  a kind of literary madness,    at   most   absurd    a   mammoth case  of writer's block.  More  precisely,  as the  original title  suggests,  Abel  is meant to  be  seen  as  a  modern Quixote, but  a Quixote "demanche": that  is, without his handle, out   of  control,  breaking  down mentally and  physically.  It is a  theme  fit for   both    comic   and   serious   purposes. Beaulieu's  Beauchemin   (one   notes   the deliberate similarity in  names)   was born near  Trois  Pistoles and  came  to Montreal as a writer  and  publisher's reader. Work­ ing  compulsively-"a  million  words  in seven  years" -he has  produced  five  or six novels.  However, in  the  novel's  pres­ ent,   a   mere   twenty-four  hours   at   the height   of  Abel's  "peculiar sickness,"  his ability  to write  has abandoned him. Try­ ing   to   comprehend   his   condition   he muses, "the more  you wrote and  the more you   felt  obliged   to  write,   the  less  you understood  what   was  happening  inside and   outside   yourself,   as  though   every­ thing  was  scrambled up,  the  dream and  reality."
Everything is  indeed   "scrambled up" in  Abel's  consciousness  and  in  the  novel. The  reader thus faces the considerable problem of sorting out  fact  and  fiction, reality   and   dream. And  since  these  dis­ tinctions blur  in  any  novelist's  imagina­ tion, since dream feeds reality and  reality  feeds dream, the  problem is clearly  some­ thing more  than  mere aberration. More­ over, for a certain kind of novelist  (many

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



of whom, like Lowry, Joyce, Melville, Burroughs, and Kerouac, are Abel's touch­ stones) , the  idea  of madness is a  central preoccupation.  Thus,  when   the   reader shares  Abel's  thoughts and  conversations over  the  24 hours,  he  faces  the  problem  of  trying   to  "understand"  the  madness that  has affected  Abel even  as he tries to figure  out  point  by  point  what   is really happening,  to   whom   Abel   is  actually  talking, and  what  the  event  or  conversa­  tion might  signify. A sort  of simultaneous puzzlement and  fascination confront the reader   at  almost  every  turn   in  a  narra­ tive   where  past   and   present  converge, where sickness may mean  health, where madness may  mean lucidity, where dreams and  obsessions gain  special  prom­ inence.
What we do know of Abel does help in understanding the  particular strains  upon him  and  the  consequent shape  of his ela­ borate   fantasies. We  know  that   his  left side is weakened by polio,  that  he suffers from   fears   about  his   heart,  and   that,  rightly  or  wrongly,  he  is  convinced  that  he is about  to die. The novel  begins with that  startling assertion. We  know  that  he is desperately lonely and given  to curious  sexual  fantasies,  having been  deserted  by his  beautiful   wife  Judith  who   at  some point  has given  birth  to a stillborn  child.  We  know  he  has  two  brothers whom  he admires  perhaps excessively:   Steven,  an expatriate poet  and   translator of  Joyce, and  Jos, a self-styled  visionary  and  revo­ lutionary. We know  he lives in a conven­  tional  Terrebonne bungalow with his two cats  (to  whom  he talks  in a serious man­  ner), that   he  writes   (when  he  is able) on orange  crates  in the basement, that  he drinks  gin excessively, and  that his house at   the   novel's   end   has  been   sold.  We learn  as well a good deal  about his family or  "tribe,"  particularly his  mother, who died  gruesomely, and   his  lonely  father, who  works  as  a  "watchman in  a  mad­ house"   and   whose   loneliness   and   pain
 Abel  feels  acutely,  even  though   he  isn't able  to reach  out  to him.  There is also a Negress  named  Johanne  who  seems  to have committed suicide  in her consuming love for  Abel.
Yet even  with  such  facts  (culled  from the  novel  as  a  whole), it  is still  exceed­ ingly difficult  to gain  a coherent sense of all  the  elements  at   work  in   Beaulieu's prose.  Indeed, in  such  a  novel,  conven­  tional  expectations of  coherence can  only be  of  limited   help.  When,   for  instance, Abel  encounters  Don  Quixote  near   the end  of  the  novel,  it  is difficult  to  know what  to make  of the  statements the  Don makes. Is he a creative guide  interpreting  signs  and  offering   cogent  advice?   Is  he merely Jos  disguised    (he  is  clearly  Jos, and the disguise does stimulate Abel's nighttown vision)   and  thus  the  voice  of Jos's  revolutionary obsessions? Or  is he a further figment   of  Abel's  fictional  aber­ rations?
Don   Quixote  in   Nighttown  is  less  a novel than  an  anatomy of the strains  and obsessions  that   haunt a  particular  kind of  writer   as  he  struggles   to  understand his outer  and  inner  lives, as he waits,  in the words of the novel's Malcolm Lowry epigraph, "for  my house to pass." The "waiting" is both  for  the death  Abel anticipates and  for  the  understanding of his "tribe" to  which  he  has long aspired. In  this  sense  at  least  there   seems  to  be some  consolation  in  his  final  realization that  "I'm still  and  in spite  of everything among   them.  Even  if  everything is lost, at  least  I've  got  that." But  it  isn't  clear from  the ending whether or not Abel dies after  gaining  this  realization.
Clearly,  Don  Quixote in  Nighttown  is a   difficult   novel   to   deal   with   in   any simple or  precise  way. The  fact  that  it  is translated suggests further problems, since however  well  Sheila  Fischman has  done her  perilous   job-and  the  novel  reads smoothly  for  all  its  internal disjunctions
-a writer  as devoted to wordplay, allu-


103

BOOKS IN REVIEW



sion, and  the  theme  of madness  as  Beau­ lieu, is bound  to generate many  areas  of perplexity. Still,  Don Quixoxte in  Night­ town (which  won  the Governor-General's Award   in  1975)   merits   close  attention, both  for  the  way  in  which  it gets at  the writer's    dilemma    (in   Quebec  and    at large)   and  for  its  comic  and  verbal  en­ ergies.
MICHAEL A. PETERMAN


MISTAKEN IDENTITY

HUBERT    AQUIN,    Hamlet's    Twin,  trans.    by
Sheila   Fischman.    McClelland  &   Stewart,
$12-95·
THERE IS A  COVER  SCHOOL   of criticism, usually resorted  to in desperation or for comic relief. After  the obligatory second read,  the reviewer,  who has resisted temp­ tation   thus  far,  searches   the  dust  cover for  a  clue.  It is a  mode  requiring great self-control  because,   being   human,  we have  this  urge  to read  the  cover  and  the last  page  first.
In   the  case  of  Hubert  Aquin's   black
novel, Neige Noir  (Hamlet's Twin, in translation), I nearly   hurled   that   block of  ice  into   the  fire  and   almost   denied myself the first spot of levity in several painful   hours.   On   the   back   cover,   in comely  red  letters,  the  artist  assures  the reader   that   he  has   intended  "to   enter into   a   loving,   erotic  relationship  with him.  In  a  way  [he   was]  trying  here  to make   love  to  the   reader." This   comes hard   upon   a  score  of  mindless  physical acts  which  have  a  grotesque sexual  mu­ tilation  of the female  protagonist as  their climax.
Hamlet's  Twin, no  sibling  or  even  a distant relative of the  original,  is as cold and  cruel  at  its heart  as its more appro­ priate   French  title.  Hamlet  is  merely  a hook on  which  Aquin  has hung what  we presume  to  be  his script  for  revolution.

104
 The book is a polyglot: film script, political and  philosophic treatise, aesthe­ tic  manifesto-and blue  movie,  already  (as they say)  in the can, because we have the  film  within  the   film  on   which   the duplicity is  based.  There is  no  unity  in the  multiplicity of this unweeded garden, except   for   the  metaphors  we  recognize too  easily  because  they  are  all  borrowed from  Hamlet and  Freud   with  a soup  on of  Cocteau thrown in.
Hamlet's  Twin is a  toneless  catalogue of violence  without passion. Being the legatees   of  Freud,  we  think   we  under­ stand   Hamlet's dilemma so  much  better  than   the  Elizabethans  who,  were  we  to resurrect a  few,  might   still  make  a  dis­ tinction between  the  penis and  the sword.  Nicolas,  Aquin's impotent hero,  does not. And  his  ultimate political  helplessness  is transformed into  the astounding image  of his  own   codpiece   sandwiched  between  two  sanitary  napkins on  a  flight   to  his aborted   honeymoon  in   Norway   where,  like  Fortinbras, the   character he  has recently  portrayed on a T.V. film, he will wait  (while his fleshy sword mends) to assume  power.
Because  Sylvie  is guilty  of  the  sin  of incest,   she  will  drown  in  the   northern snow, her  hair  splayed  out  like Ophelia's. This  is the  big orgasm,  death by violence, "when we  lose all  identity, to  be  reborn and  live  in  the  Christ   of  Revelation."
The  question that  arises  out   of  this montage of desperate and  angry  sex and dying  is this: what  exactly  is the  signifi­ cance   of  Fortin bras?  Will  he  survive  to put  things  right  in  this most  boring  of all possible  worlds,  or,  as  Hamlet's twin,  is he  affected  with   the  same  political   im­  potence? Perhaps  there  is no  Fortinbras, only a cheap  imitation Hamlet acting on the   C.B.C.  Tune  in  next   week.  Aquin  lards  clues in his irritating thematic inter­ jections. "Names don't give birth  to sub­ terranean meanings; that  would  be  tan­ tamount to a purely  literary process, anti-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



cinematographic, you know. Designations of reality  add  nothing to reality,  except  a nominal mask."  In  that  case why bother?
The novel functions best  without words, as a cold  and  silent  movie  journey to the black  snow. Words  are the impedi­ ment  to a reality  he tells us may not exist.
When  the  characters speak,  it  is  with­ out  meaning, lies on lies, "fiction trapped by a  reality  it  didn't contain  and  which hypocritically  invades  it."  Eva,   Sylvie's successor, describes  the movie  dialogue  as artificial, and   Nicolas  tells  her,  "I want dialogue  that   will  be  more   articulated, more  complicated  than  the  exchange of lines we've  become  used  to. For  me, dia­ logues   that   run  a  little   false  have   the power   of   rendering  the   fantastic  more effective  than   realistic  conversations can do."
There is the  danger here  of creating a purely intellectual exercise that  engages neither  the   heart   nor   the  mind   of  the reader. One  is hard  pressed  to  find Ophelia's flowers in  the  snow, since Aquin   refuses   to  describe   them   in   the real  language of compassion.
Sex is no metaphor for  love when  it is ugly, mechanical, and  violent. The salva­ tion  promised  in the Christ of  Revelation is buried  too  deep  in  the snow  to be felt or even anticipated. Aquin seems to have  deluded  himself  here, for he explains  that  sex  in   films   has   its  correlative  in   the painted nude.  Somehow, he  expects  the naked  human  form  to invade  our  uncon­  scious  and   find   its  creative  archetype. There  is   no  synthesis,   however,   in  the copulation  of antagonists.
The revolutionary is often  criticised  for his lack of synthetic energy  and imagina­ tion.  It is not  enough   to  destroy.  There is no compensation in  Hamlet's Twin for acres of smothering black snow, the death of  art.  In   the  end,  there   is  not  even  a whimper,  just   the  silent   movement  of frozen  lifeless earth.
LINDA  ROGERS
 LES FORMES CHEZ AQUIN

RENE  LAPIERRE,  Les Masques  du  recit, lecture de Prochain Episode de Hubert Aquin. Hur­ tubise HMH, Cahiers  du  Quebec, collection Litterature, n.p.

DANS UN  AVANT-PROPOS  qui  s'intitule "Anciens  et modernes," !'auteur des Mas­ ques  du  recit  livre  les  premisses  theori­ ques  qui  gouvernent son  analyse  de  Pro­ chain  Episode:   les caracteres de I'art mo­
derne   et  Le   Livre   a  venir  de  Maurice
Blanchot.  Par   la  suite,   Rene   Lapierre
reprendra l'idee,  souvent   repetee   depuis la vogue du  nouveau roman  et de la nou­ velle  critique, que  l'ecriture  romanesque
n'a  plus, sous  l'egide  de  la  modernite, a
s'astreindre comme   jadis a une  fidele  re­
presentation  du   reel   et   a  une   histoire
regie  par  la logique  cartesienne. Dorena­
vant,  le jeu du  langage, ses possibilites  et ses resistances determinent son cours. Cette
primaute accordee .a la fabrication du ro­
man  conduit !'auteur a revenir  avec insis­
tance sur la perspective de Blanchot selon
laquelle l'ecriture fait  probleme pour l'ec­
rivain  qui s'y abandonne, d'autant que  la tentation du silence, de concert .a un  vio­ lent  desir  de  naitre .a  la  parole,  miroite  sans cesse .a ses yeux. A l'origine des para­
doxes  de  l'ecrivain et  de  cette  contesta­ tion   de  l'ecriture  dont   temoigne    toute  oeuvre  veritable, il y a la  poursuite d'un absolu   inaccessible,   la  totalite  du   livre, auquel  Lapierre se  refere comme  au  Re­  cit.  La  fiction  se  subordonne par  conse­ quent   au  Recit/pre-texte et  son  rOle est d'etre metaphore de la litterature: "Toute la difficulte  d'ecrire un roman tient  en cet incroyable  defi:  creer  une fiction  qui soit, dans   sa  coherence  particuliere,  l'image des empechements de l'ecriture romanes­ que. Tout y doit  done  etre relatif  et lege­
rement ambigu, tenu   a distance  raison­
nable   d'un   absolu   que   la  seule  logique
d'une intrigue ne peut  assumer.  Le  Recit


105

BOOKS IN REVIEW



incree  censure  sans cesse par  ce moyen  le recit  commenc;ant,  appelant et  menac;ant
-depuis  l'acte  meme   d'ecrire -I'exis­
tence  du  roman."
A notre  avis, la force et l'originalite de
ce livre s'affirment lorsque  Rene  Lapierre s'attarde de preference non  plus aux con­
siderations theoriques de Blanchot mais a
leur application au texte "relatif" de Pro­
chain Episode,  ce qu'il  fait  surtout dans
ses  deuxieme et  quatrieme  parties.   Son analyse  de la "matiere humaine et brute" du   recit   met   en  relief,  outre   l'essentiel secret  qui  s'insere  et  se maintient au  fil des  pages,  les formes  chez Aquin  du  de­ tour,  de  Ia  poursuite et  de  la  fuite,  des doubles  et des masques. Avec art  et pene­  tration, elle  fait  ressortir,  d'une  part,  le pietinement de  ce recit d'espionnage qui,
a !'image du  heros-narrateur, se cherche
en  se niant  et  se construit en  se  dereali­
sant,   d'autre  part,    }'utilisation  qui   est
faite  de ce pietinement puisque  un  heros ne manque jamais  de transformer ses empechements en  strategic et  un  narra­ teur   de   rentabiliser  les  failles   de   son enonciation.
FRAN«;OISE IQBAL


WAITING FOR THE BONE-SETTER
MARTHE B.-HOGUE,  C'etait  dimanche. Editions
Naaman, n.p.
JOSEPH  BONENFANT, Repere.  L'arbre H.M.H.,
$8.25.
JACQUES  GARNEAu,  Les   Difficiles  Lettres d'amour. Editions  Quinze,  $4·95·
LOUIS  CARON, Le Bonhomme Sept-heures. Laf­
font,  n.p.

C'ETAIT DIMANCHE, by Marthe B.-Hague, bears  the  sub-title "roman social  quebe­ cois." The label,  by its presence  as much as by its  judgment, consigns  the  novel  to an   "old-fashioned"  category.   The   "ro­ man  social quebecois," a living phenome-

106
 non  in  the  I g6o's,  has  long  since  given way  to  other types  of  novel  in  Quebec. This  work is a throw-back to an era when any   expression   not   found   in   the   Petit Robert  had   to  be  italicized   and  accom­ panied  by a  footnote  for  the  benefit  of non-Quebecois readers. It is,  admittedly, part  of a series destined to appeal to "la francophonie," and   therefore  not   com­ peting  on  home  ground.
In the  presence of the  body  of her student son  who  has  committed  suicide, a woman  listens  to the  opinions of others on the causes of his death. The  hackneyed judgments  of  the   older   generation are exposed  as false  (but who  can  believe  in a  character  who   is  glad   her   nineteen­ year-old  son  prefers holding  hands with his   boy-friend   to   seducing   girls?).  A stilted  and  stereotyped  dialogue between  two  professors,  one  a  priest,  one  a  free­ thinker, presents  the  principal arguments surrounding  adolescent  suicides. We realize  that  no-one  knows  that  the  char­ acter whose internal monologue we share  is  the   mother  of  the   dead   youth.   She faints,  and  the  "concierge" who  attends to her turns out to be a "psychologue stagiaire": switch  to a  lengthy  flashback in which  the internal monologue becomes an  oral  one  as  the  narrator  remembers her  last interview with  her son, when  she revealed   the  true  identity and  nature of his  parents and  recounted her  life story. Here   the  language becomes  more  "que­ becois"    (and    extremely   self-conscious) . The   discussion   of   suicide   is  converted obliquely   to  one   of   abortion, since   the truth  is  out:   Mark   killed   himself   on learning that  he  was the son of a fifteen­  year-old   nobody,   who   would   have   re­ sorted  to  abortion if  it  had   been  avail­  able. The heroine is revealed  as the  vic­ tim of a Jansenist upbringing. The argu­ ment   belongs   to   the   past,   as  does   the novel, since  the  discussion  centres on  the role  of  the  church, rather  than   on  the role  assigned  to  women.  While  the  nar-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



rator almost   comes  alive  in  the  second half  of  the  novel,  the  son  becomes  less and   less credible or  likeable.  The   main effect of this well-intentioned work is to recall  others   which   make   better   use  of some of its elements (As I Lay Dying, Kamouraska). The  happy  ending  elimi­ nates  even  the  positive  aspect  of  a  plea for   the  liberation  of   fifteen-year-old mothers, since the narrator's salvation ap­  pears  in the person  of her silent and long­ suffering  husband.  Her   redeeming  mis­ sion  is  to  return to  her  home  and  chil­ dren.  One  wonders what  the   author thought of Les Fees ont soif.
At  the  opposite end of the scale, Joseph Bonenfant's Repere  bears  all  the  marks of a first novel written by a university specialist    in   modern   French  criticism. The "story" as such  is non-existent: the protagonist is supposed   (according to the cover)   to  have   murdered  someone,   but the circumstances and  the victim remain nebulous.  At  the  beginning of  the  novel the character, who is not  the narrator, emerges  from  a womb-like crevasse some­ where   in  Crete, to  relive  his  childhood and  more  recent   happenings  in  Quebec through  a  series  of  flash-backs.  Why  his father is now living in Crete is not eluci­ dated, but  the classical  venue  serves as a vantage point for a protracted panorama of  Homeric  and   Biblical  allusions.   The  text  is divided into  a series of short  chap­ ters   which   alternate  between   the   per­ sonal  fantasies  of   the   protagonist  and (his?)   reflections   on  his  reading,  inter­ spersed   with  comments which  can  only emanate  from   the   omniscient   narrator. The fictional  character is in  fact eclipsed by the  personality of the implied  author. The implied   reader is  evidently   familiar not  only  with  Homer  and  the  Bible  but also  with  Hubert  Aquin and  Julia Kris­  teva.  One  chapter  in  particular provides  an analysis of the story of Potiphar's wife and  Joseph  which   would   not  be  out  of place  in  Poetique,  except   that she  com-
 mands   him  to  "Couche  avec  moe!" in best  joual.  The intrusion of events  from Quebec history  and  the current affairs  of
1975  (as  reported in  Paris Match)  con­
tributes   to  the  density   of  a  text   which
must  remain   for  many   readers  inacces­ sible  without an  encyclopaedia  at  hand.  Paradoxically, the  narrative is  most  con­ vincing   when  it  admits to  being  meta­  narration, a commentary on fiction,  writ­ ing, and  above  all  reading. The passages which  delve into the  Freudian depths of the   hero's   subconscious  suffer   from   a superfluity   of  severed   heads   (or   other  members)   and  all-pervasive  bloodiness.
A bloody emergence fro  the  womb  (as metaphor for  the  birth   of  the  book)   is equally  central in Jacques Garneau's  Les Difficiles Lettres  d'amour.  This   novel  is also remotely  related to C'etait  dimanche by its treatment of abortion. Another  al­ most anonymous character (Philippe may be  his  father's name,   or   his,  or   both)  relives his childhood, marked  like  that  of both  previous   protagonists  by  scenes  of butchery   and   covert  opposition   to  sex­ role stereotyping. In  this  case  the  narra­ tion  is a written  one  at  the  intradiegetic level,  since  the   character  records   in  a series of diary-like notebooks his memories  fantasies  and  "letters" to  his mother, sis­ ters and  finally "la  femme." The  parallel  between birth  and  writing is explicit  from beginning to end,  as  the  epigraph is also the final statement: "Ceci  est le livre que tu  composas  et  tu  es  la  femme   que   je suis"  ( Anais  Nin) . The male  child  is de­ picted   as  devoured  by  a  vain  desire  to return to the womb  or in his tum to give birth.   Rather than  communicating with his mother  or sisters  he shuts  himself  up in  his  womb-like   room   to   write.   The grown   man   adopts   the   same   strategy, until   he  meets  "la   femme" and   recog­ nizes  that  the  only  way  to  return to  the womb  is  to  plant   his  seed  in  someone else's. The  resultant abortion is necessary in   order   that    he   assume   his   sex  and


107

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



autonomy, and   be  made   fertile   himself by contact with  the  woman  who  enables him   finally   to  deliver   his  book.  He   is born  again   as  a  writer,  "en  s',ecrivant," the product of what  Barthes  terms the "middle voice"  activity  of writing,  which while   producing  an   object   also   trans­ forms  the  subject. The  object  in  this case is  enriched  by  the  exuberance  of  Gar­ neau's   imagery   and   the  intensity   of  his evocation of a fantastic world, more often found  in  poetry  than  in  the  novel.
One  of Garneau's narrator's fears  is of the "bonhomme sept-heures"-the seven o'clock  bogey-man imagined  by the Que­ becois   from    the   English   term   "bone­ setter." This mythical character  provides  the  title  for  Louis  Caron's second  novel, a  work  which  proves  that  it  is still  pos­ sible  in  Quebec  to  write   a   traditional (that is,  non-narcissistic)  novel,  without falling into  the  pitfalls of "deja lu."  The  novel  is  based  on  an  actual earthquake which  took  place  in Nicolet in 1955· The events  are   recounted  in  the   tone   of  a traditional "conteur," and  the Quebecois expressions are  an  integral  part  of the narration.  They  are   seen   through  the eyes of a group of naive,  innocent  char­ acters: a  gang  of  children, a  physically deformed old man, a nature-loving monk. The  last  two, one  of  the children, a cook and   a  baby  are   the  victims  of  the  dis­ aster.  The reactions of the various  towns­ people  provide a  scaled-down version  of La  Peste, as  seen  by a  naive  painter. A generous  dose   of   humour  and   fantasy  cloaks  the  question  raised  by Camus,  or by  Voltaire  in  his   poem  on  the  earth­ quake   of  Lisbon:  why  should  the  inno­  cent suffer? The village idiot  is shown  as knowing  more than  the  townspeople, but unable   to  communicate  her   knowledge  except   by   her   perpetual  cry  of  "Mal­ heur!" which  she uses indiscriminately to express  joy  or  anguish. Caron,  by  con­ trast,  makes  something  joyful  from   the tragic  facts: death is  a  new  life  in  the

108
 world of myth for those who were too vulnerable for this world.  It is the only alternative for  those  who  refuse  to  grow up.
All  four   of  the  novels  considered are
concerned with the relationship between childhood and  adulthood, with  the  nos­ talgia  for  a  state  of  primitive  innocence. Is this still  typically Quebecois, or simply part  of life?
VALERIE RAOUL


LE JEU DU TEXTE

Adrienne   Choquette lue  par  Suzanne Paradis.
Les Presses Laurentiennes, n.p.
HUGUES  CORRIVEAU, Gilles Henault: lecture  de Semaphore. Les Presses de  l'Universite de Montreal, n.p.
FRAN OISE    MACCABEE-IQBAL, Hubert    Aquin, romancier. Les Presses de l'Universite Laval,
$12-50.
DANS  LES  TROIS OUVRAGES presentes  ici, il s'agit  de  la  critique interne d'un  texte ou  d'une oeuvre   particuliere. Aucun   ne vise  .a !'elaboration d'une  methode  cri­ tique  ou  a  !'insertion  du   texte  dans  un contexte historique et  Iitteraire.  Ces  trois livres  temoignent chacun a leur fa on
la  creativite d'une lecture a  la  fois  ou­
verte  et  respectueuse du  texte.
Suzanne Paradis choisit  Adrienne Cho­ quette avec  !'intention  avouee de  sortir  cette   romanciere  d'un  oubli   immerite. Elle  s'attache done  avant tout  a  reveler  les  qualites de  son  oeuvre.  La  majeure partie de !'analyse critique  est  consacree a  !'unique  roman de  la   journaliste,  La Coupe  vide  (publie pour Ia premiere fois en  1948). Choquette  y  raconte I'emprise d'une   femme   sensuelle   et   mysterieuse, dont  !'obsession  les  poursuivra  toute   la
vie, sur  quatre adolescents. Le  roman  fit scandale a I'epoque  (il  n'en   fallait  evi­
demment pas beaucoup!). S. Paradis pre­ sente  aussi  brievement les quelques  nou­  velles  et   recits   (surtout,  Laure  Clouet,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



rg6r) qui  constituent le reste  de !'oeuvre assez  n!duite d'Adrienne Choquette. L'etude contient egalement des poemes et fragments inedits.
Avec  une  approche critique et  un  me­ talangage  fort   traditionnels,  S.  Paradis s'efforce  de   degager  les  !ignes   thema­ tiques  de force  de !'oeuvre de Choquette. Elle  insiste  surtout  sur  le  theme   d'une predestination  depourvue   d'un  contenu chretien. Elle met  aussi en evidence !'uti­ lisation   particulierement   habile   de  cer­ taines   techniques  narratives,  notamment l'emploi du  dialogue.
Dans  son souci de  rehabilitation, S. Paradis s'attache a communiquer son ad­
miration et  la  ferveur de  sa  lecture. On peut  regretter que ces louanges si bien intentionnees s'expriment souvent par des cliches   vagues   et   rebattus:  ainsi,   est-il bien  utile de  parler de "la  finesse et de la profondeur  de  !'analyse  psychologique" ou de dire  que  A. Choquette "sait  diriger
un  dialogue ou  planter, a l'aide de  quel­
ques  images  et  d'un peu  de  couleur   un
decor  vivant!"? Cependant, dans  son en­ semble,  ce  livre  se  lit  sans  ennui,  avec sympathie  pour   l'entreprise  de  Suzanne Paradis.  L'image  d'Adrienne  Choquette qu'on emporte avec  soi,  a  des  cotes  fas­ cinants, ne serait-ce que le contraste entre  la  journaliste prudente  et  bien  pensante des chroniques de Terre  et  Foyer et Ecole et Education et la  romanciere torturee et exigeante de   Laure    Clouet  et   de   La Coupe   vide.
Hugues Corriveau nous propose  une lecture remarquablement  riche  et  nova­ trice  d'une oeuvre   restee  elle  aussi  rela­ tivement peu  connue, la  poesie  de  Gilles Henault  et   en   particulier  son   poeme "Semaphore" extrait de Signaux pour les voyants.   L'organisation  de   cette   etude
reflete  a merveille la demarche d'une lec­
ture critique "jouant le jeu du texte" ala­
quelle  aspire  Corriveau. D'abord, le texte
meme  du  poeme,  reference indispensable du commentaire critique. Ensuite, comme
 point de depart, une analyse du champ semantique d'un mot-de "signes"  dans  le cadre  du poeme. Corriveau retrace  les fascinantes  metamorphoses   du   signifie,
aboutissant  a des  schemas d'oppositions
qui  soustendent  toute   la  poesie  de  He­
nault.  La troisieme  partie presente  un commentaire strophe par  strophe, inspire surtout de   Bachelard  et   de  Durand ( Structul'es  anthropologiques de  l'imagi­ naire) . Le dernier chapitre  relie  le com­ mentaire detaille avec  le  reste !'oeuvre et d'autres  textes   critiques   sur   Henault. L'etude contient  egalement une entrevue entre  Corriveau  et  Henault oil  le  poete parle  de ses rapports avec son oeuvre.  La bibliographie exhaustive inclut  non seule­ ment  la poesie  et  la  prose  litteraire mais aussi  les  tres  nombreux   articles   publies par  Henault pendant sa carriere de  jour­ naliste.
La valeur de la lecture de Corriveau repose dans  son  respect  de la multiplicite des significations  de !'oeuvre. Loin  de  re­ presenter   une  reduction de  sens,  comme  c'est   souvent   le  cas  de   la   paraphrase­ explication  de   textes,    elle   donne    aux poemes   une   dimension   supplementaire par  un  reseau  de  rapprochements et  de correspondances.  Corriveau nous  permet
de  suivre   pas  a  pas   l'activite  creatrice
d'une  lecture   exemplaire  jouant   le  jeu
d'un   texte  exigeant qui  s'affirme  de  plus en plus conune  l'une des oeuvres majeures de  la poesie quebecoise.
Pour  Franc;oise  Maccabee-Iqbal  (Hu­
bert  Aquin, Romancier), il ne s'agit  pas de donner  sa place  a un  auteur peu  con­
nu puisqu'Aquin est un des ecrivains quebecois  qui  ait  suscite  le plus de  com­ mentaires  critiques.  Son   travail   se  dis­ tingue  des etudes precedentes par son en­ vergure  et sa richesse.  II est heureux que la  premiere etude  abordant  !'oeuvre d'Aquin dans  sa  totalite, la premiere pu­  bliee   depuis   son   suicide,    ne   soit   pas, comme c'est souvent le cas, le resultat du travail  bade d'un opportunisme commer-

109

BOOKS IN REVIEW



cial.  L'etude de  Franc;oise  Iqbal   restera un  des  livres  majeurs sur  Hubert  Aquin. Chaque roman -Prochain Episode
( rg65), Trou  de Memoire  ( rg68), L'An­
tiphonaire  ( r g6g) , N eige noire (  974) - fait   l'objet  d'une  analyse   approfondie tenant   compte a  la  fois de  la  substance et  de  la  forme.  L'orientation de  la  pre­ miere   lecture  ainsi   que  !'utilisation  de certains passages  comme  references  ulte­
rieures  sont  grandement facilitees  par  la division  de  chaque partie  en  chapitres et sous-chapitres titres et sous-titres. Cette organisation,  parfois   suivant   des   rubri­ ques  assez  scolaires   (structure  du  recit;  personnages, temps,  espace,  Iangage  ...) permet de  mieux  suivre  les  rapports et les distances entre les quatre romans.  On  s'etonne de  la  presence  inutile   de  "re­  sumes  sommaires de  I'intrigue" (en  plu­ sieurs pages!)  puisqu'il est evident  qu'une telle  etude  s'addresse .a  un  public  qui  a deja   lu  Aquin.   F.  Maccabee-Iqbal s'at­  tache  a !'exploration de quelques  themes­ des  parmi   lesquels  domine  !'association entre  ecriture et  alchimie,  toutes  deux  a la  recherche d'une experience totalisante transcendant la hantise du double  qui est au  coeur  de !'oeuvre d'Aquin.
Aquin   inclut dans   chacun   de  ses  ro­ mans   un  metadiscours critique,  exegese de  la  forme  et  du  fond.  Chaque  oeuvre propose  ainsi  sa  propre  mise-en-abyme a travers des   gloses  riches en  allusions mythiques et   litteraires.  F.   Maccabee­ Iqbal  poursuit  brillamment le  commen­ taire  amorce par  le romancier lui-meme. Ainsi, par  exemple, elle analysera la "structure en  spirale" de  Prochain  Epi­ sode suivant l'image de l'ex-libris  decrite  par  le narrateur; elle decrira  le  protago­ niste  du  meme  roman  comme  "baroque et   romantique,"   poursuivant   ainsi   les multiples allusions  a Byron. De meme, ce sont les commentaires de la  narratrice au sujet   de   son  livre   "compose  en  forme  d'aura  epileptique"   qui   servent   de   fil conducteur a  toute  !'analyse  de  L'Anti-

I IO
 phonaire. C'est  dans !'analyse de Trou  de Memoire, a  notre  avis la  plus  riche  et  la plus interessante de cette  etude, que la critique s'aventure le plus  loin  du  meta­ langage  d'Aquin   lui-meme,   pour   nous donner  une   interpretation   remarquable du   roman  comme   rituel  dyonisiaque  et une  analyse  du  langage comme  triomphe de  l'ecriture  celebre  dans   le  roman.  F. Iqbal exploite avec aisance  les travaux de Bachelard, Durand, Jung, Eliade et d'au­ tres  pour  eclairer  le  contexte  mythique et  psychanalytique de  I'oeuvre   d'Aquin. Elle situe aussi par  rapport a certaines oeuvres  de psychanalyse !'obsession meur­ triere, l'exhibitionnisme et l'erotisme,  constantes des quatre  romans.
Franc;oise Iqbal nous a donne une lec­ ture  parallele de !'oeuvre d'Aquin, en  re­ marquable symbiose  avec  les  propos   de ses  narrateurs.  La   co-existence   harmo­ nieuse  du  style de  la  critique et  de  celui du romancier en est sans doute  une preuve  supplementaire.  A  notre  avis,  il faudrait maintenant prendre ses distances vis-a-vis de l'autorite des commentaires des narra­ teurs  et  les aborder par  le  biais  possible de l'ironie. Le rapprochement avec les oeuvres   de   Nabokov   et  de  Borges  sug­ gere  par   Mme   Iqbal nous  y  engage.   II faudra  aussi   inserer   les   textes   d'Aquin dans  le  discours  de  sa  societe  et  de  son epoque et  en  explorer  le  contenu ideolo­  gique.
JACQUELINE  VISWANATHAN


SOUVENIRS

GERARD BESSETTE, Mes  Romans  et moi. Cahiers du  Quebec/Hurtubise HMH, n.p.
ROGER  LEMELIN,   Les  Voies  de  l'esplrance. La
Presse, n.p.

MES ROMANS ET MOl comprend d'abord "Mes premiers souvenirs," en  partie  dif­ fuses a CBF  FM  en  rg78, et, sous le titre  meme  du  livre,  quatre sections  dont  les deux   premieres ont   paru   dans  V oix  et

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



images en 1978. Il ne reste done qu'une trentaine de pages inedites, les plus "auto­ analytiques" de  l'ouvrage.
Les  souvenirs   de   ]'enfant  sont   beau­
coup  plus que  des  reminiscences anecdo­ tiques.  lis  constituent un  recit  fort  bien organise ou  "se conjoignent deja Ia fabu­ lation   et  Ie vecu"  (Jacques  Allard,   pre­ face). Avant  Ia  rupture de  !'adolescence
a Montreal, voici le plein  et  les delies de
la  vallee  du  Richelieu avec  sa  "securite
domiciliaire," ses  animaux  fabuleux  ( le
"kyakya") , ses jeux  de  langage a Ia  Du­
charme, l'amitie intelligente d'une soeur
ainee,  quelques lectures fantastiques qui preparent  sans  doute   Ie  roman   prehis­ torique Les  Anthropo'ides.
Quant  a  I'histoire  de   Baptiste-la-Ba­ Ioune,  agrippe par  le crochet de fer d'un  aerostat, qui  tombe  un  arbre, "puis  sur Ie landeau d'un  hebe,  lequel  mourut des suites  de  cet  accident, alors  que  Baptiste s'en  tira  avec  une  cicatrice sous le men­ ton,"  elle  se  situe  a  Ia  limite   du  conte picaresque et du  cauchemar bien dessine, entre   Mark Twain et  Roman  Polanski. C'est  Ia plus  romanesque de  Gerard  Bes­ sette.
A  Ia suite  de  ses  Memoires d'enfance qu'on pourrait intituler "Moi et  mes  ro­ mans," Bessette  nous  presente une  sorte de  Memoires de  romans  ( et  de  roman­ cier),  mais  non  pas  une  veritable auto­  biographie intellectuelle. "Mes romans  et moi" est plus proche de Ia conference, de Ia confidence, des souvenirs et  de !'auto­ critique que  de  Ia  confession   structuree et  structurante.  C'est   au  hasard, Ie plus souvent,   je  veux  dire:  librement et  sans systeme,  que   le  romancier  suggere   des liens  entre tel  passage  de  son  oeuvre  et tel evenement de  sa vie consciente ou de son  "scenario intime." II  pose  d'ailleurs plus  de  questions qu'il   n'apporte de  re­ ponses.
Quelques  coups   de   griffe   aux   "pe­ quistes de plume," a Leo-Paul Desrosiers, "conservateur  a  Ia  triste   figure,"  mais,
 dans !'ensemble, !'atmosphere est sereine, Ie ton  n'est  ni au  pamphlet ni au  roman a clefs. On s'etonnera peut-etre que Ia "premiere idole  Iitteraire" de  ]'auteur de La  Bagarre  ait  ete  Chateaubriand.  Les autres  ecrivains  qu'il  a "admire avec pas­ sion"  sont  Benjamin Constant,  Nelligan  ("a   part")  Valery,   Gabrielle  Roy   ( "un  role de  premier  plan") , Sartre,  Dos  Pas­ sos, Claude  Simon  et-plus  inattendus
-deux  de  ses  professeurs:  le  linguiste
Jean-Marie  Laurence et  Lionel   Groulx.
Lecteur  de  ses  romans,   Bessette   dis­ tingue  soigneusement son projet  des  plai­ doyers  pro domo  ou des requisitoires con­ tre  les  critiques  auxquels se  livrent   cer­ tains   confreres.   "Sans   m'interdire  cer­ taines  confidences d'ordre  biographique et  affectif  destinees  a  eclucider mes oeu­ vres,  je  me   propose   de  les  analyser   le moins subjectivement possible,"  dit-il.  Et, en  effet,  l'ecrivain reussit  de  fa($on assez
remarquable  a  devenir   son  propre  lec­
teur,  commentateur,  professeur. II  inter­
prete  peu, et avec  prudence, mais il four­ nit  divers   renseignements,   dessine  quel­  ques  pistes.
II  explique  la  "scission  affective" du
Libraire  vis-a-vis des livres  ( capharnaiim
= refoule) . Les  doubles  du  protagoniste ( Chayer)  forment  un  couple  antitheti­ que  (Paulo et  Athanase)   dans  La  Com­ mensale,  ou  la  scene  de  la  "cage   grilla­  gee" s'eclaire  par  la  "fixation horaire, ou horlogere"  d'un    enfant.  La    structure triangulaire est plus evidente encore  dans La Bagarre, ou  Ie protagoniste Lebeuf  est partage entre   une   projection  fran($aise ( Sillery ou  la Culture)  et  une  "tentation americaine"   (Weston  ou   la  Sociologie,
!'observation exterieure du  milieu) .  Ail­
leurs,  Bessette  souligne  le  core  loufoque d'un nom   ( Allaire-Ducul)  ou  son  sense cacM   (Lagarde). Sur  le  theme  de  l'or­ phelin,  sur la parataxe, sur le monologue, sur  le  vealisme, etc.,  le  critique litteraire complete  le  psychanalyste.

I I I

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Les  deux  dernieres tranches de  "Mes romans  et moi,"  inedites,  moins scolaires, sont un peu plus autobiographiques. L'au­ teur   y  evoque   son   journal   intime,  son hospitalisation (enI 963), l'effet  des dro­  gues, !'incubation de L' Incubation. A pro­ pos du  Cycle, Bessette fait  une  observa­  tion  psychologique dont  on  pourrait tirer des  consequences politiques.  Les  Quebe­ cois  qui  suivent   Ia  generation  du  heros central, Julien, ne  sont  plus  a  Ia  recher­ che  d'un pere  fort  mais  d'un  leader  fra­  ternel.   La   stature  de   Rene   Levesque,  son  allure   et  ses  tics,  ainsi  que  !'aspect tatonnant de  sa  pensee  (lorsqu'il impro­ vise)   l'apparentent  beaucoup plus  a  un fils, a  un  adolescent qui  se cherche  qu'a un  pere pompeux  jouissant  de  Ia  "pos­ session tranquille de  Ia verite." Or, con­ clut  Bessette  (avis  a  Claude  Ryan), "le Quebec se trouve  beaucoup  plus  pres du pole  fils que  du  pOle  pere...."  On  n'en a  jamais  fini  avec  le  "kebekoua" sur  le­ quel  hesite et revient Bessette jusque dans Les Anthropo'ides. Par deJa les complexes  d'Oedipe, tout  se  termine et recommence par  les "paroles,  parolages et  parolades." Mes Romans et  moi, malgre son carac­
tere  partie!et limite,  prepare la voie a la critique  ( et  autocritique)  fiction  du  Se­ mestre.
Les V oies de l'espbance  est un recueil de  discours,  conferences, reportages,  bil­ lets,  editoriaux faits  par  Roger  Lemelin  depuisI 97 I (a deux  exceptions pres) . Le livre,  presente   de   fac;:on   dithyrambique par  un  subordonne de Lemelin,  est dedie  au  grand   patron, Paul  Desmarais.
Les deux  premieres pieces, qui  reman­ tent  a  I952 et  I964, comptent  parmi  les plus   importantes  du   recueil -avec   la derniere, dont  nous  reparlerons, et  la fa­ meuse  "Autopsie  de  la greve," qui  occu­ pait  presque  toute  la  une  de  La  Presse, le 8  mai  I978, pour  ecraser  "la  pieuvre  CSN."
D'abord, un article  substantiel du Mac­
lean, a !'occasion du  centenaire de l'Uni-


112
 versite  Laval, qui  valut  au  jeune  jouma­ liste  l'honneur d'une  denonciation cleri­  cale  pour  avoir  presente  Ia venerable in­ stitution  comme "un   instrument efficace de  conservation," dont Ia  "poetique an­ ciennete" ( selon Andre Siegfried) ne sau­ rait  compenser le manque d'ouverture in­  tellectuelle.  L'article   est   rempli   d'idees stimulantes et  de  vifs  portraits de  quel­  ques  professeurs  d'avant-garde: Mgr  Pa­  rent,  le Pere Levesque, MM.  de Koninck, Pouliot....
Le second  "jalon" de l'itineraire est un echange de  lettres,  en  I964, entre  Leme­ lin et Stuart Keate, qui  avait  ete chef du bureau du  Time  a Montreal au  moment ou   Lemelin  en   etait   le   correspondant, vers   I948.   En   I964,  ce   sont   quelques bombes du  FLQ, des manifestations inde­  pendantistes ou  syndicalistes, une  littera­ ture  et  une  chanson engagees  qui   tran­ chent  sur   la  "joie   de   vivre"   tradition­ nelle qu'adorait Stuart Keate. Lemelin  a quelques eclairs  dans  sa reponse  au  futur editorialiste du Vancouver Sun:  "Qui dit maturite sociale  en formation, dit  aussi elements d'anarchie, car  c'est  dans  les societes   en   transformation   qu'apparais­ sent  les  mouvements  anarchistes." Dans
!'ensemble, cependant, le romancier d'Au pied  de   la   pente   douce   en   est   reste, comme  son correspondant, a !'image idyl­ lique   des  bons  pauvres  rieurs   et  insou­
ciants.  II trouve "trop forte" l'equipe francophone au sein de Ia Commission Laurendeau-Dunton, qu'il  presente d'ail­ leurs  comme un  "piege."
Le  passage  le  plus  eclairant des V oies de  ['esperance  est  sans   doute   celui   ou
!'ex-reporter  de  Time/ Life  avoue   avoir compris que  son  role etait  "d'etonner, de piger  au  Canada franc;:ais les aspects,  les personnages,  les  situations  cocasses   du milieu... II ne s'agissait  pas pour  moi de donner de  rna  province un  portrait  veri­ table,  mais  de  servir  !'image que  les  edi­ teurs   de   New   York   s'en  etaient  faite."
Depuis  I972, c'est  a La Presse que  Roger

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Lemelin   sert  l'image que  les  tenants du statu  quo veulent bien se faire  de la belle province. De quoi se plaint done "notre peuple  franc;ais,  nourri et  protege  par  la grande famille   nord-americaine"?
Si Les V oies de l' esperance  ne sont  pas insondables, elles sont  parfois  incoheren­ tes,  malgre leur  conservatisme  polymor­  phe,  qui  s'epanouit  avec   une  suffisance
Mate  a  la  fin  des  banquets de  chambres
de  commerce ou  de  Canadian Clubs.
A la Federation  professionnelle des journalistes du  Quebec, !'auteur  des Plouffe  parle  d'esthetique, multiplie les citations -de   Mauriac  a   Lysiane   Ga­ gnon-et  declaire que  "l'ecrivain  veri­ table  est  un  etre   asocial,  un  delinquant sublime   qui  oppose   son   univers   a  ceux qui  l'entourent." Cela  ne  l'avait pas em­ peche  de  soulever  demagogiquement les foules  contre la  murale de  Jordi   Bonet et  p,eloquin  au  Grand Theatre de  Que­ bec;  cela  ne l'empeche pas, ici meme,  de traiter  Jacques Ferron de  Diafoirus.
Aux membres de la  Presse canadienne, a  Toronto, Lemelin   ne  parle   plus  d'art mais   d'or,   c'est-a-dire  de   politique. Et comme   n'oserait le  faire  aucun  ministre ou  depute liberal quelque peu  sense. "Je suis venu  vous dire  que  le Parti quebecois est  en  train   'd'iraniser' le  Quebec ... ," affirme-t-il d'entree  de  jeu.  Ce  n'est  pas seulement contre  la souverainete-associa­ tion  du   P.Q.  qu'en  a  l'editorialiste  de­ venu  pamphletaire, c'est  aussi  contre  les idees "egalitaristes et socialistes  qu'il  pre­ conise."  "J'ai  toujours cru  aux  honneurs et aux  privileges  dus au  merite," ajoute candidement le docteur es lettres  honoris causa de l'Universite Laurentienne de Sudbury (patrie de M.  Paul  Desmarais).
II faut insister sur cette conference torontoise de mai I 979, intitulee "L'unite canadienne et  la  liberte," qui  conclut  et
ferme  a tous  points  de  vue ces soi-disant
V oies  de  l' esperance. Lemelin  y va  loin
dans  l'etalement de ses prejuges et de ses ignorances. "Et  le dollar canadien se mit
 a  baisser,"   chantonne-t-il  comme   con­ sequence   economique  de   !'election   de I 976;   au   plan    S<Xial,   "les   professions liberales  sont  lentement  asphyxiees," les pauvres.  Cette   election  fut  d'ailleurs un "coup d'Etat  de  la  part  du  P.Q.,   paci­  fique   peut-etre,   mais   un   coup   d'Etat quand meme."
"Oil  est la  liberte  quand vous ne  pou­ vez envoyer  vos enfants a l'ecole  de votre choix,  quand  vous  devez  prouver  votre  identite culturelle pour  obtenir un laissez­ passer  scolaire ?"  M.  Lemelin  pose  cette
question   rhetorique a Toronto,  mais­
son auditoire I'a  bien  compris-c'est  au
Quebec de la loi  IOI  qu'il  pense.
Au fait, nulle part  M. Lemelin  ne parle de  la  R.C.M.P., de  la  provocation  poli­ ciere,   etc.   II   se  contente   d'innocentes plaisanteries sur  le  deficit  d'un   milliard
occasionne par   les  Jeux   Olympiques.
Mais  contre  la Revolution tranquille qui
nous  a  inocule   la  "strychnine  des  radi­ calismes  europeens," contre Rene  Leves­ que  et  ses "diverses  mesures  sociales  qui nous  ont  coute  en  especes  sonnantes des centaines  de  millions   de  dollars," il  se dechaine.  Sans   cette  "esperance calme,  froide,  raisonnee" que  croyait  remarquer
!'introduction  publicitaire.
Les  V oies  de  l'esp,erance- titre    a la
Malraux  pour    un   mediocre  pele-mele
d'allocutions de circonstance et de propa­ gande   reactionnaire-   semblent  parfois aussi  desesperees  qu'exasperantes. Leme­ lin  n'est  pas  un  oiseau  de  bonheur: "j'ai
tendance a moraliser, a dire  que  les  va­
leurs  traditionnelles fichent  le camp, que
le monde  moderne est envahi  par  la  bar­ barie," etc.  Sa  formation et  ses  connais­ sances  sociologiques,  economiques,  poli­ tiques,  culturelles, sont  etonnamment fai­ bles pour  un  directeur de  journal. Qu'il parle  de  McLuhan, de  "l'homme de  la Nouvelle   Renaissance"  ou   du   "nouvel homme  de   la   Renaissance,"  il  ressasse les  cliches  les  plus  ecuies.  "Le  Canada, c'est  le paradis terrestre."

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Claude  Ryan   a   jadis  ecrit   dans   un bloc-note du  Devoir que  Roger  Lemelin ne connaissait pas grand-chose en  dehors de la publicite, du  foie gras et du  jeu d'echecs.  En   publicite,   il  devrait   d'ur­
gence  se  recycler.  Quant a l'ecrivain, il
est disparu au  haut  de la  pente  douce  il
y  a   une   trentaine  d'annees, meme   s'il dine  quelquefois chez Drouant a titre d'agent ( associe)   de  relations  publiques.

LAURENT  MAILHOT


TEXT,  STORY,  SPEECH

G.-A. VACHON, Rabelais tel que[. Presses de l'Universite de  Montreal, $7.00.
M.    MAISANI-LEONARD,  Andre  Gide  ou  l'ironie de  l'ecriture. Presses de  I'Universire de Montl'eal, n.p.

VACHON'S IS  A  VERY  GOOD  STUDY of  Ra­ belais, paradoxical as he himself  was and initiatory as his work  is less known  to be. To  begin  with  the paradoxical, as well as the  transcendence  of  it,  one  can   men­ tion  the  pages  dealing with   festina lente and  "Silenes"  (in every way remarkable) and   those  dealing  with   the  apparently unorthodox chronology of the narratives. In   each   case  the   author  presents   the liberating   assumption  of  all  contradic­ tions   as   the   very   spring   of   Rabelais' thought  and   of  his  language,  which   is nature  itself,  evoking   a  pre-Babel   time antecedent to  the  great   break  of  things and  words.  If laughter sometimes   hides nothingness just as the little "Silenes" conceal  their  drug   (and  as Socrates  elo­ quently    evokes   Phedrus),   there   could have  been  no  other   way;  there  are  the tricks  and  trickiness  of the  alchemist Al­ cofribas  Nasier,  who conceals  to illumine, dissembles  and  leads  the  world  astray  in order  to enlighten it  (by telling its name)  and   must   be  sober   to  speak   so  much  about   drunkenness!
As to the  initiatory aspect  of Rabelais'

I 14
 work,  it  is to  be found   behind  the  lewd­ ness, the drinking bouts and  the scatology considered not  in  themselves  but  as  ele­ ments  of  parody emblematic  of our  con­ dition   and   in  no  way  exhaustive  when seen in the comic  light. Isn't  the fountain of Theleme (through  which  Vachon re­ veals   the   centre  of   Rabelais'   canvas) evocative  of   Jouvence   and    its   water,  symbolising  at  the  same  time-o  Spin­ oza! -knowledge and  love?
The concept of  hieroglyph, rather quickly  dealt  with  in its opposition to metaphor, attempts to convey the passage to unity  beyond  all contradictions. By pointing this out, Vachon suggests that Rabelais' text can  be read as a perfectly credible  Bildungsroman or as a "mystical journey."
Taking the distinction between  "story" and   "speech"  established by  Benveniste as his starting-point, Maisani-Leonard proposes  to discern how far the Gidian narrative meets  such  criteria. What   will be the  status-real,  fictive  or  truncated
-of the  narration? To  what  difficulties and  mirror-effects will the  distant  narra­ tor, caught red-handed intruding into  his own  narrative, expose  himself?  It can  be
seen   that   the  stakes   are   high   and   the undertaking  not   unattractive. The   en­ quiry  proceeds by  the  comparative  study of  the  part played   in  various  narrations by linguistic  (and  stylistic)  "gearing" de­  vices  such  as,  in  particular, the  opposi­  tion of the simple past  with  the past  per­  fect  and  the  historir:al  present; the  ( dia­  lectical)   relationship  between   cliff erent  adverbs  of   time; the  mechanism of  the passage  from   direct   speech   to   indirect, etc. The whole  is meticulously listed, clas­ sified  and comprises numerous word­ counts,   tables   and   graphs.  The   writer gives us in  conclusion a variation on  the familiar  theme   of  the  study   of  style  as defined  by the  measure of departure from the  norm.  Gide  seems  to cover  his traces and   deliberately  muddle   the   accepted

BOOKS IN REVIEW



categories of linguistic structuralism. A meagre   result  considering the  amplitude of the work and  the toil involved: Gidian aesthetics thus reduced to a mixture (haphazard or not)  of certain grammati­ cal  categories.
Formally,  however,   this   thesis  is   re­ markable: it shows a  total  respect for all the rules of its kind: readings, quotations, references, index  are  all there. The  bibli­ ography,  very  well   presented   thematic­ ally,  will  be  of  considerable   use.  How­  ever, after  closing  the  book, I felt it to be cruelly  inadequate. Firstly, applied to the field of literature, this type  of formalistic approach seems to me in no way decisive, methodologically speaking.  Indeed, such criticism  does  not  seem  to go beyond  the level  of  pure  description,  even  if it  is of the  workings  of its  subject.  Moreover, if we   must   observe   and   describe,   let   us eschew  the "do-it-yourself" approach and rather turn  resolutely  to a computer and the  statistical  analysis   of  word-frequen­ cies.  Taking a  wider   view,  Robinet has done   this  for   Leibniz   and   others   with some   usefulness.   The  method has  also been  applied  successfully  to  the  stylistic analysis  of  the  classics.  Some   points  of detail  could also be criticized-the draw­ ing-up of a corpus, for example, limiting  the  "narratives" to  the  eleven  following works:   Cahier  d'A.  Walter,  Paludes, El Hadj,   L'Immoraliste,  La   Port   etroite, Isabelle, La Symphonie  pastorale, L'Ecole des   femmes, Robert,  Genevieve  and  Thes8e. Of course,  the author justifies his selection,   not   even   excluding  the   easy solution ( Les  N ourritures terrestres is dropped, "the   proportion  of   narrative being   judged  insufficient"),  but   this  is somewhat   controversial.  Lastly,   I  must say that the discrepancy between  the title and  the content of  this  work  comes  as a shock.  The  reference to  the  Van   Eyck convex   mirror  does   not   appear  again after  the epigraph, just  as  the  extrapola­ tion  of stylistic  counts as existential "no-
 tions"  [such  as "irony" (see Kierkegaard in this connection) or  "writing"  (see Barthes  or Derrida, whom  the author has read  and  quotes) ] is not  as clear  as  the title and  the blurb would  have  us believe. In  short,  a work  of  university   standard can  only  lose  by  being  made  falsely  at­ tractive.
PIERRE SOMVILLE

RACONTANT ET RACONTE

JEAN-PAUL    SIMARD,   Rituel    et   langage   chez
Yves  Theriault. Fides, n.p.
ANDRE BELLEAU,  Le  Romancier   fictif: essai sur la representation  de l'ecrivain  dans le roman quebecois. Les Presses de l'Universite du Quebec,  n.p.

VOICI ENFIN  DEUX ETUDES ambitieuses et penetrantes sur  le  roman quebecois qui proposent des considerations nouvelles dans  le  domaine de  la  narration.  S'ap­ puyant  surtout sur les concepts de la nou­  velle critique franc;aise, Jean-Paul Simard et  Andre   Belleau  preferent analyser   in­  ductivement  les oeuvres choisies ainsi  per­
mettant a la matiere de suggerer  les prin­
cipes  theoriques et  methodologiques. La
derniere phrase de I'etude de Belleau  pre­ cise  le  procede   fond amental  des  deux: "L'ideologique n'existe  pas  dans  le  texte  sous  une   forme   ideologique  mais   tex­  tuelle, et ... chez l'ecrivain, les problemes historiques   et  sociaux  appellent  des  re­  ponses   dans   l'ordre   du   langage    et   de l'ecriture."
Jean-Paul Simard analyse, dans les oeuvres importantes  d'Yves Theriault ecrites entre  1944 et 1964, les differents moyens d'expression-gestuel, rituel, oral et  ecrit-utilises  par  le  personnage  pri­
mitif  a la recherche, non  de  la  parole ni
de  l'ecriture, mais  d'une "fac;on  fonda­
mentale d'etre et  d'exister." Tout en  de­ montrant que  le signe et  le referent  dans un  systeme  verbal   civilise  ont   des   rap-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ports  trop  distants, Simard   remet  en  va­ leur Ia fonction du  langage  pour l'homme primitif   ou  Ia conceptualisation  est  rem­ placee  par  le geste  et  le rite,  par  Ia lec­ ture  des signes de  Ia nature  meme.  C'est en ayant  defini l'homme  primitif  theriau­ sien  en   fonction du  langage   que   cette analyse  depasse  celles des autres critiques.  Ce  personnage vit  le  "drame de  Ia  pa­ role"  et  dechiffre  les signes de  Ia nature sans  jamais 'etre ecrivain  dans  le sens tra­ ditionnel. Comme Christine dans les nou­ velles de Gabrielle Roy, ce sont !'acquisi­ tion et l'interiorisation du monde qui rem­ placent l'ecriture meme  chez  le primitif.
Le  seul  ecrivain  theriausien  pour  qui l'acte d'ecrire est conu
retrouver  l'harmonie  de  son  heritage et d'exprimer Ia conscience  collective de son peuple   est  Ashini.   Selon  l'etude de  Si­ mard, l'ecriture semble  dominer  comme sujet  non  comme objet  de  Ia  narration. II  faut  regretter que  ce  n'est  qu'a  Ia fin de  son  analyse  qu'il   se  concentre sur  Ia technique du narre et decouvre  que, dans le  roman  "d'outre-tombe" qu'est   Ashini, l'ecrivain  narrateur possede  une  disposi­ tion  poetique et  un  style de  poete  primi­  tif. C'est  ainsi que Simard peut  comparer l'ecrivain  primitif   aux  poetes  quebecois des annees  cinquante et soixante  qui cherchaient leur  voix a travers  Ia  decou­ verte,  !'enumeration  et  !'acquisition des signes  de  leur   monde.   Ne  serait-il   pas aussi revelateur de !'analyser dans  le con­ texte  du  roman  traditionnel quebecois  ou le  personnage   ecrivain    subit,   pour   des raisons socio-historiques, l'echec  de l'ecri­ ture?
Par  sa structure meme,  le roman  pro­ vogue  des  questions fascinantes  quant a Ia  narration car  l'echec  raconte,  qui  se tennine par  Ia mort  du  racontant, est nie par  notre  lecture. Elle transforme l'echec  en  reussite.  Bien que Simard  fasse ressor­ tir cette metamorphose, il ne cherche pas a penetrer les consequences de ce procede
qui  mene  a une  semantisation  fort   im-

116
 portante. Cette lacune souligne  les limites de !'analyse dans laquelle le langage comme  sujet  succede  au langage comme moyen.  Neanmoins, en demontrant que le langage joue  un  double role  de  revendi­ cation et de contestation dans Ia quete  de "!'unite  originelle de  l'homme," Simard nous fournit une appreciation enrichie du langage dans  les  oeuvres  de  Theriault et de  ceci  d&ele a  Ia fois l'uniformite et  Ia complexire du  personnage primitif.
Andre Belleau  ne definit  pas les limites de  son  analyse  afin  d'eclairer un  theme deja   perceptible mais  pour  identifier un
genre  a travers  !'emergence inconsciente
de  "traits  singuliers." Se  basant sur  un
phenomene de  plus en  plus  courant dans Ia   litterature  contemporaine  ainsi   que dans  Ia litterature  quebecoise, il fait l'en­ quete de  Ia  representation  de  l'ecrivain dans   une   quinzaine  de   romans   publies entre 1940 et I 960, a !'exception de  Les Demi-civilises  (I 934)  et  La  Route  d' Al­ tamont    (I 966).  Cette  cloture,  souvent  utilisee  pour  classer  les divers  phenome­ nes quebecois par  categories, designe  l'ar­ rivee  d'un  nouveau  personnage-ecrivain "en  situation d'ecriture." Belleau propose, en  creant le paradigme de  l'ecrivain  fic­ tif, examiner comment ce  trait generique decide  de  toutes strategies textuelles. Loin de  tomber dans  le piege du modele semio­ tique  pre-construit  auquel s'ajoute !'ana­ lyse,   il   prefere   retracer   transtextuelle­ ment   les  procedes tout  en  se  basant  sur les  grandes  theories de   Ia  narratologie, surtout celles d'Auerbach, de Luckacs, de Barthes, et  de  Genette. II  'evite  les  me­ thodes  socio-historiques et autobiographi­ ques,  et  opte   pour   une  etude socio-tex­ tuelle-un  melange  heureux  d'analyses inductives, basees  sur  le  texte,  et  deduc­ tives,  tirees  du  contexte  socio-historique.
Indicatif  de !'attention qu'il   porte  sur les  procedes narratifs,  Belleau   distingue de  fac;on claire  et  penetrante entre  !'au­ teur  et  le narrateur, entre !'auteur  racon­ tant  et !'auteur raconte:

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Quand on  parle de  narrateur ou  meme d'auteur ... il  s'agit d'une fonction inscrite dans  le texte. Cet  auteur-narrateur, dans  Ia mesure ou  il devient lui-meme !'objet d'une representation, est   aussi   fictif   que   tous  les autres elements du   recit.  II  semble  cepen­ dant   qu'on   doive    l'envisager    sous   deux  aspects: interne et  exteme.

Ainsi, il a pu clairement mettre en valeur le discours  du  recit  dans  les romans  for­ tement   mimetiques  de   Roger   Lemelin.  S'inspirant  de   Ia  structure  du   contenu narratif,  Belleau   a  fait   ressortir  les  ele­ ments   socio-textuels  qui   vont   a  definir Denis  Boucher comme ecrivain  et n'a  in­ vogue  l'extratextuel que  pour  Ia verifica­ tion.   Les   criteres,  les   structures,  et  les contenus narratifs a   considerer  varient selon  !'oeuvre  analysee.  Done,   Ia  nature de  Christine,  l'ecrivain-narrateur de  Ga­  brielle  Roy  dans   Rue   Deschambault   et La Route  d' Altamont, exige  des conside­ rations   propres  au   discours   autodiege­ tique.  Les observations de  Belleau  sur  ce personnage qui  se sent  promis  a l'ecriture mais qui  ne s'engage pas clairement com­ me  ecrivain   pourrait eclairer et  enrichir toutes  lectures. Le  rapprochement se fait pour   les  deux   de  Roy  entre   "l'eclosion de  Ia  vocation  d'ecrivain" et  Ia  decou­  verte  du  monde  tout  en  evitant Ia tenta­ tion   du  hors-texte  (a   laquelle,  nous  le rappelle  Belleau,   a  deja   succombe  Bes­ sette).
Comme son  intention est  de  formuler des generalisations et des regroupements d'ouvres dans  lesquelles  Ia representation de l'ecrivain-personnage peut definir le genre,   Belleau   propose    trois   categories qui  temoignent du  rapport entre  l'ecri­ vain  et  Ia  narration: le  roman  du  code dans  lequel  le contexte social et les inten­ tions des personnages dominent, le roman  de  Ia parole  qui  privi!egie  "le  rapport de Ia  litterature au  sujet," et  le  roman   de l'ecriture qui  fait  !'experience meme  du langage.  Ainsi  Belleau   demontre que  Ia litterature de  l'ecrivain fictif  reste  nette­ ment  idealiste  jusqu'en 1955 apres  lequel
 elle  se  contextualise. Comme  l'ecrivain devient   le  sujet   de  l'enonciation,  dispa­ raissent  !'innocence devant !'oeuvre et  le detachement entre  l'ecrivain  et  l'ecriture qui   caracterise   les   romans  precedents, tandis  que  s'accroit !'incertitude du  lec­ teur  devant !'oeuvre  naissante. L'esprit perspicace  de Belleau  permet une lecture sensible  de  La  Bagarre de  Gerard  Bes­ sette, "le roman a Ia fois le plus attachant et  le plus  revelateur de  Ia  periode   1955-
196o."   A  travers  un   analyse   subtile   et
convaincante de  Ia contextualisation  lin­ guistique  qui se cache  derriere une narra­ tion   apparemment  neutre,  il   revele   le contexte social  et  ideologique  d'un  Que­ bec  avant   Ia  revolution  tranquille et  il marque le debut de  l'ecrivain trop  cons­ cient  de  lui-meme  et  de  Ia litterature.
Comme  conclusion et aussi comme ou­ verture  sur   une   etude    future,   Belleau analyse   le  roman  de  Jacques  Godbout, D'Amour, P.Q., en fonction des traits dis­ tinctifs   qui   caracterisent   les   romans  a personnage-auteur ecrits depuis  1960:

La  situation d'ecriture, Ia possibilite ou  l'im­
possibilite  du  texte  meme,  les choix enoncia­ tifs et formels tendent a en  constituer Ia sub­  stance narrative ou  du  moins  a Ia subordon­ ner  manifestement a leur expression propre.

Un  des nombreux merites  de !'analyse de Belleau  est le raffinement critique qui  ne perd  pas le lecteur   non-initie a Ia  termi­ nologie  de  Ia  semiotique.  Esperons   que cet   essai   ( comme   les   autres  monogra­ phies  dans   Ia  collection  Genres  et  dis­ cours)  encouragera des  etudes   bien  de­  sirees  sur  Ia  structure de  Ia  narration et sur  Ia semiotique textuelle.
Simard  et Belleau offrent  a Ia critique litteraire deux  etudes  qui  revelent   Ia  ri­ chesse  et  Ia  complexite de  Ia  litterature quebecoise.  II n'y a aucun doute que celle de  Belleau  surtout  servira  de  modele   a d'autres etudes  textuelles  comme  sa con­  clusion  nous le  laisse prevoir.

ESTELLE  DANSEREAU


117

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



TREMBLAY'S SECOND

MICHEL    TREMBLAY,   Therese   et   Pierrette    a
l'ecole  des Saints-Anges. Lemeac,  n.p.
WITH Therese  et Pierrette a l'ecole des Saints-Agnes, Tremblay has published  the second  volume  of his Chroniques du Pla­ teau Mont-Royal,the first being La Grosse
Femme  d' a cote  est  enceinte  (I 978) ; a
third sequel, entitled La Duchesse ele roturier, is announced. Therese and  Pier­
rette  are  characters we are  familiar with from  La Grosse Femme;  here  they  form an inseparable trio with their  school-mate Simone.  Tremblay's new  book  tells us of the  relation between   these  little  girls, of their  teachers at  the  convent  school  they attend, and   of  a religious  procession  in which  Therese, Pierrette, and  Simone  are the  stars.  In  addition, the  narrative  fol­ lows up  on events  in the lives of  Gerard, a  beautiful  young   man  infatuated with Therese,  little   Marcel   and   his  beloved tomcat  Duplessis, "la grosse femme," and the   three   knitting  sisters  Rose,  Violette and   Mauve with  their  mother Florence.  It  is because  of  these  episodes  which  al­ lude to previous ones in La Grosse Femme that  Tremblay's book cannot  be satisfac­ torily  read  in  isolation; the  plot  centred upon   the   three   little   girls,  however,   is easily comprehensible on its own.
In the first volume of his Chroniques, Tremblay  covered   in  as  much   as  329 pages,  one  day,  May  2, 1942, tracing in minute detail  the daily routine of his characters in a limited  territory of  Mont­ real.  In  a  technique  reminiscent  of cine­ ma   verite,   the   narrator's   eye   remains  directed for  a  duration of  time  upon  a given scene and  reports as dispassionately as  possible  what   occurs  before  it.  Little  attempt  is  made   to  edit  what   is  being observed;  that    is   to  say,   no   apparent effort  is made   to  impose  an  extraneous, rational pattern  on  the events.  Tremblay underlines the  associative   nature of  his

118
 writing by almost  completely dispensing with  paragraphs within one sequence; when  there  is paragraphing, it suggests  a shift  in  perspective. Therese  et  Pierrette generally follows this precedent, but  the author has suggested  an  overall  structure by likening the four  parts of the book (corresponding to  four  days:   June r,  2,
3,  and  4,  1942)  to  the  four  movements of  Brahms' fourth  symphony.  Trem­
blay's tendency to speak  of literature i terms   of  music   is  well-known  from   h1s
experiments with  the  form  of the  string­
quartet in Toujours a toi, ta Marie-Lou
and   other plays.  There, the  analogy   to
		'	.	.
The  convent  community in   Therese et   Pierrette    with    Soeur   Sainte-Cathe­ rine  as  thei; leader,  undergo an  emanci­ pation from  their  tyrannical, unpedagogi­ cal  "directrice,"  and   little   Simone,   not even  found  worthy of inclusion  by name  in   the   trio  of  "Therese  pis  Pierrette,"
literally  rises   to   giddy   heights    as   the "ange suspendu" of the  procession. These progressive  developments.are d l yeby numerous  misunderstandmgs,  mJuStices, or   simply   contemplative  passages,   and even  counterbalanced by the gradual  de­ terioration of Gerard who, close to mad­  ness,   finally   enlists   in   the   army.   The theme most  responsible for  both  the  pro­ gress and  the  delays  in  the  novel  is that

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



of language, of effective  communication. Several  characters in Therese et Pierrette, in  particular  those  who  succeed   within the   framework  of   the   novel,   learn   to speak. Their success is often  accompanied by the improvement of a disability  affect­ ing  their  mouths and  speech: Simone  is getting used  to  being  beautiful after  her hare-lip  has   been   operated  upon,   and four-year-old Marcel learns  to  enunciate properly  ( "il  ne  zozote  plus") .  In  con­ trast,   the   unsympathetic  directrice  has foul   breath,  and   Therese  continues to hide  her  crooked  teeth. Despite Simone's and  Marcel's  maturing,  and  despite Soeur   Sainte-Catherine's  and    Simone's mother's courage in speaking their  minds to   the   directrice,  there   remains  ample evidence   of  the  communication  impasse frequently  found  in   Tremblay's  plays: children  misunderstand  the   vocabulary learnt  at school,  their  parents resent  their children's  increased  linguistic versatility, children  misinterpret  their   parents'  vo­ cabulary, and   children and   adults   alike are   confused and   deceived   by  the  lan­ guage  of the  media.
Most  of Therese  et Pierrette adheres to the  rules of realism,  even  radical realism, as I have  tried  to suggest  in  the  analogy with   cinema  verite.  Yet   there are   two factors   in  the  novel  affecting the  scope of its realism,  one  with  intriguing  poten­ tial,  the  other, I  believe, superfluous and annoying.
In  the  three knitting sisters  and  their mother, Tremblay has  introduced a  fan­ tastic, even  mythological element into  the story.  Only  visible  to  Marcel,  these  wo­ men  incorporate the  Fates,  the  weavers of destiny,  but  also the  Muses who  teach Marcel the  secrets  of  music,  poetry,  and art  as  alternatives to  the  deadly   routine of   his   family's    life.   Their  supervision  through  their   mother   Florence  ensures  that  errors  in the destiny they have woven are  corrected,  not  in  "reality" perhaps, but in a child's imagination; thus the tom-
 cat  Duplessis  comes  alive  again  for Mar­ cel and  his dying  grandmother Victorine alone.  In its combination of super-realism and  fantasy,  Tremblay's  novel  continues features from  his earlier  prose, especially
Contes  pour buueurs  attardes and  C't a
ton tour, Laura Cadieux, and  it parallels
similar tendencies in contemporary North­ American  fiction  as found  in the work of Carrier, Hebert, Hodgins, Kroetsch, Tom  Robbins,  John  Irving,  and   others.   Not surprisingly,   the  epigraph of  Therese  et Pierrette is a  quotation from  The  World According to Carp.
The  disturbing feature about  both  La
Grosse Femme and  Therese et Pierrette is
Tremblay's occasional tendency to  mor­
alize,   a   tendency   ironically   associated with the generally omniscience of his nar­ rator.    The    mass   of   intellectually   and emotionally alarming detail  observed seems to be too much  for  him at times to remain  detached -he must insert a com­ ment  to express  his  personal displeasure. But  the  reader,  too,  has  witnessed   the scene and  been  given  more  than  enough  material  to   form  his   own   opinion.   A comparison with  Claire Martin's Dans un gant  de   fer,  which  deals  with  a  similar theme   but   uses   the   tightly   controlled point-of-view of a young  girl, will imme­ diately  reveal  the  problems attending the narrative focus of Tremblay's Chroniques.

EVA-MARIE  KROLLER


THEATRE IN QUEBEC

JEAN-CLEO     GODIN    and    LAURENT    MAILHOT,
Theatre  quebecois II. Hurtubise HMH, n.p.
ANDRE FORTIER,  Le Texte et la scene. Editions de l'Universire d'Ottawa, n.p.
PIERRE   PAGE,  Le  Comique   et  l'humour   a  la radio quebecoise.  Fides,  n.p.

THE THEATRE IN  QUEBEC is far more than the  sum  of  its  parts. The  plays  them­ selves, or the  productions, do not  tell the

119

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



whole story;  around them is a veritable swarm of critics, analysts, professors of literature, and  others,  who  examine and expound upon  everything produced  on or off  the  stage.  In  addition  to  the  ample space  accorded the  theatre  in literary  re­ views such  as Etudes  franfaises, V oix  et images, and  Etudes litteraires,  there is an excellent  review,  feu, which appears four times  a  year  and   is  devoted  entirely  to Quebec theatre production.  If  relatively  few   books  have   appeared   on   contem­ porary  dramatists,  numerous  works  have come  out  which  synthesize  the  theatrical developments  of   the   past  fifteen   years, from  Michel  Belair's  rather tentative Le Nouveau  theatre quebecois  to Pierre  Go­ bin's mature and  rich  study of Le  Fou et S@S  doubles, and  not  forgetting the  thous­ and-page collection of essays (of unequal quality)  entitled  Le  Theatre  canadien­ franfais 	(the    fifth    volume   of    Fides's Archives  des lettres  canadiennes) . All this makes  Quebec theatre one  of   the  most scrutinized,  analyzed, and   just plain talked  about in  the  world.
This  situation is similar,  in some ways, to   that   of   the   French  theatre  of   the
195o's  and   196o's.  Then, it  was  people like Martin Esslin, David Grossvogel, or Jacques Guichamaud who  made  this theatre known   to  many  who  had  never seen the plays of Ionesco or Beckett, and institutionalized it for a whole generation of  students. Similarly, Jean-Cleo  Godin and  Laurent Mailhot, both  professors  at the Universite de Montreal, have, for  the past  ten  years,  been  the  foremost  inter­ preters  of current Quebec theatre  to  the academic  community  and   the   general  reader.  They    began   in   1970   with   Le Theatre quebecois, an introduction to ten dramatists including  Dube,  Languirand, Frant;oise  Loranger,  Tremblay, and  Du­  charme. The book sold well and  a second edition   was issued  in  1973.
Now   Godin    and    Mailhot  are   back again   with   Theatre  quebecois   II,  sub-


120
 titled  nouveaux auteurs, autres  spectacles. This  is somewhat more  than  an  updating of their  previous book. The period  1970-
I g8o  has  seen  the  rise in  importance of some new dramatists (Germain, Garneau, Barbeau), the significant development of some  already established authors  (Trem­ blay,   Gurik,  Frant;oise   Loranger), and  the  emergence of a  new  form  of  theatre based  on  improvisation,  best  represented by  the   Grand  Cirque  Ordinaire.  Since
1968,  when  Tremblay's Les  Belles-Soeurs caused  such  a  commotion on  the  Mont­ real   stage,   new   forms   of   theatre   have  developed so rapidly  in Quebec that  dra­ matists like  Dube  and  Gelinas,  although still  writing, seem  curiously   depasses.
It is this  new  theatre, which  turns  its back  on naturalism, which  rejects  the bourgeois standard of the well-made play, and  whose medium is usually  joual rather than  "standard" French, that  Godin  and Mailhot examine in  their  new  book. Readers familiar with  their previous work will find here the same awareness of the complexity  of   the   theatrical   phenome­ non; Godin  and  Mailhot are  among the few  academic critics  of  theatre  who  take into  account more  than the printed word, who realize that  mise en scene, acting, and audience response  are  as  much  a  part  of the  play  (the  only  part, in  fact,  for  im­ provisational  theatre)  as  the  text.  Their recent   book  takes  into  account the  latest developments in  French  methodology of theatre analysis,  and  attempts an  "aller­ retour  constant" between   the  sociocriti­ cism  of critics  like  Jean  Duvignaud and  the  more   literary,  structural  analysis   of people  like Anne  Ubersfeld.
Godin  and  Mailhot combine  the  tradi­ tion  division  of  chapters  by  author with the analysis  of a certain number of "fonc­ tions,  formes, spectacles," which  they  see as   characterizing  contemporary  theatre in Quebec. The  principal function of this theatre seems  to  be  to  provide  a  mirror which   reflects  contemporary society   ( es-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



pecially  politics)   but  which   also  gives a vantage point  from  which  to observe  the continuing   progression  of   history   and even  the  development  of  theatre   itself. Thus the  historical dramas  of  Germain ( U n Pays dont  la devise  est  je m'oublie) or of Jean-Robert  Remillard (Ceremonial funebre    sur   le   corps   de   Jean-Olivier
Chenier) provide an  opportunity for  au­ diences  to re-evaluate some  of the  myths of history  in  the  light  of current  realities, and  plays  like  Le  Quadrille  by  Jacques Duchesne  or   Les  Comediens   by   Roger Dumas put  into  question the  whole  idea of theatrical illusion. There is a tendency,  observes  Godin, to  use  theatre  to  reflect a  "pays   incertain qui   joue  sa  vie  avec assurance et  conviction,  mais  qui  ne  l'a pas  encore  assuree." The  roots  of  this theatre in  the independentist  movement are   thus  deep,   and   are   more   complex  than   the  political allegories  of  Fran  oise  Loranger and  Claude Levac  ( Le Chemin du   Roy)    or   Robert  Gurik   (Hamlet, prince  du  Quebec) . As  Mailhot puts  it,
"!'oeuvre  quebecoise ... sert  d'abord a identifier  un   homme  et   un   espace,   a montrer une  societe  possible,  a faire  une
experience de  solidarite et  de  liberte."
In  their  analyses  of  specific  plays  and of playwrights the  authors rightly  feature those  whose  experimentation, even  when results  are  less than   successful,  has  been the  most  influential. Godin, for example, points out  the persistent contradictions between  Jean  Barbeau's theories  and  his plays  (though, curiously, he doesn't take into  account his latest  plays, in particular Le  Thefi.tre  de la maintenance, in which the  playwright at  least  admits the  exis­ tence  of  these  contradictions) ;  Mailhot shows how Robert Gurik's theatre, for all its pretentions to be liberating and  demo­  cratic, is severely  limited by an  ideologi­  cal  infrastructure which  imposes on the spectator a single  type  of analysis.  Other chapters include a very  sensitive  study  of the  poet/playwright Michel Garneau, an
 analysis of Jean-Claude Germain which traces the still incomplete itinerary of Quebec's most  outspoken man  of the theatre, and  a study  of the whole  of Tremblay's cycle  d,es Belles-soeurs which provides some of the most original and illuminating insights  into  the significance of the transvestites in Damnee  Manon, sacree Sandra  and  of the  father-son  rela­ tionship  in  Bonjour, la,  bonjour,  that   I have read.  Eschewing   parochialism, Godin  and  Mailhot include in their  book a  chapter  on   the   Acadian  author  An­ tonine  Maillet,  whose  work  has  in  com­ mon   with   that   of  Quebec  writers   the evocation   of    a   "pays   incertain"  with "frontieres ouvertes, genereuses."
It would  be  hard   to  find  any  serious fault  with  this book. I would  have wanted a  few  photographs or  illustrations  of
the   productions,  especially   to  complete the  chapter on  the  Grand Cirque  Ordi­ naire,  and  I find the  pages a bit too com­ pressed  with   type  for  easy  reading  (the  bibliography  reads  more  easily  than   the text) .  These   are   details  which   do   not detract  from   the   overall   excellence   of Godin   and   Mailhot's  analyses.   Thefi.tre quebecois  II  will be  indispensable in  the universities  of  Quebec, and  can  provide other   readers  with   some   important  in­  sights into contemporary Quebec culture.
Of  illustrations there are  many in Andre   Fortier's  book,   Le   Texte  et   la scene, but there  is not much  else of value. In  fact,  one  wonders why  the  Centre de Recherche  en   Civilisation   canadienne­ fran<;aise  of  the   University  of  Ottawa, which   has  edited  works  of  quality  like Wyczynski's  study  of  Nelligan   or  Jean­ Louis  Major's  Le  jeu en etoile,  bothered to publish  this book at all.
The   title,  which   leads  one  to  assume that   the  contents will  concern   the  rela­ tionship  between   the  dramatic  text  and  the  performance, is  deceiving.  No  such theoretical  problems   preoccupy   Fortier. What he offers  us is a series of  essays on


121

BOOKS IN REVIEW



all of the plays presented in the 1977-78 theatre  season   in   Montreal   (well,   not really  all  of  them; he  missed  a  few,  he says, because he couldn't get tickets or because he got his dates mixed  up) . Most of these essays were  originally  written  for the  Ottawa  newspaper, Le  Droit;  some were based on the dramatic productions, some  on  the  written text,  and  others  on the  novels  that   inspired   the  plays.  Con­ sistency  of  methodology  is  not  Fortier's strong  point.
Fortier's essays are  less analytical than descriptive, and  are  generally  superficial. He really didn't understand that Carrier's play,  Il  n'y  a  pas de  P'ays  sans  grand­ pere, was more  than  an anti-English dia­  tribe,   or   that   Rejean  Ducharme's  Ah! Ah! ... was anything other  than  a melo­ drama  with   Beckettian  overtones.    His article   on  Antonine  Maillet's La  V euve enragee  might  have  gotten  somewhere if he  hadn't  decided   to  write  it  in  his own watered-down version of the Acadian dialect.
Fortier says that  he  had  two  purposes in writing  this book:  to encourage people to attend the  theatre, and  to incite  them to  buy  the  texts  of  the  plays. These  are noble  ideals,  but  I'm   not  sure  that   they are  well served  by Fortier's efforts.
Le  Comique   et  Chumour  a  la  radio
quebecoise,   volume    II,   continues  the
work  that   Pierre   Page   began   in   1976, and  brings  this major anthology of radio plays  and  texts  up  to  1970. One  cannot deny  the  role of radio comedy  in  the de­ velopment  of  Quebec  popular   culture. More   than   public   affairs   programmes, these divertissements provided, says Page, an  uninterrupted commentary on the na­  tional  consciousness, social and economic structures, and   cultural ideology.  When one  realizes  that  between   70 and  85  per cent  of  the  population  of  Quebec had radios  after  1945, and  that  a programme like Chez Miville  reached  an audience of between 8o,ooo and  134,000  families (and

122
 these  were  not  small!), one  see  the  im­
portance of the work  Page and  others  are doing   at   the   Universite  du   Quebec  a
Trois-Rivieres.
Radio  humour  began,    according  to Page, with  the esprit critique, which characterized production during the years
1930-1950,   and   gradually  evolved   into more  profound social criticism. And while satire  dominates in some of Jacques Lan­ guirand's  sketches   of  the   1950's,  social analysis  is very evident in other presenta­ tions, especially  in the series Chez Miville, which   stayed   on   the  air   for   14  years, from  1956  to 1970.
For  those  (like  myself)  unfamiliar with
the radio of the past, Page's anthology provides some new material by familiar authors (Eloi  de Grandmont, Jacques Languirand)  as  well  as  some  good  ma­ terial  by names  which  were  undoubtedly household words  in Quebec  25 years ago (Eugene  Cloutier,  Louis   Pelland,  Carl  Dubuc)  but  are  largely  forgotten  today. The book is an  important step  in provid­ ing  access   to  documents  which,   in   the past,   have  been  ignored   by  students of Quebec  culture.
JONATHAN  M. WEISS


L'HJVER, LA NUJT

LOUISE    SIMARD,   Un   Trop   Long   River.  Les
Editions  Ia Presse, $6.50.
CHARLES-AUGUSTE   LAVOIE, A  Deux   contre  la nuit. Les Editions  Ia Presse, $7.50.

SANS CE COMPTE-RENDU,  je n'aurais sans doute  jamais  lu Un  Trop  Long  Hiver. 11 s'agit, je crois,  d'un premier roman  dont je ne connaissais pas encore !'auteur. Le livre vaut  bien une lecture  cependant. Discret, sans originalite marquante mais aussi parfois emouvant et sans pretention,
il merite qu'on le signale  a d'autres  lec­
teurs.
Comme bien  d'autres  romans  contem­
porains, celui  de  Louise  Simard  est  en-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tierement centre sur la vie interieure d'un seul personnage. A travers Wle saison, on
suit pas a pas la vie quotidienne, les reves,
les peurs,  les  hantises  et  surtout les  sou­
venirs  d'enfance d'une jeune  femme,  in­ stitutrice, mariee, sans enfants, qui se sent mal  dans  sa  peau.   Secrete et  farouche,
elle se livre  peu  et mal,  meme  a ses pro­
ches,  Seul,   le  lecteur  a  le  privilege   de
penetrer dans  son  intimite. L'inreret que
nous  pouvons eprouver  pour   Julie  s'at­
tache   surtout  a sa  peur   et  a  son   inse­
curite. On  suit,  avec  la  sympathie  clair­
voyante  d'un observateur tres  proche,  la
lutte  de la jeune femme  contre elle-meme, contre son  instinct irresistible de  fuir  la vie  et  de  se  refugier dans  son  chalet  et dans  ses souvenirs. La  progression  du  ro­
man  correspond .a la  progression,  incon­
sciente  pour  Julie  mais  perceptible pour
le  lecteur, d'une  crise  de  depression   de plus en plus aigiie qui la menera jusqu'au bord  du  suicide.  A travers les nombreux retours vers  le  passe,  on  peut   remonter aux  sources  du  mal  de  Julie: la solitude de l'enfance, le rapport avec  la mere me­ decin,  lointaine et  sure  d'elle,  et  surtout ce  pere,  deteste mais  trop  semblable  qui a  fini  ses  jours   dans   un  asile  psychia­ trique. C'est   en  decouvrant  la  vulnera­ bilite  d'un mari, qu'elle croyait aussi fort et  efficace que  cette  mere  admiree et en­ viee, que Julie parvient peut-etre au bout du  tunnel  de  "ce  trop  long  hiver."
Comme on le voit, ce roman £role par­ fois la bluette sentimentale et  n'evite pas toujours   les  poncifs.   On  souhaiterait  la disparition  de  certains  passages  de  style vieillot et laborieusement scolaire,  comme  par exemple  dans  cette  description: "Cet hiver  qui  s'acheve dans   une  symphonie de  pepiements d'oiseaux, dans  le gazouil­ lis de  la  neige  fondante." Mais  pour  les lecteurs  qui  apprecient, avant  tout,  dans un   roman,  de   penetrer  dans  l'intimire d'un   personnage, Un  Trop  Long  River ne  patit   pas  entierement  de   ces  mala­
dresses   de   langage.  Julie,   a  travers   sa
 lutte quotidienne contre la  peur  des autres et de la vie, reste un personnage attachant.
A  Deux   contre  la  nuit   de   Charles­
Auguste Lavoie, publie dans la meme collection  "Romans d'aujourd'hui," aux Editions  La  Presse,  est  sans  doute   aussi un  premier  roman ( le premier publie,  en
tout  cas)  qui  s'attache lui  aussi a la  vie
interieure d'un personnage replie  sur  lui­
meme. "L'homme" ( ainsi bizarrement de­
nomme par le narrateur) est professeur d'histoire dans  un  CEGEP. Le  roman  se deroule   tout  entier  dans  la  grisaille  feu­ tree   de  sa  vie  d'academicien,  avec   un parti-pris d'attention  pour  la  mediocrite
quotidienne qui  finit  par  fasciner  a force
d'insignifiance. A  cote  des  mesquineries,
des petites  chicanes  avec les collegues,  de
!'irritation contre  les etudiants, les  syndi­ cats, le radicalisme facile en  politique, les eclairs  de  deux   passions:   !'interet  pour  ces  personnages du  passe  dont  l'homme ecrit   l'histoire  et  surtout,  l'amour  pour  John, son compagnon et  son amant.
A Deux  contre la nuit  tire  sa force  et son  originalite des contrastes du  person­ nage,  vieux  gar· on
amoureux passionne.  John est habilement presente.  Les limites  de la perspective de
1' "homme" preservent les cotes fuyants et enigmatiques de  son  amant. C'est  a tra­ vers  l'incapacite de  "l'homme" a cerner
la  personnalite de son compagnon qu'on ressent le mieux  le desarroi de son amour. Lavoie  manie   avec  beaucoup d'habilete tout  le registre  des  techniques narratives ouvrant au  lecteur  la vie interieure d'un personnage. De  nos  jours,  ce  n'est   plus une gageure ou une marque de grande originalite d'ecrire un  roman  ou il "ne  se passe  rien."  Encore faut-il   pouvoir  don­ ner au  texte  suffisamment de relief, et de variete  pour  rendre acceptable cette  aus­ terite  deliberee.  Ainsi, le cercle  etroit  des ruminations interieures de l'homme s'elar­ git  par  !'insertion  de  tres  beaux   textes mystiques  de  Marie de !'Incarnation.


123

BOOKS IN REVIEW



II est facile de regretter le brio et !'exu­ berance  du   roman   quebecois  des  deux  decades   precedentes ou  presque  chaque nouveau roman  apportait au lecteur  non­ quebecois   la  surprise  et   le  plaisir   d'un  depaysement radical.  Dans ces  deux  ro­ mans,  le dilemne et  l'angoisse  de  Ia mar­ ginalite   sont   affaire   d'individu  et   non plus   de   communaute.  L'alienation   des personnages s'exprime en sourdine et sans eclat  mais  elle  ne  devrait pas  pour  cela en  meriter moins  notre  attention.

JACQUELINE  VISWANATHAN


REMEMBERING, FRAGMENTING

DIANE GIGUERE,  Wings  in the Wind, trans. Alan
Brown.  McClelland &  Stewart, $10.95·
GABRIELLE  ROY,  Children of My  Heart,  trans.
Alan  Brown.  McClelland & Stewart, $12.95.

IN   1961  DIANE   GIGUERE'S    first   novel, Temps de  jeu  (translated as Innocence) won  the   Prix  du  Cercle   du   Livre; her third  novel, Dans les ailes du vent  (trans­ lated  as   Wings in   the   Wind), was awarded  the  1977  Prix  France-Quebec. Gabrielle Roy  has  been  honoured many times  in  both   France  and  Canada; her most  recent  book, Ces  Enfants de ma  vie (translated   as   Children   of  My   Heart) received   the  Governor-General's  Award for  fiction  in  I978.  It is therefore rather intimidating  to be  asked   to  review   the English   versions   of   these   two   works. August  committees have   rendered their verdicts:  who am  I to judge?  And  yet, if a   translation  is  adequate-as   Alan Brown's  work  certainly appears to  be­ some  of  the  applauded  brilliance  of  the original   text   should   shine   through  the medium of another language. Children of My  Heart  does afford a respectable glim­ mer  of  the  author's talents   (although  I suspect  it  received  a GG  as much  in  tri-


124
 bute  to Roy's  overall  contribution to Canadian literature as  for  its  merits   as the   best   French  work   of   fiction   that year). With   Wings in  the   Wind,  how­ ever,  the  reader peers  into  a shadowland composed   of  pretentious  imagery,   vague characters, and  wavering  narrative  lines.
Both books use first-person voices to establish   the  subjective nature of the  ex­ periences  they   recount,  and   the   main characters  of   both   are   women.   There their   resemblance ends.  Roy's  work  is a series  of  sketches rather  than  a  novel,  a memoir in which  the  narrator recalls  and muses over  her  years  as a  teacher on  the prairies during the  nineteen-twenties and thirties.  Despite  occasionally  tedious   re­ flective  passages,  a  masterful  hand   con­ trols  both  the  content and  the  structure. The  indefinite, rather sentimental pre­ sentation of many  of the children, which some  readers may  regard  as a  weakness, in fact  accurately reflects the filtering process of memory. Memory itself, rather than  its contents, appears to be the book's primary  concern.  Its   title   is  therefore ironic: the  reader's eye tends  to dwell  on the  word  "children," but  the  real  subject is "my  heart" (or  "rna  vie") .
What the  teacher remembers is not her individualized  pupils-many  of  whom are mellowed  through a golden  haze of nostalgia-so much  as her emotional responses   to   them:  her   delight  in   the candid affection of the little ones, her satisfaction  at   creating  a  line   of   com­ munication  between    an   abusive   father and  his son,  her  concern and  admiration for   a  child   shouldering  adult   responsi­  bilities,  and  her bittersweet entanglement with  an  unruly  adolescent. Through  her re-creation   of    the    children's  youth emerges   her  regret for  her  own  loss  of innocence; indeed, the  impulse  to return to childhood is built  into  the time scheme  of   the  book.  In ordinary chronological fashion  the children grow older as the anecdotes progress:  the  opening section

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



recounts the  joys and  terrors of  five-year­ olds  on  their  first  day  at  school,  the  last analyzes   the   distresses  of   an   adolescent  passing  from   childhood  to  maturity. In counterpoint,  the   teacher  herself   grows younger,  gradually  reaching further into the   past   until,   in  the  final  section,  she describes   her  complex   relationship  with a  boy  only  a  few  years  her   junior.  The  book ends -as it must -before the  two timelines merge; it reachE's towards  a de­ sired  but  impossible   union  of  adult   and  child,   subject   and   object,   present   and past.
In contrast to the simplicity  and  clarity of Roy's  book,  Giguere's offers  confusion and  obscurity. Its structure resembles a parable of artistic creation, but  this,  un­ fortunately, is defeated by its cloying lan­  guage.  Presumably, the author developed a  style  intended  to  reproduce  the  claus­ trophobic, labyrinthine mind  of her  nar­  rator.   However,  she   appears  to  share, rather than  direct, her character's loss of control.  In   the   book,   there   appears  a woman   who   fills   boxes   with   pieces  of paper:

Each   scrap contained  a  little poem  organ­ ized   around  a  word   which   formed   its  nu­  cleus,  with  further words  added  by  associa­  tion,   tracing the  relationships  of  each   part to  the  others, and  to  the whole.  She  worked  by   the    adjunction   of   words,    units    in   a luminous  flow,  repetitions  with   variants  of the  original  locution.

Giguere  often  works  the  same  way, con­ cocting  disjointed sequences  of  imagery: "The  infinity   of  time  was  forever   scat­  tered,  a world  was suddenly abolished,  a world  in decomposition in which  tragedy  showed  its distorted face,  a  horrid, inde­ cipherable  scrawl   which    jealousy    had tinged   with   blood   like  flesh  opened   in the   soul's   chamber  of   slow   tortures." Such  confusion may  be effective  in small doses;  a whole  novel-full  makes  one  gag. Brown's    translation   often    clarifies   the
 original  text, although he necessarily loses some of its sound  patterns.
Written with  more  restraint, Wings  in the  Wind  would  be a  compelling study
of a fragmented mind.  The book, like the
psyche it records,  is split  into  several sec­ tions.  The   first,  "Amedee," is  the  diary of  a  young  woman   trapped  in   mental limbo  after  a  hospital cure  for  alcohol­ ism. She  describes  her  lethargy  and   the monotony  of  her  present   life.  "What do you do," she asks, "when you've given  up drinking,  given   up  smoking,   and   even lost your  taste  for  food.... How  do  you fill  up  the   time  you  used   to  spend   in cafes  and   good  restaurants?" By  filling your  diary  with  the  details  of your  bore­ dom, alternating with  convoluted images reproducing the  free  association of  your thoughts.  The  news that  her friend  Rosa­ lie has died  spurs  Amedee  to take a holi­ day,   but   the   trip   simply   increases   her alienation. She  detaches  herself  by  nar­  rating her travels  in the  third  person  and she writes long letters  to her  dead  friend. Her  final  diary  entry  indicates that   she is sinking deeper into claustrophobic sub­ jectivity.  She  announces, however,   that  "Other  characters come  to  populate my sleep,  voices other than   Rosalie's call  to me   from   unwritten   pages...."   These other  characters  take   over   the   second half  of the  book.
This  section,  titled  "Elizabeth," creates yet  another version  of  that   familiar,  in­ turned world  of much  Quebec literature. Included  are   a  pensive   young  woman, religious obsession,  baroque symbolism,  a decaying    mansion   filled   with    tattered remnants  of   the   past,   tl1e  isolation    of winter,   and   characters  who   inhabit  a twilight realm between  dream and  reality.  As  the  narrative  progresses   the   bound­ aries  between  the  rational and  irrational gradually dissolve, each character retreat­ ing  further into  her  own  kind  of  mad­ ness.  Most  spectacular  (and  by  far   the most powerful  and  focussed piece of writ-


125

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ing  in  the  book)   is Elizabeth's dream  in which figures from a book of Velasquez paintings come  to life. Giguere   joins her schizoid narratives in the last few pages when   Amedee   returns  to  consciousness, and  we  watch  her  watch  one  of  the  fig­ ments  of  her  imagination jump  in  front  of  a  train. Her  lethargy   has  transmuted into  anguish and  despair, but  here,  as in most  of  the  book,  the  effect  of  her  lan­  guage  is to  distance rather  than   engage the  reader.
CAROLE GERSON


WOMEN'S LIVES

JOAN  AUSTEN-LEIGH,   Stephanie. A  Room  of
One's  Own  Press, $5·95·
GEORGINA BINNIE-CLARK,   Wheat and  Woman.
Introduction  by   Susan   Jackel.    Univ.   of
Toronto Press, $7.50.
SUZANNE  LAMY,   d'elles. L'hexagone, n.p.

To  READ THESE  WORKS  in  this  sequence is to move  through a century  of women's experience and  women's  thinking and writing about the  meaning of  their  lives and  work.  It is also,  in  two  instances at least, to reflect on the growth  of feminist thought in Canada and  on the character­ istic  difference between   the  Anglophone tradition  of empiricism and  the  Franco­ phone  of  metaphysical  speculation.
In  order   to  do  this,  it  is easiest  to set
Stephanie   aside   from   the   beginning­
which,   I  suspect,   is  what   most   adult readers   would  be  inclined   to  do  with  it in  any  case.  Its  one  claim  to  distinction is -as  the  hot  pink  cover  informs  us - the  fact   that   the  author, Joan   Austen­ Leigh   (better known   as  the  playwright Joan  Mason  Hurley), is "a  collateral de­ scendant of Jane Austen  and  one  of  the founders of  the  Jane Austen  Society  of North   America." Be  that  as  it  may,  her first  novel   shows   nothing  of  her   great ancestor's satiric  skill, for Stephanie  is the saga   of   the   proverbial  British   private
 school  girl,  up  to all sorts of thrilling ad­ ventures  and   astonishing  social   revela­  tions,  apparently intended  to  be  all  the more  revealing for  their  setting  in Vic­ toria  rather than  the  English countryside. Badly  written, badly  designed  (the  cover is a  new  low  for  this  press  and  the  text full  of  some  marvelous typos), mawkish  and  "profound" in  the  worst  sense, Ste­ phanie  would   perhaps  make   a  suitable gift  for  a  literary  ten-year-old  (if  there are  any  left)   on  vacation from   private school.
Despite its rather dull  title, Wheat  and
Woman does  merit   our   attention.  First
published in 1914, it has  been  reissued  in the  University of  Toronto Press's  Social
History   of  Canada  series,   with   an   in­ formative if rather longwinded  introduc­ tion   by  Susan   Jackel.   Though  on   the whole  not  particularly  well  written, this record  of  the  author's  wheat  farming in Saskatchewan from   1905  to   rgo8  suc­ ceeds  in  being memorable partly  because it does convey very clearly  Binnie-Clark's great conviction that  farming in Canada constituted a viable  solution  to the  prob­ lem of "redundant women" of the  upper classes  in  Edwardian  England.  Through not  always  skilful  dialogue,  Binnie-Clark endeavours to catch her  English  reader's attention, offering a good deal  of inform­ ation  about  everything from  crop  failure  to  the  quality of  various makes  of  farm implements as well as about the daily routine of farming in  a difficult  climate. Her  gradual adjustment to the life of a homesteader is presented, as is her own increasingly  articulate,   feminist   under­ standing of her situation as a farmer who happened to be a woman  and  was clearly made  to suffer  for  it  by  neighbours who were  ill prepared to accept such  a devia­  tion   from   the   norm.  The   volume   is  a valuable   addition  to   the   collection    of works   demonstrating  the   courage  and tenacity  of  Canadian pioneer   women.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Neither autobiography nor  criticism  as usually understood,  Suzanne  Lamy's d'elles situates itself within  the context  of contemporary  French  feminist  polemic and  literary theory.  Its  debt   to  theorists like Helene Cixous, Chantal Chawaf  and, to a lesser extent,  Luce  Irigaray is clear. But  Lamy  moves  into  several  interesting new  areas   within    the   current  feminist concern   for    the    relationship   between language and  the  body, the expression  of women's   experience in  a  language  free from  what  Jacques Derrida terms "phal­ locentrism." Thus in  her  chapter on gos­ sip,  Lamy   is concerned  with  investigat­ ing   the  ways  in  which   a   phallocentric ideology   has  seen  women's  language  as inconsequential, illogical,  and  so on  pre­ cisely   because    that   language  is  char­ acterized  by  a   sense   of   flow,   sharing, intermingling,   communion  rather  than the  combative,  power-motivated style  of debate as  (male)  self-definition (Cixous' concept   of    "phallogocentrism" -logos operant as male  ego) .
Lamy  extends this discussion into  a consideration  of  that   favourite  contem­ porary  French  instant  form,   the  inter­ view  with  an  intellectual  celebrity,  com­ paring  the  openness  and   responsiveness evident in dialogues between  women  with the   closed,   set   pieces   which   she  finds typical  of  interviews between  men,  noting  that  such  subjects   often   edit   the  trans­ cript  into  print perfection in  an  effort  to produce  "official"  statements.  By   com­ parison,   the  all-inclusive and  sometimes  almost rhapsodic  interchange between women   which   is  "gossip" is equally   the form  of   the   litany  which, as   Lamy demonstrates,  is  a  frequent  element  in much  contemporary writing by women.
I have sharply  abbreviated the major threads of  Lamy's work,  rendering it "linear" at  the  same  time.  Readers who search  out  the  text  will  discover  it  to be a collage of extracts from  major sources (from Freud  to   Marguerite Duras),
 punctuated by reflective passages which move   through a  variety   of   tones   and styles in skilful presentation of Lamy's manifold  subject. D'elles is an intertext whose  voices have  many  analogues in English Canadian writing but whose equi­ valent  in feminist  theory  we  have  yet  to produce. Readers of Stephanie  may  well believe  that  our  need  for  such  a study  is urgent.
LORRAINE WEIR


POTPOURRI

YVETTE  NAUBERT,  Tales  of Solitude, tr.  Mar­
garet  Rose. Intermedia, $13.95; pa.  $9·95·
JACQUES   POULIN,    The    Jimmy    Trilogy, tr.
Sheila  Fischman.  Anansi,  $8.95.
VICTOR-LEVY BEAULIEU,  Race  de monde. vlb editeur, $4-50.
LOUKY BERSIANIK,  Le  Pique-nique   sur l' Aero­
pole: Cahiers  d'Ancyl. vlb 1editeur, $10.95·
MICHELE  LALONDE,  Defense   et  illustration  de la langue  quebecoise  suivie  de prose et poemes. Editions  Seghers  Laffont,  n.p.
LARRY SHOULDICE,   ed.  and  tr.,  Contemporary
Quebec  Criticism. Univ.   of  Toronto Press,
$2o.oo;  pa.  $7·95·
WHAT's NEW FROM QUEBEC? Five fictions first  published   between   1967  and   1972 have only  just reached us about a decade after  leaving  their  source,  like light  from the   nearest   star.   In  two   cases,  Yvette Naubert's Tales  of Solitude ( Contes  de la solitude,  II, 1972), and  Jacques Poulin's The Jimmy  Trilogy (of  which  the  three volumes, Man Cheval   pour  un  royaume, Jimmy, and  Le Coeur  de la baleine  bleue, appeared in 1967, 1969, and  1971  respec­ tively) , the time gap is one of  translation. In  the  third  case, Victor-Levy  Beaulieu's Race  de monde  (first  published in  1969, with    an   exclamation   point    after    the title),  the  author himself   has  chosen   to re-issue the book in a "nouvelle version," though  I  am  not  clear  in  what  respects, if any,  it  has  become  a  work  of  the  late

127

BOOKS IN REVIEW



seventies   rather  than  of  the  late  sixties. These   works  have  in  common   a  tone which  mixes in varying  proportions wist­ fulness   and   earthy  jollity;  either   mode can  subside  at  times  into  cuteness.  Tales  of Solitude is almost  wholly  wistful; the stories  read  like slightly  eerie enactments of  metaphor,  taking   place  in  a  mist  at some distance from  the reader. Their use of "magic realism," of  the mildly  fantas­ tic  nature of  everyday  events,  is not  un­ like Ferron's, though  the tales are  told in much flatter  language (in  French   as  in English)  than   his.  They   tend   to  suffer either   from   the  intangibilities of  under­ plotting  or   from   the   jarrings   of   over­  plotting;  most   end   with   inadequately motivated murders or suicides. The  most interesting  story   is   "The  Transplanted Heart,"  in  which   the   hero's   emotional life,  down   to  the  specific  objects  of  his affection,  is  determined  by  that   of  the previous  owner  of  the  heart:  the  meta­ phorical    implications   of	"heart"   are
schematically acted  out.
The concluding novel of the Poulin tril­ ogy, "The Heart of the Blue Whale," curi­  ously enough employs  this  same  conceit,  but  to much  more  interesting effect.  The dying  narrator-hero, Noel, is  led  gradu­ ally  into  the  death-world  by  a  Hermes­ like  young  girl;   her  heart  was  the  one transplanted into  him,  to extend  his life, ambiguously into  this "hovering between  life  and  death."  It seems  he  must  learn  to  accept  a  gradual gentle  shedding of the  outer  elements of  his  own  life,  and an  equally gentle  entering into  the world of  his  own  imagination; he  must  come to understand the relationship of "gentle­ ness  and   death." After  a  ghostly  love­ scene  between   Noel  and   the  girl,  he  is taken   to  the  visionary  world  of  his  own books;  he has  been  working  on the  novel "Jimmy" all  along,  and  is  probably also the  author  of  "My   Horse  for  a  King­ dom." Here-encounters the characters of both  those  books in  this  visionary  world,
 and   chooses  for  himself   the  death that might  have  been  intended for the "gentle terrorist" of the first story. The  tying together of the three  apparently quite disparate tales  is  neatly  done; echoes  of "Kingdom" lightly  punctuate "Jimmy"; echoes  from  "Jimmy" cluster  ever  more thickly  in  "Blue   Whale," and   echoes  of both   culminate in  the  discovery   of  the box of grenades....
"My Horse  for a  Kingdom" reads  like a deliberate answer  to Hubert Aquin's Prochain  episode. A hero called Pierre, isolated    within    his   carapace  of   stones (not  all the puns in the original can be translated),  drifts into   a   minimal   ter­ rorist  action; he begins and  ends  his story from   inside  that   other carapace of   jail. His  strongest affinity  is with  the  city  of Old  Quebec itself, like him trapped  with­  in  its own  stony  walls;  his strongest rela­
tionship  is a curious  menage .a trois with a
woman  and  a Charon-like caleche  driver,
Simon,  who  kills  himself  rather early  in the   story.  Simon   has   clear   connections with  the  girl  of  part   III; both  are  senti­ mentalized characters of  wistfulness  and  wisdom,  belonging to the  world  of magic realism.   "[B] ehind   every  mirror  there's  another world,  the only real one perhaps. And  who  can  say  which  side  of  the  mir­ ror  we are  on?"
As Aquinian themes  are, perhaps, trans­ posed  into   the  key  of  gentleness  in  the first  story,  so  are   Ducharmean  ones  in "Jimmy." The titular hero seems a gentle  re-working  of   that   most   violently   psy­ chotic   of  creative  brats,  the  heroine   of L'Avalee   des   avates,    by    R!ejean   Du­  charme;  his   Beatrice,   the   artist-as-dis­ turbed-child,  is  herself,  in  turn,   a  mor­ bidly  intellectual heiress  of  brat  Zazie  in the Queneauvian Metro. Jimmy is as pre­ cocious  as  they,  but  far  more  docile  and long-suffering; he turns  his frustrations inward into vivid anecdotes structured on refrains, whose repeated rhythms and bizarre, hilarious contexts suggest even  in

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



translation  his   (or   Poulin's)  wonderful ear   for   language  and   eye  for   magic:
"Catshit !"  [Crotte de  chat!J ; "zouave"
[used   as  several   parts   of  speech,   with
subtle   varieties of  nuance] ;  "at   a  hun­ dred   miles  an  hour";  and,  most  impor­  tant, as  it  provides Jimmy's  own  defini­ tion  of himself  as an  artist  and  of artists as morally  dubious "tale-tellers": I'm  the biggest liar  in the whole  city of Quebec." Jimmy   of  course  does  not  know  that
he   shares   the   sensitivities   of   Salinger's
Holden  Caulfield,  expressed    in   an   at times Queneauvian idiom,  and  is creating for  himself  a world  of magic  realism  like Boris  Vian's. But  of  course   Noel  knows this and  takes care  to tell us. The author­ narrator of  part   III once  exchanged  a copy  of L'attrape-coeur  (Salinger)  for  a copy   of   L'arrache-coeur (Vian)  and afterwards  felt   "as   though  Boris  Vian and  Holden Caulfield knew one another." The theme  of "Blue  Whale" does  not lend   itself   to   the   verbal   dynamism  of "Jimmy."  The    first   two-thirds  of   the story are  rendered diffuse  by "gentleness" in  both  theme  and  style  ("tendresse," or more  often  "douceur," in  various  gram­ matical  forms,  in   the  original),  to  the point  of  lapsing  into  sentimentality. But although the  first  two  parts  are  page  by page  more  satisfying,  at  least  the  conclu­  sion of  part III justifies the  whole  of this gentle   tri-partite  artist-parable  and    (it
turns  out)   tenderly  self-reflexive  text. Victor-Levy Beaulieu's Race  de monde
is  the  first  volume   (revised)  of  a  huge
roman    fleuve   (four   volumes   published, six more  under way)  which  will no doubt constitute a Human Comedy or Rougon­ Macquart of Quebec. It is full  of earthy  jollity  from   the   beginning to  very  near the  end,  where  it modulates  into  a senti­ mental   wistfulness   analogous  to   Nau­  bert's  or  Poulin's. As the  shadows  darken  over  the  family  Dentifrice  Beauchemin, some  characterizations, notably   those  of Bibi,  the  narrator-novelist, and   his  bro-
 ther  Steven-le-poete, struggle   to  emerge out  of  the  "characters" who  have  roist­ ered  with  a comic  lovability  occasionally edging  over into  ethnic cuteness through­ out  the  book.  This  comic  mix of "deme­ nagements," poverty,  roguish or even vil­ lainous adventures, much local colour and occasional   satire   is  eminently  readable and   entertaining,   though  neither   espe­ cially  demanding  nor  profound. If even the  two grotesques,  le Cardinal -impo­ tent  hippie,   "craquepotte," and   would­  be Svengali-guru-and Festa,  the aston­ ishing  nyphomaniac who  gives  the  nar­ rator   those  most  invigorating  nights  in which  he  fails  to  "deposer son  cui  dans son  lit,"  wind   up,  the  latter  insane,  the former   hanged by  his  own  necktie,  they have  at  least  been  very  entertaining for most   of  their   fictional   lives.  Many   of Beaulieu's  jokes are  easy and  indeed  even patronising ones.  There  are  a few  high­ brow   puns,  for   the  most  part   obscene, but the staple language jokes, which  wear a  little  thin  over   the  long  run,  are  an amalgam  of   joual   phonetics  ( le  grand  Moria!;   zaller) ,   nicknames,  and   slang constructions  (pie pies)  that  is  much closer  to  caricature, while  far  less  witty and   inventive  than    Poulin's    language games.  Further,  these   Rabelaisian   boy­ hoods, so farcially sexual  as to seem most lovable  when  crudest, seem  in  their  un­ critically funny  affirmation-of-life to both sentimentalize and  sell short  the  Quebec experience. Too often,  the  narrative makes it merely  cute.
A minor but structurally essential theme is the familiar one of artist-growing-up, becoming   through  his   experiences    the sort of person who can transcribe those experiences.  I suspect  this  theme  will be a  more  important part  of  later  volumes in   the   series;   here   it  seems  very   old­ fashioned,   especially   when  compared to Poulin's   gentle,   neo-modernist  interlac­ ings of Text and Life.

* 	* 	*

129

BOOKS IN REVIEW



The books  by Bersianik  and  Lalonde, by contrast, are  both  polemics centrally concerned with  language as  power,  as  a means  of oppression. The  amalgamation of genres  in each  book makes  them diffi­ cult   to  classify  in  terms.  The  Lalonde volume  is in  any  case an  anthology, col­ lecting  prose  essays,  poems, quasi-dramas (radio  scripts?)   and  fictional  fragments from  the  period  1970-1978;   much  of  it is now  of rather  marginal interest, being "litterature  de  combat" very  much   tied to  its  time.  This is  particularly  true  of the dramas:

les poetes  etaient en  prison et  Ia liberte d'expression
etait gardee dans  !'autre langue

are   the  most   neatly   turned   lines  to  be found  in  them; they  catch  the  theme  of language  as  politics   which   (along   with more   straightforwardly  separatist   argu­ ments)   holds  the  volume  together. There are   also   some   sub-Nerudan   coca-cola poems,   some   slender,   snowy   apolitical  verses,  some  "concrete"  prose  poems  in the  shape  of  fleur-de-Iys  banners,  and  a number of discursive essays saying all the right   things,   but   with   no  lightness   of touch.  The  pastiche of du  Bellay's classic essay,  "Defense et  illustration de  Ia  lan­ gue  franc;aise,"   is  the   most  substantial and   entertaining  of   the   prose   pieces, though  other essays on the language problem,  especially  those  treating its  his­ torical  as  well  as  its  socio-political  con­ texts are of considerable interest. Lalonde argues,  for  instance,  the  connection  be­ tween  joual  and  machismo: women  and  priests speak  French.
A subsidiary  theme,  as this last example suggests, is feminism. While  evidently feminist  in her sympathies, Lalonde is likelier to use the oppression of women  as a  subsidiary   case  of  political  oppression, or  even  as  a  metaphor for  it:  Quebec can be seen as "une entretenue qu'on  viole assidument et  qu'on paie  pour  se taire."
 Bersianik  reverses this pattern: her sub­ ject  is the  oppression of women  through the agencies of, inter  alia,  male language, stories  and  myths; the oppression of poli­ tical   entities  is  a   metaphor,  or  a  sub­ sidiary   case,   of   this   major  oppression. Though  Bersianik stresses the implication of  "story" and  Lalonde that of "history," either of them  could  summarize the  link they  see between  language and  power  in these tenns: "histoire [est] ecrite, au fond, par  !'Autre."
Bersianik's Pique-nique  sur l'Acropole,
while  mixing   together at  least  as  many genres   as  Lalonde's  book,   crafts   them into   a  more   unified   work-a  "satire," not  without its root sense of "hash" or "medley." Her  starting-point is a  formal one; she  proposes   a  subversive   pastiche of   Plato's   Symposium,  but    a   "pique­ nique" is of course  the  only  banquet her ladies  can   afford. Plato  proves  a  much  springier  spring-board   than    du   Bellay, doubtless because subversion is more com­  plex and interesting than  the  mere  build­ ing  up  of  argument or  even   jest.  Plato sets  up  a  pseudo-woman, Diotima,  and  then  effectively  silences  even  her  by al­ lowing  Socrates to  report her  words   to help  him  assert  the  transcendent  superi­ ority  of the spiritual engendering possible to  the  male  over  the  physical  engender­ ing  to  which  the  female  is  limited. This  is not  the  least  of Plato's sins against the nature and  identity of  woman, rendered mute  and  silent  in  Plato as in  almost  all of male-authored fiction  and  history. ThP Plato-like  Authority Figure of  our  own times  is a  certain St.-Jacques Linquant, who  can adapt Freud, if not  Socrates, to much  the same  purpose.
Bersianik, anti-Platonist,  allows  Xan­ tippe   and   her   other  (invented)   female  characters  to  speak.  There  is  action as well   as   dialogue,  but   the   bulk   of   the book  is  made   up  of  the  tales,  parables and   anecdotes  with   which   the   women  confirm  from different angles and accord-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ing  to their  different temperaments their views  of  the  female (chiefly  sexual)   ex­ perience in  all  its  physicality  ( Bersianik perhaps leans  too heavily  on  quotes  from the  Hite   report for  evidence  of  female  sexual  responses) .  These views  are  con­ tinually counter-pointed against evidence  of  a  male oppression  which  destroys (politically) or denies  (linguistically) that experience. Such  myths  as  that   of  Iphi­ genia,  sacrificed  by her father, or of  Pros­ perpina, snatched away  from  her mother, and  such images as that  of the Caryatides, mute  statues  supporting the  marble edi­ fice which  takes  no account of them  and has  no  "use" for   them,  give  resonance  to  the  more  historical or  argumentative accounts, which  are  saved  from  stridency  by style. The characters speak  of atrocity  in their  own voices. The central historical  example is again,  like  the  Caryatides, a synecdoche:  it  is  not  only  atrocious  in itself,  but  stands for  all  the  other   atro­ cities of maiming, silencing and  denial  of pleasure, where  pleasure is equated with independence and identity. This is female circumcision, a cause much  more familiar among French feminists  and  general  pub­  lic   (and therefore, I assume   to  Quebec feminists) than, up  to now, among Anglo­ phone ones. The case  is made  by  a most winning  little   African  girl-not   quite yet  a  victim  of  it-who  has  made  her way  up  the  Acropolis to  talk  the  matter over  with  the  women  at  the  picnic,  and to  ask  them   what  such  mutiliation  por­ tends  for  her  prospects  of  a  "heavenly" carnal happiness.
The book as a whole seems to me a logically  coherent, stylish  and  vivid  pole­ mic, funnier (though the  comedy is often dark)  as  well  as  more  poetically  intelli­  gent  than  most feminist  treatises; its chief competitor  in   Quebec   literature   is  of course Bersianik's  own  earlier  work, L'Euguelionne. Both should be translated as  soon  as  possible;  I hope   an  English edition can  preserve the handsome typog-
 raphy   and   illustrations  of  this  volume ( "eaux-fortes  et   tailles-douces  de   Jean Letarte") .
* 	* 	*
The ten essays in Larry Shouldice's selection  of contemporary Quebec critic­ ism tend,  not  surprisingly, to confirm  the generalizations  of  his  preface:  Quebec critics  are  likely  to be didactic and  argu­ mentative rather than analytical, and  are, on  the  whole, more  concerned with  con­ tent  than  with form.  Of  course  what  is to  be  taught  changes with   the  shifting  tides  of  history  and  culture, but  the  di­ dactic disposition remains constant. Neither  the  introduction  nor  the  selec­ tions quite  catch  the  sense of an  intellec­  tually  lively Quebec, seething  with  theo­ retical  controversy, of which we occasion­  ally  hear   rumours.  Surely   there   was  a chance  to confirm or  refute  the  proposi­ tion that  Montreal is to Paris  as Toronto (say)  is to New  Haven, even  though the regrettable temporal  barriers of the  pub­  lishing   process  limit  "contemporary"  to
1976 and  before?
Shouldice chose essays "general enough
to be accessible,"  apparently feeling  that "practical" criticism  of particular texts or of "one  particular writer" would  inevit­ ably be too specific  to be  accessible. The premise  behind  this decision  seems to me to  be faulty;  indeed  the  two  most  inter­ esting  essays in  the  book  luckily  work  to subvert    it.   Paul   Chamberland's  essay, "Founding the Territory" (on  the  Hexa­ gone   poets),  and  Louis Francoeur's "Quebec  Theatre:  Stimulation or  Com­ munication?" deal  closely with  quite spe­ cific  texts;   they   strongly   suggest   a   tilt towards   the   formal  and   analytical,  at least  in very recent criticism. To  be sure, the  elaborate  methodologies of structural linguistics  and  semiotics,  respectively,  al­ most  crush  the  fragile   texts  under  dis­ cussion.   Lengthy   diagrams  of    speech­ sequences  and  character-exchanges yield

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



conclusions about  Marcel  Dube's   plays remarkably consonant with  those of  com­ mon-sense  observation. The  most  cogent of  Francoeur's  views is  the  least-dia­ grammed: the "extradiegetical Receiver," perhaps  more  familiar  to  you  extradie­ getical  receivers  out  there  as the fictitious spectator,  is   fascinatingly  analyzed    in terms of Dube's and  Michel Tremblay's stage  practice.
Chamberland's essay seelllS an elabora­ tion  into  the  language of  structural lin­ guistics  of  simple  and  relatively  familiar propositions in  Gilles  Marcotte's very brief   meditative  essay,   "The  Poetry   of Exile,"  which immediately, and  no doubt deliberately, precedes  it in this anthology. Chamberland's "poetry of foundings and origins" corresponds closely to Marcotte's "poetry of first steps,"  and  his approach is  as  fundamentally  thematic  as   Mar­ cotte's, despite  his disclaimers.  His analy­  ses depend largely  on  the  archetypes of psychic topography and   on   familiar mythic patterns  (again   he  disclaims "mythic" intentions) which hardly require  the   apparatus  of   structural  linguistics. Chamberland  gives  analytic  paraphrases, of   considerable   interest,    for   extensive selections,  all  quoted solely, alas,  in their English  translations. The  regrettable de­ cision  not  to include the  original  French  texts   renders   some   of   Chamberland's comments virtually meaningless -for in­ stance,   the  allegation  that  Beaulieu,  in "A   glaise   fendre,"  is  "intolerably  con­ cise."   Neither    Chamberland's  interests  nor  Shouldice's  brief  permits  what  these poems  (as excerpted) clearly cry out for:  a  comparatist's study,   juxtaposing them with  the  vast  corpus  of  "foundings and origins" in  Anglophone poetry: -Mar­ garet   Atwood's alone   would  lend  great  resonance to  the  analysis  of  Hebert and others.
But,  despite  all  these  qualifications, I am  happy   that  Shouldice has  alerted  us to  the   presence   of  these  methodologies
 and  even  happier  that   he  has  gone  be­ yond his self-imposed limits  to show them in  analytic action on  particular  texts.
Would that he had done the same for psycho-criticism and sociological criticism. That Gerard Bessette  is acquainted  with the   basic   postulates  of   psychocriticism and  can  outline them  satisfactorily  seems to correspond to none of the somewhat diffuse  intentions of  this  anthology, and to be of the  most  marginal interest  com­ pared  to what  Bessette, as a Quebec critic,  thinks  can  be done  with  psychocriticism, preferably as demonstrated in the analysis of specific  texts,  or  what  he  thinks  other  Quebec  critics   have   done   or  could   do with   those  assumptions. The  latter  ap­ proach would  fit in with  the more histori­ cal  essays  of  Shouldice's  "Backgrounds" group.  Jean-Charles   Falardeau's  essay, "The Evolution of the Hero  in  the  Que­ bec  Novel,"  while   teasing   us  with   the prospect of a  clearly  focussed  "sociologi­  cal" criticism,  lapses  almost  at once  into  a patchy, unsystematic survey, one  which could  only have  benefited  by some critical presuppositions.
Two  essays in  the  book justify  their  in­ clusion  on  "form" alone; their  "content" is  slightly   off-centre  to  the   book  as  a whole,  as  they  are  the  least  literary and  the   most   polemically   cultural  in   their concerns,  but   they  are  by  far   the  most readable. One  is Hubert Aquin's essay on "The Cultural Fatigue  of  French Cana­ da," which  is largely  an  elegant and  co­ gent  jousting  with  Trudeau on  the ques­  tion  of  nationalism, but  partly a  discus­ sion  of  Quebec's cultural fatigue as, one senses, a sort  of extrapolation of his own. Perhaps another  Aquin   essay,  closer  in topic   to  Jacques  Brault's,  might   have been a more  useful choice. Brault's "Notes on a False Dilemma" seems to be arguing (his  extended  marginal  commentary on his  own  text  complicates the  reading process  considerably)  the  importance of not  being  a committed writer, while  con-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tinuing  to  be  a  committed  citizen;  his prose  carries   one  along,   twice.  But  cul­ tural  critics  can be  just as stodgy  as liter­  ary  critics,  as  we  see  upon  sinking  into Michele Lalonde's well-intentioned views on  Quebec  cultural  history.
This  book, though not equally  lively in all  its parts,  will be an  essential  resource for  Anglophone readers. If the  selection seems somewhat burdened by obligations to introduce culture, literary history,  and the  history  of criticism  all at once, all the more  reason  for Shouldice, having  now admirably and  usefully discharged these obligations,  to   give   us  a   sequel,   with fewer  sweeping  glances   over  so  wide  a field   and   more   essays   (like   Chamber­ land's  and   Francoeur's)    showing   con­ temporary Quebec critics in critical oper­  ation.
PATRICIA  MERIVALE


A DOGMA  OF DIVISION

SHERRILL   GRACE,  Violent Duality:   A Study  of Margaret   Atwood. Vehicule   Press,  $14.95; pa.  $s.gs.
THE  TITLE OF   Violent  Duality:  A Study of Margaret  Atwood, by  Sherrill Grace, suggests that  Canadian criticism is rapidly developing  a   tradition  of  brutal   parti­ tion.  Dennis Lee  set  the  stage  with  his cosmology   of   "world"  and   "earth"  in Savage  Fields, a stimulating  essay which presents  a vigorous  portrait of  the divided  sensibility  in  Ondaatje and  Cohen. The  name  of  Grace's book  seems  to  propose  carrying the  study   on  to  Margaret At­ wood.  Instead, there  is  not  even  a  refer­  ence   to  Savage   Fields,  although  it  has been around for a few years now and  Lee expressly suggests that  Surfacing and The  Journals  of Susanna  Moodie  display  his "fields."  In fact,  Violent   Duality  proves to be  very much  in an  earlier mode.  The
 phrase   refers   to   an   impression    of   At­ wood's work as the representation of  con­ flicts between  various,  rather  traditional, pairs.
Still,  there  is at  least  one central point
of  comparison. A  major  difficulty   with Lee's  work, as noted  by many  reviews, is that   his  claim  that   his  fields  are  some­ thing  more  than  our  old  favourite, "Na­ ture  vs. Civilization," is often  unconvinc­ ing. His insights and style of presentation are  illuminating and  at  times  fascinating but   his   attempt to   overcome  the   old "simple-minded  dualism" seems  only  to restate  the  problem observed  in  the  Re­ naissance  and   before:  somehow   nature and  civilization   keep  overlapping. This quandary is found  as well  in Grace  and, I  think,   is  common  to  all   critics   who create  a dogma  of division.
And  yet that  lapping of the edges can­ not  deny  the  existence   of  the  division. But  is  it  much   more   than   a  universal  presence  of oppositions?  Whether it  is a product  of  the   bicameral  mind,   of  an innate  recognition  of  the  split   between  the noumenal and  the  phenomenal, or of anything else,  man   seems   to   find  con­ flicts. The  law of three  so often  noted  in folklore  is superseded by the  law  of two. Nature-and-Civilization   is   part   of  this. Good-and-Evil is as well. And  we should  not forget Man-and-Woman.
Agreed, some writers make  more of the possibilities  of  dualism   than   do  others. The case might  be made, through a series of comparisons, that  Atwood  is on this "more" side.  But  Grace   chooses  simply to  state  that  Atwood  "explores the  con­ cept  of duplicity thematically and  form­  ally,  always   with   an   ironic   eye   to   its common    meaning   of   deceit."    So   do Robertson  Davies,   and   Margaret   Lau­ rence,   and   James   Reaney,  and   D.   C. Scott,  and  Samuel Taylor Coleridge, and  William  Shakespeare.
So   much   for   duality.  Regardless  of one's  reaction   to  Lee's  assertion   that   he

133

BOOKS IN REVIEW



has  identified  a  new cosmology  his  criti­ cal  methods are  innovative and  produc­ tive. Grace  takes a similar  preoccupation with  the twos but she adds to it a method  which  is traditional and  uninspired. She goes  through  the  Atwood  canon   chron­ ologically  book  by book. The  first half of the   study   covers  the   poetry    and   the second,  the  novels.
It is difficult  to argue  with  such  a sys­
tem,  simply  because  it  is so  straightfor­ ward.  As  well,  Grace  argues, there   is a development in   Atwood's   work   which can  be  traced. The  split  by genre  might  be  justified  by  Atwood's assertion  of  the difference   between    her   poetry,   "some­ thing  you  hear," and  her  novels, "some­  thing  you  see." But  Grace  herself  asserts the  similarities between the two, what Woodcock  calls "the capillary links." The question is thus  raised  whether an  over­ all chronological scheme  might  not  be of more   value,   in  which  The  Edible  W o­ man is followed  not  by Surfacing  but  by The  Journals of  Susanna  Moodie.  From this,  a   variety  of   interesting  juxtaposi­ tions  might   be  seen,  such   as  the   I972 publication  of  Power Politics, Surfacing,  and Survival.
As it is, each  work is viewed  primarily as  an   individual.  Even   from   novel   to novel and  poem  to poem the comparisons are  of  a  general and  superficial   nature. The result is a collection  of parts,  a series of studies  rather than  a single  integrated one.
Given   this  diffusion,   there  is  still  po­ tential  for  more  than  Grace  achieves.  A glance  at  one  section  of  the  book  might provide a  few  suggestions. Grace  says of The   Journals  of Susanna  Moodie   that  "It is a compelling articulation of a Can­  adian myth  and  a  dramatic incarnation of  our   past."  This   is  only  one  of  the many   times   that   Grace   uses  the   term "myth" in an  unspecified  way. Later  she compares  Atwood  to Reaney:

I34
 Atwood's  use   of  myth   here   bears   striking resemblance  to   James  Reaney's  theory  of myth  in  Alphabet  and in  his  poetry. Because classical  myth   informs historical Canadian subjects,  Reaney  insists   upon    incarnating myth  in  the  local  present. For  Reaney  "met­ aphor  is  reality" and   poetry  is  myth  plus documentary-Job lives  again in  the  Don­ nel!ys. In The  Journals  of  Susanna  Moodie, Atwood employs a similar  method, illustrat­ ing   classical  myth   embodied  in   a   living  reality, drawn from the  facts of  native tradi­ tion.   She   shares  Reaney's  belief   that   "the native  tradition    [is]    ancestral,  important, and   haunting."

What  does   Grace   mean   by   "Reaney's theory of myth"? Is it that  "classical  myth informs  historical  Canadian   subjects?" Or  is this  simply  a  statement of fact  by Grace? What does "classical myth" mean? Job,  as a  rule,  would  not  be seen as part of a "classical myth" tradition. Is "living reality" a term  for historical fact? How  does  Grace see "native tradition"? In  Reaney's view, in  the  quoted   passage, it   is  something  combining  Indian  lore and  Canadian literary history.  Is this At­ wood's  view  in The  Journals?
The historical context  of the origins  of The  Journals is not much  better served. Grace states,  "The Moodies,  of course, helped  to suppress the rebellion. To  them it was just that, an  insurrection supported by 'Yankee' Republicans, and  aimed  at overthrowing British government. As Atwood  points out in her 'Afterword,' Moodie later came  to feel  that  the I 837
Rebellion  was   good   for   Canada.   Cer­ tainly   it   encouraged  solidarity   and  an awareness of common goals."
It is unfair to expect  a detailed histori­ cal  analysis   of  the  situation  but  this  is assuredly  much   too   simplistic.  Moodie  states    in   her   "Canada:  A   Contrast" (I 87 I) , published in  the later editions  of Roughing  It  in  the  Bush,  that   she  had come  to  recognize   that   "those   who  had settled down in the woods were happily unconscious," until  they were called  to demonstrate their   loyalty  in  battle.  This

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



gap  between  the bush-life  and  any under­ standing of  the  political  questions of the day  is relevant to  much  of  Roughing  It, directly or  indirectly.  As  Grace notes,  by
1871 Moodie  perceived  the   benefits   of the  Rebellion, but  primarily in economic
progress  and  democratic reforms.  Some­
thing  more  subtle   than   "solidarity" and
"common goals"  but  also  more  precise. Grace  refers  in  a footnote to Atwood's
play,  "The Servant Girl," which  is an adaptation of a  Moodie story.  I  think  a bit  more  could   be  made of  this  in  con­
nection  to The  Journals. Atwood's  inter­ est in Moodie in "Servant Girl" is simply as a genteel  prison  visitor,  while  the con­ centration is  on  the  girl,  Grace Marks, and  her  eventual  madness.  This impres­  sion   of   Moodie,   while   limited,  would
seem  to be much  closer  to  historical fact
than the  figure  in  The  Journals, who  is, in  many  ways,  more  like  Grace  Marks,
being driven  mad  by a horrible imprison­
ment,  in  Moodie's case, in  the  bush. Thus  we  have   a  number of  possible
approaches to The  Journals, all  not  pur­
sued.  The question of what  is myth,  in a more   precise   sense,   particularly  as  ex­ plored  by Northrop Frye, is left to wander  while   Grace   drifts   from   Persephone  to Job  to  Moodie. The  possible  connections between  The  Journals and   the  historical  setting  are  similarly   neglected. Then the difference  between  the  real  Mrs.  Moodie  and   Atwood's  is  passed   over   in  a  few lines,  although  it   is  a  variation  which would  seem  to  be  at  the  core  of  a  fic­ tionalized  biography of  an  historical figure.
A like complaint could  be applied  to almost every section of the book. In each, there  are  hints  of  possible  critical  excur­ sions  which  invariably are  not  taken.  A two   line   reference  to   James   Dickey's poetry   is  made  but   none   to  his  novel, Deliverance. If a  comparison  is  required  with the former, surely Surfacing  deserves one   with    the    latter.   Numerous  other
 names  are  mentioned, without  develop­ ment.  The  possible  connections  to  Frye, Reaney  and  Macpherson are  well worthy of pursuit. Others, to Virginia Woolf and  Samuel  Beckett,  I  found   surprising and potentially fascinating, although Grace doesn't bring  them  to  that  point.
It seems that   I  have  mainly  rehearsed what  the  book  is not.  But  in her  preface Grace  points out  that  the study is only "explorative"  and   has   no   pretense    of being  "definitive." She  states  that  "This book  is intended, however,   as  an  inter­ pretive  guide  to form  and  theme  in  At­ wood's  work for readers and students." It fills part  of this role quite adequately but it  is much   more  concerned with  theme than  form,  except  in  the  broadest sense. Grace  looks at  the arrangements of poems and  sections  of  novels but  she avoids  lin­ guistic  or other study  of the  microcosmic structure  of  Atwood's  work,  something which  could  repay  substantial attention, particularly in  the  poetry.
Yet  it is in  the  poetry  that  Grace  pre­ sents the most satisfying  general interpre­ tations.  In  much  of the  fiction she leaves questions   for   which   answers   might   be suggested, albeit  tentative ones. Here  that  microcosmic  approach might  again  be of value, particularly in explaining the prob­  lems with  point  of  view in Surfacing and The  Edible Woman. It might  also remove Grace's  tendency for  generalizations like the  following: "By  the  end  of Surfacing,  the  narrator has  succeeded in  her  quest; she  has found  what  she  needs  to begin  a new, complete and  free  life. Whether or not she will create this new life is entirely open,  but  at  least  possible, in  the  closing lines of the text."
The  final  words  of  Atwood's narrator are "The lake  is quiet, the  trees surround me, asking  and  giving  nothing." But  life in  the  trees  has  been  proven   impossible for a human, which  she must  accept her­ self to be. A few  lines  before,  she  thinks of  the  inevitable conversation  with  Joe:

135

BOOKS IN REVIEW



For   us,  it's    necessary,  the   intercession  of words; and   we  will  probably fail,  sooner  or later  more  or  less painfully. That's  normal, it's   {he   way  it   happens  now   and   I  don't know  whether it's  worth  it  or  even  if I can depend on  him,  he  may  have   been  sent  as a  trick.  But  he  isn't an  American, I  can  see that now; he  isn't  anything, he is  only  half­ formed, and  for  that  reason  I  can  trust  him.
To  trust is  to  let   go.  I tense   forward, towards the  demands and  questions, though my feet  do  not  move  yet.

The  "free  life,"  with  nature "asking  and giving  nothing," is impossible.  The  pos­ sible life,  with  man,  is not  free,  but  full of  "demands and  questions,"  not  "com­ plete," but  "half-formed." The  sentences are  a  series  of ambivalent  wavers.
At  the  Learned Societies, in  Montreal,
Ig8o,  Professor  Grace gave  a  simply  ex­ cellent   paper  on   the  Bluebeard   tale  as used  by Bartok,  Fowles  and  Atwood.  As a result  I expected Violent  Duality to be, if not  a  sequel  to Dennis  Lee,  at  least  a major  improvement   over  the    usual "writer and   his  work" series, and  some­ thing  really  worth  buying.  It is not  and it is not.
TERRY GOLDIE


CANADIAN GOTHIC

HELEN  WEINZWEIG,  Basic  Black  With  Pearls.
Anansi, $7.95.
w.  o.   VALGARDSON,   Gentle   Sinners.  Oberon,
$t7.50; pa.  $7-95·
THE   AUTHORS OF  THESE two   recent novels both look beyond the resources of realism  for  a form  capable of embodying their  respective visions. Helen  Weinzweig uses surreal  fantasy to chart  the flight  of her   middle-aged  heroine   from   an   un­ happy marriage, while W. D. Valgardson attempts  to create a  contemporary myth out  of  his  young  protagonist's efforts  to transcend a bleak physical  and  emotional environment.
 Weinzweig's first  novel,  Passing  Cere­ mony ( I973), portrays a wedding recep­  tion  as a gothic  nightmare, with  her  nar­  rator   hovering like  a  grim  spectre   over her  characters, pausing here and  there  to record    their    obsessions   and    anxieties. Now,  in  Basic Black With Pearls, Weinz­  weig  has  added a  zany  sense  of  humour to her  considerable talents  for surrealism. Thus, what  might have  been  yet another "bored housewife" novel  takes  on  a  new and   striking   dimension  as  her   heroine confuses hopes  with  facts,  and  then  pro­  jects her fantasies on to her surroundings. When  the  novel  begins  she  is  travelling in  Mexico under   the  assumed   name   of Lola   Montez, waiting for  a  coded  mes­ sage from  her  (alleged)  lover, Coenraad, an  agent for  the  sinister  Agency.  Believ­ ing  that  "it  goes against  the  grain  of ro­ mantic love  to  bring  it  the  trappings of marriage," she is content  (she claims)   to follow   her   lover   around  the   world,   a lonely  journey redeemed only by their  in­ frequent,  wild  nights  together. Suddenly, she  receives  a  command: Return to  To­ ronto.  "Toronto?"  she  exclaims   in   dis­ may,  "But  that's where  I live."
Lola  has  no choice  but  obedience, and as she wanders through Toronto in search of  Coenraad, we  learn   that   (Surprise!) her   real  name   is  Shirley   Kaszenbowski, that  she has abandoned her  husband and children, and  that  she  just  may  be more than  slightly  mad.  She  finds that  the  city is mined, for  her, "with the explosive de­ vices of memory"; she  journeys  back  into  her  past,  attempting to comprehend  the mysterious necessity which  compelled her flight.  Frequently  in  doubt but  never  in despair,  Lola/Shirley relies  on  her  wits to resolve her  many  problems.  When, for example, she is confronted by a hostile guard at  Immigration, she knows exactly what to do: "Now that  I am  middleaged I have  a slight  advantage in  these  situa­ tions.  I try   to  give  off  that  mixture of confusion   and    unhappiness    that    will

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



make  him  reluctant to  detain me, for  in that  state  I  remind him  of  his mother." As passing allusions to Ibsen's A Doll's House   and   Bartok's  Blue beard   suggest, like Nora  she is seeking  a more meaning­ ful identity, and  like Bluebeard's wives is paying  a  terrible  price  for  her  curiosity and   courage.  Loneliness  is  her   greatest enemy,   but  from   the   lovers  in  her  fa­ vourite  movie,   "Children  of  Paradise," she   gains  an   important  insight:  "You have  no  right  to  be  sad,  you  are  one  of the   happy   ones  in  spite   of  everything, because  someone  really  loved  you."
Weinzweig's main strength  is  her ability  to make  us feel deeply for her character in spite  of the  bizarre convolu­ tions  of  her  plot.  As  Lola/Shirley is in­ exorably   drawn   towards  her   final   con­ frontation with  her  family,  real  suspense is  generated: it  becomes   genuinely   im­ portant that  this  funny, passionate   and  courageous   woman  find   some   measure  of  stability.  Hopefully,  Weinzweig's two novels will one  day  be published in inex­ pensive  paperback editions, so  that   they can   be  enjoyed    by   the   wide   audience they  deserve.
Gentle  Sinners is Valgardson's  first novel,  following his  three  very  successful collections of short  stories. Once  again  his prose   reveals   his   intense    love   for   the harsh  northern  Manitoba  landscape, the setting  of   all   his   work.   His   efforts   to evoke  that  landscape for  his reader  often result   in  descriptions capturing  the  au­ stere  purity  of a world  that  almost seems to  exist  apart  from   the  twentieth  cen­ tury:  "The  town   was  so  still  it  might  have  been  embedded in the clear glass of the   sky."   Unfortunately,   however,  the subtle  approach which served  Valgardson well in his short  fiction is too often  aban­ doned  in  his  novel,  to  be  replaced by a heavy  hand, an  explicit  theme,   and   an irritating   obsession   with    mythologizing every  rock  and  every  tree  in  Manitoba. Gentle   Sinners   is  very   much   a  "thesis
 novel": the  author's chief  concern   is  to convince  us of  the  truth of his  Message. The novel  portrays the  struggle  of  the seventeen-year-old  Eric   to  survive   after running  away   from   his  parents  in   the city to live with  his uncle  in the wretched little   town   of  Eddyville. Here   he  finds life dominated by fear  and  greed:  frus­ tration will  be  his  destiny  if  he  cannot learn  to outwit his opponents. The mean­ ing of his quest  is made clear in numerous passages. "If God  wanted  us to be good," he  asks  his  wise  old   uncle,  "why'd  he make  it  necessary  to  make  money?" Ah, Uncle  Sigfus  replies, "That's what  makes  it so hard.  To  get what  you want  without
losing your  integrity."
Valgardson has  remarked in an  article that  his intention in his fiction is not to recreate the  external  world,  but   rather, to make  conscious  the  internal landscape of  his  mind.   As  he   tends   to  think   in mythic  patterns, his worthy  goal is the creation of  a  new  myth.  He  appears to forget, however,  that  the enduring appeal of a myth  is a function of its elusiveness. Would we still be fascinated by The Odyssey,  for  example, if  Homer had  ex­ plained  to his audience that  it was really about the  integration of the  ego  and the id?  Valgardson is guilty  of such overkill: a  forest  is  "like   some  vast   unconscious mind";  a  mind  is like  "an  endless  maze of  dark   tunnels"; a  bull   is  "like   some great   mythical  beast."  Eric  is  given   no room  to breathe as a  character indepen­ dent   of  the   theme  he  embodies. He   is simply  shuffled  about from   one  Mythic Encounter to the next-"like a defeated king  who  has  sought   and   gained   sanc­ tuary,  he  began  planning his return."
The characters who inhabit this aggres­ sively mythic  setting are  either  very good (Eric,  his uncles,  his  girlfriend), or  very bad  (everyone  else).  Eric's  parents, both  rabid   religious   fanatics,  belong   in   the  latter  category.  The father's specialty is harassing  ice cream parlours; the  mother

137

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



IS  more  concerned with  her  diet  and  six daily  enemas.  There is never  even  a  re­ mote  possibility of a complex  conflict de­ veloping  between  Eric  and  these  human gargoyles.  His  adversaries, the  Forces  of Evil,  are  always  ludicrously  melodrama­ tic. Thus, his final battle against  the town villains  (a dwarf  and  a giant) is curiously flat-we  know   in  advance  that,   as  in any   fairy   tale,   the   Hero   will  triumph. The   novel's  conclusion is  further weak­ ened   by   the  shifts   in  perspective  from Eric  to  Larry, who  is all  too  obviously Eric's   Double    or   Shadow.  While   Eric defeats the baddies and  rescues his fair damsel,  Larry engages  in  a comic  sexual encounter with  the voluptuous Widow Rosalind. The  whole   bizarre   episode  is strangely out  of  place  in  relation   to  the very   serious   mood   of   the   novel   as   a whole, although this momentary lapse is rectified  when  Larry simultaneously sets himself  on fire and  hangs  himself.
Larry's death  is  to  be  taken   (it  ap­ pears)    as  a  suitable  punishment  for  a would-be   capitalist. A  bit  extreme,  one might   object,  but   then,  this  episode   is typical   of  the   novel.   Ironically,  in   his preaching against   the  excesses of materi­ alism and conventional religion, Valgard­ son is equally  excessive.

PETER  KLOVAN


TAKING ON TRADITION

RALPH GUSTAFSON, Landscape  With Rain. To­
ronto:  McClelland & Stewart,  $8.gs.
ROBIN  SKELTON,   Landmarks. Sono  Nis  Press, Oolichan Books, $5·95·
DAVID   SOLWAY, Mephistopheles and  the  Astro- naut. Mosaic  Press/Valley  Editions,  n.p.

POETRY, LIKE OTHER ARTS, thrives  on difficulty.  The alliance of print   and   the Canada  Council, some  public  outcry   to
 the  contrary, has  not  made   poetry   the easiest   of  literary  vocations.   There   re­ mains,  for  example, the  difficulty  of  rec­ onciling a poetic  tradition that  is funda­ mentally anti-democratic  with  the  need to  be accessible  in  an  age  when  democ­ racy is the official faith, unless one adopts Graves's solution of  deciding that  democ­ racy  is, poetically speaking, an  aberation. There  is   an   ancient  conflict    between those who hold  that  poetry  must  preserve  its esoteric core, or  degenerate into  mere rhymed  prose,  and   those  who  are   blas­ phemously  devoted  to  making  the  eso­ teric  exoteric.
The  three    poets    here    reviewed    all
wrestle   with   this   demon,  and   win,   at least  on  points.  Skelton   strives  to  make the tradition speak  a language really used by men.  Solway  puts  his considerable mastery   of  the  tradition's more  difficult forms   at   the   service   of  an   intelligent, exoteric realism.  Gustafson, inimitably, makes  the conflict  seem irrelevant: he re­ casts  the  tradition.
Skelton writes with  Robert Graves per­
petually looking  over  his shoulder. Loyal to The Theme, he strives  to tell  us, in translucent language, what  it's  about. In Timelight  ( 1974), the  continuity of  the poetic   tradition is  resolutely   asserted:

We change little but names
and accidents.
We fall
upon one earth
and  with  one mouth  applaud
one  harvest  ...
("Burning Sticks,  Mallorca")

Skelton's  "Virgin   of   Torcello"  is   the White  Goddess in her  maiden  phase,  but the  poet's  willing-unwilling worship  is tainted by too many  mental reservations: "I find  I almost  kneel." The poem  ends weakly on the unhappy, self-conscious, rhythmically uncertain phrase  "of our disquietude."  Such    closures   invite   the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



reader's sympathy, not  assent; they  seem trapped in  the  esoteric,  but  wanting out. In  his   new   volume,   Skelton   escapes more  successfully.  The poems  of   Land­ marks,  unusually   expressive   of    the  haunted  glooms   of   Vancouver   Island, have  no embarrassing  man-observes-him­ self-observing   gentility;  they   are   clean­  lined,  pared,  sometimes chilling in  their open-eyed  submission   to  the  genius  loci. Skelton's   genius   is  not   the   mossy,  life­ spawning one  of Roethke, nor  the atavis­  tic,  blood-rhythmic  one  of  Susan   Mus­ grave,    though   it   occasionally  touches both, but  a  shamanistic,  unheimlich genius,  caressing   the   invader's  mind   as Conrad's Kurtz was  caressed   by  Africa. Roethke  wrote   in   the   forties   of  "The feeling  that  one  is on  the  edge  of  many things: that  there  are  many  worlds  from which  we  are  separated by only  a  film" (Straw  for the  Fire,    972). At  his best,
Skelton  voices this  feeling:

Up  from  the  earth
a voice  that is not  mine
because encountering  me, and  yet  is mine
because possessing me,
is making words
within the  quiet ... and   the  quiet,
like  a sea-shell, holds
the  hush  and   roar
of other tidal voices
from  within or from  without, from  far
dark history or
from  hesitant tomorrows,
as  I listen. . . . 	·("The Visitant")

As a "private" language, aimed  at  public utterance, such  shamanism works  in  this poem  and  some  others -notably  "Invo­ cation" and  "Waiting"-but more  satis­ fying  is  a  longer   poem   that  evokes  the "dark  history" of  the  West  through the  dramatic  treatment of  an  actual event,  "The  Emissaries." Based  on  the  meeting  of  Juan Perez  and   the crew  of  the  San­  tiago with  the  Haida of  the Queen Char­ lotte  Islands in  I774, it  achieves  a  com-
 passionate  simplicity  that,  avoiding prop­ aganda and  bitterness, leaves  the  ironies of  our  dark   history   to  speak  for  them­ selves. "Landmarks," the last poem in the collection,  records  a more personal search for  remembrance of  things  past  that  at­  tempts,  however,  to be emblematic in the manner of  Frost's  "Directive." Its   ges­ tures  towards  the "worlds from  which  we are separated by only a film" are hesitant, frustrated  once  more  by  that   peculiarly Anglo-Saxon inability  to love, worship  or even  act  without some  mental  holding­ back. If rapture is out  of place before  the Virgin of  Torcello, how can  it not  be out of  place on Vancouver Island?
I tell myself  that these
are  the  nineteen seventies
and  there  are  no  mysteries left.
The  poem is too honest  for its own  good, the  admissions  of incompleteness too dis­ armingly   literal,   the  measured  dimeters and  trimeters colourless  rather  than   pel­ lucid.
David  Solway's collection, with  less thematic  unity    than    Skelton's,  has   a richer  variety  both  of form  and  tone.  If The  Egyptian Airforce   was  sometimes harshly demotic, Anacrusis  occasionally precious,  Mephistopheles and  the  Astro­ naut  has  a  technical virtuosity  and ima­  ginative  range  that  wholly  lay  the  ghosts of  these  earlier   selves. A  kind  of  ottava  rima  in "Penelope" and  "The  Crucifix," blank  verse in "Cressida's Letter to Troi­ lus," villanelle  in "Corinthians," rhyming couplet  in  "Scholar and  Gardener" and  "Erlebnis" -each is used with a deftness  that  never becomes  merely  slick.
"Penelope" revisits  the  topos  of  Odys­ seus' return   (the  basis    of   a   poem­ sequence  in Paximalia) with  a  new  twist on  marital fidelity.  The  Cressida   poem, working  forward from  Shakespeare's in­ sights, mercilessly dissects Troilus's insup­  portable courtly loving, which  Cressida  is made  to see is a  kind  of violence  against her:

139

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



... in  the  rigid  innocence and   rule of a  utopian imagination
I saw  the  mortal enemy  of our  kind.

A neo-Elizabethan wit distinguishes "Love's Particulars," "Statues," and   the poem  beginning "I said, there's no priva­ tion  in her  sight"; and  Solway  the clear­  eyed realist, it's good to see, is still around, in "Manuel" and  the devastatingly accur­ ate  "Empire's  End." The  title  sequence, which   ends  the  volume,  is  showier;  as recherche at times as Anacrusis, but  with compensating flashes of the satiric scalpel, probing our  ersatz  nirvanas:
Smug as  alpaca, and  not  to  be  trifled   with, Sri  Sanskrit of  the  Orient Welkin glides  ...
0 metaphysician of  tea,  freak  of sandalwood, mayor of Katmandu,
pale   seminarian, limp   catamite  of  bodiless
gods,
Celestial Sahib of  Interior Kitsch, Nabob of  Chic,
nibbling his  verses  of empyrean blue  ...
("As  Buddhist Poet")

Solway's  is an intelligent, articulate voice. Gustafson possesses an astonishing com­ mand   of   allusion    and    of   unfamiliar thought  forms.  He   turns   the  earth  up­ wards   for   our   inspection,  with   a   self­ effacement and  ironic  grace  no romantic could   achieve.  Unromantically,  he  will not  avert  his  eyes from  civilization's vul­ garities  and  atrocities to  botanize  in  the
woods,  and   he  admits-heretical  con­ fession  - that   for   all   human  nature's grandeur, people,  as people, are too often flawed  and   unlovable. But  he  avoids  a monkish contemptus mundi. "People aren't worth   the  world," as  he  contem­ plates  the  Parthenon-but  the world  we don't deserve  is still a world made  by our own  better  impulses,  very much  a human world, its cathedrals and symphonies  har­ monizing nobilmente, not  dumb  nature's holy  plan.  Humanity is  the architect, hu­  manity also the  vandal:
 And  willows  man bequeaths and  bungles!
(Fire  on Stone, 1974)

Atrabilious as Swift  when  there  is need, Gustafson engages   us  with  a  metaphysi­ cal  pleasure in  the  unexpected but  exact  word.  (How  else  describe  the  Parthenon at   evening,  elevated  in  its  own  sphere  above  Athens, but  as  "acronychal"? So Shelley, describing his Greek  Temple: "upaithric.")  Only  the  learned in  me a­ physics  know  how  felicitous  the  matenal world   really   is:    so,  in   Gradations   of Grandeur   ( 1979), the  categorical "Un­ heard music  isn't  sweeter," and  the  con­ stant  delight in words,  those sensuous  en­ tities   which   leap   the   gap   between   the tangible and the  noetic.
Only   the   irredeemably romantic  (or blinkered  pious)    could   refuse   to  enjoy Landscape  With Rain.  With  less instant profundity than  Soviet  Poems, less matey vernacular than   Fire on Stone,  it  excels them  in  economical allusiveness  and  ma­ ture,  dense-packed metaphysical wit. The  God-hunger is there  in the  title sequence,  and  still  more  critically  regarded by the pagan-or  the   advocatus   diaboli-in Gustafson. God? -We   can't  make   do with  one   who  is  before   all  worlds,   the philosopher's  First  Cause; we must  have  one  we can smell  and  taste.

Distance is for  the  birds.  What We want's someone close  to  nail To a cross,  Orpheus out  of Hell No looking back,  or  Moses  soaking His  feet  following a  hard  pull
Up  and  down Sinai, not  pulsars
Pulsing in  space.
("Ramble, On Intimacy")

Jesus?-The hubristic desire for our own immortality  has  caricatured  him  into   a God-figurehead.
Enough that  there he  hung ...
... The rest,  the  god Business, is human need.	To   defeat Death.	That got,  we  can  get  on
With  cruelty  . . . 	("Good Friday")

The Parthenon.
Wars   blew  it  up.
 Men  with  their damned
What  wigs
 
Heaven?-Who  would   want   one   that


140

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



wasn't subcelestial, recognizably a product of human, not  divine,  aesthetics?
What
Shall I plump for?   Abstract premises
Or  interruptive stardom, buttresses Butting roofs  whose  inside  glooms Hold  fragilities of  colour?
("Heaven Is  Difficult")

-lines  demonstrating several  times over Gustafson's mastery of the  heuristic pun. (They reveal  too, though one  would have to  quote   the   whole   poem   to  show   it, highly   skilled   rhyming:   wishes-edifices­ premises,  vacuums-conundrums-glooms.) One   never   feels,   as   occasionally  with Skelton  and  Solway,  that  a verbal moun­ tain  is  being  made out  of  a  conceptual molehill.
"Country   Matters,"   the    fourth    se­ quence in  the  volume,  takes  us to Frost's  country rather than   Roethke's.  There is something  of  Frost   in   the  ironic-retro­ spective    "Of    Indelible   Water-Barrels," and  in "Dirge for Gardens" and  "Objec­ tions,"  nature  turns  an  impertinent ques­ tion  back  upon  the speaker. "Lamp-Bulb for  the Corner" exquisitely senses its way around   love's   duality-love's self-suffi­ cient  glow, that  thrives  on darkness. The  poem   has   a   mock-innocent  scepticism that  is characteristic of Gustafson's fond and  mischievous  way  with  myth:

That myths  about can  have  light, The man  in  the  Hydro's hoist  bucket Replaces the  burnt-out bulb
In  the  bracket on  the   telephone  pole
At  the  top  of  the  hili  beside  the  lake, The bulb  dead for  weeks  so that Venus Up   over   the   winter equinox
Like  a  dazzling chip of  diamond  never
Shone so brazenly, Helen
On  her  fur  rug  waiting for  Paris
Never  as  dazzling to  the  boob.

Venus's  acolytes   are   deprived  of  their handy  dark  corner, now  lit  by the  bulb's "Jaundiced /  Search-beam," a  less than rosy dawn  for that  "world well lost." Multiple ironies are expertly handled, images  fused.
 In "Brief Colloquy the Day After Mid­ summer" the  mischief  gives  way  to  the perennial    problem   of   the   mythically­ literate  poet,  what   to  make  of  a  dimin­  ished  thing.

Empties
in the groves goatfoot-trod ...

But pollution is merely  the symptom,  not the cause, which  goes deep  in human  na­ ture: a  self-poisoning  self-hatred,  of which  myth  itself  is disconcertingly pres­ cient.  Our   failure  is already   defined  by Adonis's:

He  refused   to  fuck
Aphrodite.   Could we lament for  that?

The  fifth  and  last sequence  will be the one many readers turn  to first, the travel­ ler-Gustafson, casting  a cold eye on mag­ nificence  and   (again)  on  pollution:

Yesterday's soaked news  floating
Where Byron  swam  and  Browning loved.
("At the  Ca'Pesaro")

The   Shelleyan  ruins-of-empire  theme   is well  exploited  in  six  "Persian  Poems," but  Greece  is  still  the  real  focus  of  his "Pound-like journey  through the past" (Wendy  Keitner, "Gustafson's Double Hook,"  Canadian  Literature, no. 79). Greece  calls  out  more  of Gustafson's powers,  its  gods  being  of flesh, not  mar­ ble,  its  sensuous   world  prolific  of   para­ digms. The southern tip  of Attica  is still sacred  to turbulent  Poseidon, rather than  to pragmatic Athene:  Gustafson's prayer  there  is of a Yeatsian virility, and  a clas­ sical pungency:

May
Mariners of worth, simplicity and  silence Pass  by promontories difficult with  trouble And  sadness gracefully. This  suppliance
0 Earth Shaker, Poseidon, from  one
Who  hates people, loves  humanity.
("Sunday at Sounion")

Determinedly   provincial   minds    will miss the  "Canadian"  Gustafson of  Cor­ ners in  the  Glass, but   those  who  have

BOOKS IN REVIEW



followed his physical and metaphysical voyages  with  increasing  excitement  will not  be disappointed in this collection.  An exact  contemporary of  Klein  and  Live­ say,  Gustafson now  surely  joins  them  in the  first  rank  of Canadian  poets.

ANTHONY  J. HARDING


WRITING AS TRANSLATION

FRED CANDELARIA, Foraging. Intennedia, $3·95·
STEVE   MCCAFFERY,    Intimate Distortions:   A Displacement  of Sappho. Porcupine's Quill,
$5·95·
JILL ROGERS,  Alternate Endings. Sono  Nis, n.p.
ANDREW  suKNASKI, East  of  Myloona. Thistle- down, $r4.oo;  pa.  $6.gs.

THE POSSIBILITIES OF TRANSLATION have been   increasingly  noticed   by  Canadian poets  in  the  last  decade,  particularly  be­ cause   of   the   persistent   experiments   of Steve  McCaffery. If poetry is neither mir­ ror nor lamp, but a transforming, a carry­  ing over from  one language (or medium) to another, then  it  may  be more  demon­ strably   dependent   on   its   sources,   and more  mechanically generated; poets  will show  more  awareness of  the  limitations of  their own  personal  language, and  of the  continually changing nature of  lan­ guage itself. In an eloquently personal discussion  of  translation in  Ellipse  Num­ ber  2 I, Doug  Jones  reminds  us,  through paraphrasing George  Steiner's   After  Babel, that   "translation  ... is  part   and parcel  of all discourse,  that  between  lan­ guages  being  in no way essentially differ­  ent   or   more   problematical  than    that  which  takes  place  within  a language.... Every  speech  act  moves  away  from  the conventional norm  towards a particular dialect, slang,  jargon  or ideolect."
Only   in   this   very   broad   sense  does
"translation" describe  three  of these slim


142
 books  of  poetry. Nevertheless, to  discuss them  in  this  framework does  help  to  in­ dicate the  degree   to  which  McCaffery's Intimate   Distortions  stands  out   for   me among some  dozen  new  books  of  poetry  I've    just   finished   reading.  Jill   Rogers'  first   book,  for  example,  transforms  her thoughts into the most familiar dialect  of contemporary  poetry: simple  vocabulary in  short,  staggered lines.  Alternate  End­ ings  might  be  translations  of  Atwood; many of the  poems  concern  relationships between   men  and  women,  and  the  poli­ tics of power  in  them :

when I get  to  my favourite place
I find  you already there this  is upsetting
you  are  evading my  rules soon  I may  be forced
to  turn you  back into a  myth

This  opening stanza   of   "Playing  with Fire" is representative enough: it is neither anecdotal nor dramatic, yet its laconic coolness  works  to suggest  the  texture of a complex relationship. The  third   line  is sufficiently  understated and  isolated  to startle the  reader with  the  implied  "set­ up"  in  "upsetting." The   subdued  voice, clearly  in  control of  language,  threaten­ ing  to turn  the partner from flesh to illu­ sion,  makes  this  a  worthwhile first  book. If Rogers  can  add  to  her  control of  the familiar more  of  a  disorienting perspec­ tive  revealing the  unfamiliar, she  could emerge   as  a  poet  of  memorable  reson­ ance.
Fred  Candelaria's poetry  is more  given to   translating  objects    in   the    physical world,  than  emotional abstracts and  sex­ ual  politics.  Ideas   are   found   in  things; therefore,  "inventory,"  as  one  poem   is titled,   better   describes   his   poetry   than  "translation":

There's a  clean   desk,  an  empty chair, one  scoured wastebasket, a bare  bulb, and always
the  dirt   under my  fingernails.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



This   form   of  poetry   can,  of  course,  be every  bit  as conventional and   tyrannical as the  Petrarchan sonnet. And  it may de­ mand  more  invention than  the sonnet  to make  it  new.
In  three  earlier books  of  poetry  Can­
delaria showed   his  interest, more  expli­ citly than in Foraging,in translations from symbolic   language  to   aural   language. Liturgies   ( Sono   Nis, I 975)   uses  many musical   forms   as  models,   and   Passages ( Intermedia, I  97 5)   includes four of Candelaria's   original  musical    composi­ tions.  While  the  new  collection does  not show   any   significant  advance   on   the earlier  volumes,  it does  find  its strongest,  tensest  poems  where  the  itemizing of the poet's  world   is  extended  and   deepened by the sound  of the words  themselves.  As he  writes  in "ars longa":

sometimes it  seems language  knows
what's best for  rhymes
poems  or dreams
chimes tolling time
as  fears ring  years-

The poems  which   follow  this  advice­ and  I don't think  "inventory," or several like it, do-resound with "Stone Sounds," which   let   the   "sounds . . .  around  the mind" reveal  the difference between  brick and  stone. The opening section  of "Surf­ Ice" (the  title  itself  a  revealing play  on sound)  shows  the  care  with  which  Can­ delaria can  develop short-line,  epigram­ matic   poems   by  listening to   what   the "language knows":

uncertain fogs unlike  our  dark drifts
snows  or desert dunes
the  winds  move
that were  here (that were  her) now  are  gone.

Andrew Suknaski is  another poet  for whom  sound  is of special  importance, al-
 though not  because  he  is likely, as  Can­ delaria is, to let sound  patterns determine what  is appropriate. Suknaski, as I noted reviewing   The   Ghosts  Call   You   Poor here   recently,   is  very   sensitive   to   the nuances  of  speech  which  reveal  person­  ality,  and especially skilled  at  transform­ ing his recognition into  the printed word. Suknaski  has  already made  an impressive and  influential contribution to Canadian culture. Suknaski-to borrow  again  from Jones' essay on the subject-translates voices so  that   the  forgotten  people  who share  this land  "may  exist," and  also may provide  "a  heightened and  more  articu­ late  sense of our  own  identity-of  one's self and  the  other."
East of Myloona  began  with  the  Ber­ ger Report: "I read  it twice. Fell  in  love with   the  voices:   people  speaking  about
the meaning of home,  land,  kinships,  and so many  aboriginal things." After  tra­ velling  to the  North to meet  these people Suknaski  made these recordings, these translations, of their  voices. In his Fore­ word  he  apologizes   for  the  "vague and brief  knowledge  of  a  few  Northern friends" from  which  the  poems  grew. Unfortunately, the entire  book is affected by the poet's own sense of the relatively hurried and  superficial nature of  his  en­ counters. There's  a  touch   of  moralizing grimness    in    most    of   these   poems -
"OLIVER  POWDER  I against   urban
lifelessness  I diffusing  from   the   south"
-which originates in  the  visitor's  view­
point. The aggressive and nearly random capitalization reinforces, typographically, the  sternness  of  the  book.  Suknaski   has had  little   time   to  see  the   joys and   hu­ mour  which  provide such  effective  coun­  terpoint in  Ghosts  and  Wood  Mountain Poems. Suknaski's ear for voice and  anec­  dote  has  not  disappeared,  but  his  sense of  poetic   potential   is   missing.   East  of Myloona   continues  his   contribution  to cultural  understanding,   but   too   often

143

BOOKS IN REVIEW



these   poems   are   less  translations than transcriptions.
Translation, Jones  argues,  is not  com­
munication, or  clarification, or  imitation
of an existing structure or text; on the contrary,  like  literature  itself,  it  is  "in revolt  against   any  claim   that   the  truth has  been  spelled   out,  once  and   for  all, that  everything's been said."  Thus,  Jones concludes,  "it  is precisely  through  trans­ lation, that  is, inevitably, the mis-transla­ tion,  the  mis-reading, that  the  poet,  the writer,  all  of  us who  share  an  articulate culture,  manage  to   find   nourishment, manage to avoid  being locked in 'the  pri­  son  house   of   language'." Translation  is free  and  playful; it  must,  often,  reverse or  transform what  has been said in order  to  recreate the  truth of  its  source.  This spirit   is  missing   in   the   three   volumes, each in its own way worth  reading,  which I   have   been   discussing.   The  spirit   of mis-translation  is  what   makes   McCaf­ fery's  Intimate  Distortions special  among  these volumes.
McCaffery   has    been    experimenting with  translation for  years. In  Ow's  Waif and  other   poems   (Coach   House,   1975) and  Dr Sadhu's Muffins (Porcepic, 1974) he manipulated various  "supply-texts" so he might  ignore  content and  concentrate "on the invention of the poems' forms as verbal  fields free  of  presupposed   or  pre­ requisite  rule  structures of  grammar  and syntax." lntimat,e  Distortions  is less bor­ ing than the earlier  volumes  because Mc­  Caffery does not  deliberately ignore  con­ tent, but "translates," or "displaces" Sap­  pho by a system he calls "allusive  referen­ tial."
Using  the  Mary  Barnard translation of Sappho ( 1958), McCaffery recreates  the sixth-century B.C. poet at a tangent. Barnard's translation of Number 9 reads:

Although they  are
Only  breath, words which  I command are  immortal
 
Attentive  to  the  echoes  of  these  words, and  following his  own  associations,  Mc­ Caffery  produces  this  interpretation:

the  passing breath from  a comment
in  a comma
steams the  mirror of eternity.
infinite
in  finite.

Here, adding a playful  image,  and  toying with   the   self-reflexiveness   of  language, McCaffery creates a  delicate poem,  and a  striking insight  into  the  self-conscious­ ness of Sappho's  piece. Sappho, particu­ larly  Barnard's  plain-style  Sappho, is an ideal  base  text  for  McCaffery. His  trans­  lations  can  be  intimate because  Sappho is such  a  directly personal   poet,  because  of the sexual  scandals associated  with  her name, especially  because  of our  image  of the  poet with  a  cluster  of young  women about  her   studying and   practising "the composition  of  poetry   and   music."  Yet distortions are  especially   likely  both  be­ cause  almost all of Sappho is available to us  only  in  fragments, and  because  even the  earliest texts  extant  date  from  about
300 years after Sappho's death.
Since  the  fragments of Sappho are  so
spare,   McCaffery  is  able   to  follow   his sense of allusion and  reference  without becoming tedious,  or  unrecognizably  re­ mote   from   his  initial  text.  McCaffery's book   is   bright  with   discovery,   but   its greatest delights lie  in  the  interplay be­ tween  Barnard's  translations and  the  dis­ placements.  Indeed, in  many  cases,  Mc­  Caffery's  poems  stand   uneasily  on  their own. The appealing intimacy of this book depends  on  a  sense  of  the  trans-,  of  the path  from the  originals. The one  serious omission from an otherwise handsomely produced book  is its failure to  direct   us to Barnard's book,  and  the  source  trans­ lations -in  themselves very fine.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Doug   Jones   suggests   that   the   "com­ munion" of translation may be a particu­ larly  deeply  felt  need  in a country where two  cultures share   "the  acute problems  of  how  to  live  and  write  when  you  do not  appear  to  exist."  McCaffery's Inti­ mate   Distortions   finds   existence    in   a Greek  poet  of  2500 years  ago,  distorted and   translated  and   then   displaced. In­ spiring the process is a reverent wonder about  words,   about  poetry,   about   hu­ manity.  A   predilection   for   writing   as translation is obviously  dictated, at  least in  part, by its necessarily carrying us be­ yond  the local  and  beyond  the  nation.

LAURIE  RICOU


FORECLOSURE

KEN  NORRIS,  The   Book  of Fall. Maker  Press, n.p.
DOUGLAS    BARBOUR,    shore    lines.    Turnstone
Press,  $s.oo.
VICTOR  ENNs, Jimmy   Bang  Poems.  Turnstone
Press,  $2 .so.
ROBERT   FOSTER,    Across   the    White  Lawn.
Turnstone Press,  n.p.
LES  SIEMIENIUK,  Almost   a  Ritual. Turnstone
Press,  n.p.
ENDRE FARKAS, ARTIE GOLD, TOM KONYVES, CLAUDIA LAPP,   JOHN   MCAULEY,  STEPHEN MORRISSEY,    KEN    NORRIS,    The     Vehicule Poets. Maker Press,  $4.00.
ARTIE   GOLD,  Some   of the   Cat  Poems.  Cross- country Press,  $2.00.

FROM WINNIPEG'S  TURNSTONE PRESS come books by Douglas  Barbour, Victor Enns,  Les Siemieniuk and  Robert Foster. From   Montreal come  books  by  a  com­ munity of  poets:  Ken   Norris   and  Artie
Gold  in individual volumes  and  collected
with  Endre Farkas, Tom Konyves, Clau­ dia  Lapp, John  McAuley and  Stephen Morrissey.
The Book  of Fall is the  second  install­
ment  of Ken   Norris' "on-going" Report on  the   Second    Half   of  the   Twentieth
 Century. But on-goingness is not a prom­ inent  quality  here,  for in this volume  the poet often comes up against the cognitive  limits  of  his  art.  Concerned  with   fall's  clean  sweep,  he  contemplates this  blank season, working it over and  over: "I hear
myself say  I 'how  long  can  I continue I to  think  about  I one  action,  I of  trees, the   transformation   I  in   the   color   of leaves,  I their  ripping from  the  bough  & I falling  to  the  ground . . .  ?' " He  does
continue  to  think   about  these  signs  of
loss and  change, often  sparsely,  waiting to seize an abstraction before  his topic forecloses. Near  the end  of the book, however,  he  writes  fluently  from  his De­ cember   room,  isolated   by snows  and by his poem-making, but  also affiliated  with other  worlds  by his "touch-tone phone." His  pen  (a  Bic)   and  his  telephone con­ nect in an intricate and  rewarding syllep­ tic  scheme, keeping open the "lines of communication.''
Many  of  the  poems  in  this  group   ot books are  less intricate, yet most  of their authors can  pun  and  play  with  words skillfully.   Douglas  Barbour  begins   and ends his shore lines with a phonological tuning-up, drawing the  sounds  of  ocean and  shore  into  phonetic relations to gen­ erate   a  sacred  sound: "i see  ising  icing
cold  ice sail ... is ice is I Isis is Isis...."
Between   these  soundings lie  more  con­
ventional  verses. In "moonwalks" a frigid ellipsis cuts  close  to vital  parts:
here  tonight:  cold
ifeel  cold     feel  closer  to
moon  than usual
Barbour's "maligne canyon  poems"  are philosophically speculative  and  interest­ ing.  Yet  his "walking long  beach" series seems  to have  been  stopped  in  its  tracks by littoral detail  not  concrete enough to stand  autonomously, and  unincorporated into any conception of what  the  series is about.
Like  most  of  these  poets,  Barbour ar­
ranges  the  sound   patterns of  his  poetry

I45

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



at  the  phonemic level.  Larger  ordering of   intonation  and   stress  are   less   pro­ nounced. One   exception   to  this  rule  is Victor Enns'  Jimmy  Bang Poems-even Jimmy's name  lets  us in  for  some  thud­ ding  rhythms. But  these  ups  and  downs tum out   to  be  pathological, for  Jimmy  is sick, driven  by  his congenital nastiness to  brutish  filth  and  violence:

I'll  kick dogs, I'll  kick you. I'll  not stop
'til  you're  black and  blue.
I'm  fat  and  I'm  ugly
I'm  dirty  and  I'm  mean
no one can stop me
I'm  a hate  machine

Enns mines the same vein of crude that produces the  National  Lamp,oon's satire: Jimmy    Bang   is   a   social   atrocity,  his crimes    spewing    out   over   his   fellows. Here, where end-rhymes and  metric regu­ larity   are   obscene   vehicles   of   disgust, poetic  form  has a moral  aspect.
Turnstone Press presents Jimmy Bang Poems as  Chapbook No. 6.  With  Chap­ book No. 7 we enter  a world far removed  from    Jimmy  Bang's    hate   machinery: Robert Foster's Across the  White Lawn, a book full of humane and self-deprecat­ ing  sensitivity.   Foster's  speaker   goes  to exercise  class,  facing   up  to  his  physical
unfitness: "When I  jump  I my feet splay
like  a  rabbit." But  mainly  Foster   wants
to get  at  the  past,  and  introduces  child­ hood  sequences into  the present.  Moving as the incidents are-illness, death, trou­ ble-the    introduction    is   not   entirely  successful,   for   in   "Past   Present:  Four  Poems"  the   past    is   only   superficially  hinged  to now.
Many of  these  poets  want  to  mention their  childhood-a desire  incidental to their  thirtyishness, perhaps. Of all the at­ tempts  to  retrieve  persistent  memories,  the title  poem of Les Siemieniuk's Almost a Ritual   (Chapbook  No. 5)  is the  most impressive.   Siemieniuk   describes    day's
 end,   when   the   speaker,  then   a   grave child,  would  extract plywood  slivers ("bristles")  from  his  father's hands:

once in a while he'd  wince
start  to pull  his hand away
I would  firmly pull  it back into the light and  continue silently

Unlike Foster  and  others,  Siemieniuk ma1.es no  attempt to  attach the  past  to the present  tense of poem-making; such marked  recursiveness is  unnecessary  be­ cause  the formal  features of the poem­ its  telling   title,   its   locative   details,   its strict    tense -are   enough   to   give   the child  healer  a memorable  context. How­  ever  intimate  this  archaic  scene,  it  ac­ quires  universality  and  public  dimension in  its expression.
Less public  are  the writings  of the "Vehicule Poets."  In  his introduction to The   Vehicule  Poets,  Artie   Gold   warns that  we shouldn't make  too much  of these seven  writers   appearing together:  "Not as  one," he  says,   "do   we  present  our­ selves,  but,  AT   ONCE."  Indeed,  there  may be no unifying doctrine under which these  writers combine.  Nevertheless,  the collectivity of the production, showing  up in some cross-referencing, may  give these writers  a   (false)    rhetorical security,   for they are less intent than,  say, Siemieniuk on  creating the  contexts and   coherence that would  make  their  utterances a less private enterprise. Some  declare frankly that  they  work  for  themselves,  that  they are  self-employed. Stephen Morrissey,  for instance, maintains that  his  poems   are useful -useful  for  "emancipating" him­ self.   His    recapitulation   of    childhood events   in  "Divisions"  produces  a  parti­ cipial  past  tugging  like  a  nuisance on  a reflexive   present  where   the  mind  grows
"passively   aware  I of  its  movements":

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



still,   the   reader  might    look   for   some active  intervention. John McAuley writes: "i  am  a  chain   of  lower   cases,"  and   he appears in other  typographical guises, but there  is little  sense of address  or intent  in these    disclosures.    Claudia   Lapp,   too, writes about "this rage  to dig self/  to dig up   self,"   yet   some   of   her    poetry­
 puddy/
comes  in
I patch his ear
he's  off again/
pit-stop!


CHECKLIST
 




JANET GILTROW

"Horses" and  "Cobra" -does get off the
ground in telling of fantastical animal transport.   Endre   Farkas   acknowledges the  interdependence of  coterie   and   ut­ terance: he  dedicates a  poem  about  his "dry  spell"  to Ken  Norris,  and  in "Shop  Talk"  he  writes   that    "Ken   is  on   the phone . . . to  say  hello   /  &  talk  phone poems."  He  adds  that  Ken  is "a  friend; a friend  is / the  perfect end  rhyme," sug­ gesting   that    the   sympathetic  alliances  among these writers may stand in for the formal  features which  would  make  their poems  more  valuable  to  readers outside their circle of mutual interest and respect.
When   Tom  Konyves writes   his  long poem   "No   Parking,"  cataloguing   end­ lessly the  grammatical and  lexical  possi­ bilities spawned by the  infinitive "to  die" ("To die  in  a  forest  fire,  in  city  hall,  in the   / evening  ..." and  so on,  and  on), he shows the  idiomatic virtuosity of Eng­ lish. Yet  this  interesting demonstration is unsettling in its suggestion  that there may be  no  priorities in  selecting one  phrase rather  than   another, that  a  text  can  do without  an  ordered  hierarchy of  mean­ ing.
It  doesn't take   much    to   satisfy   the
reader's  need  for   ordered,  selective thought. Artie  Gold  has  published Some of the  Cat  Poems,  a  tidy  little   book  of poems   which   are   either  about  cats   or about   things  which  cats  can  be signs of. As a superstructural principle, the  feline idea  not  only  anchors the  poems  within a set of experiences but  also provides for­ mal  purchase on  the  book's  content. And some  of  Gold's poems  show  a  fine,  flip­ pant  unity  of shape  and  topic:
 ROBERT LECKER  and  JACK  DAVID, eds.,  The Annotated  Bibliography  of Canada's Major Authors    [ABCMA].  Volume  One.  ECW Press,  $19.95; pa.  $12.95·
THIS  IS THE FIRST VOLUME  of an  ambi­ tious  project in  Canadian  bibliography. The  completed series  will  consist  of  ten volumes,   five  devoted    to   prose   writers and  five to  poets,  each  volume  contain­ ing  five  bibliographies  of  works  by and  about  Canada's forty-nine major authors. (Margaret  Atwood   will  receive  separate treatment  as  poet  and  as novelist,  bring­  ing  the  total   up  to  the  intended fifty.) Each  bibliography, the  editors  state,  will provide "full  listings of all works"  by the authors selected,  "a complete, annotated list  of  works  on   the   author,"  together with   selected   book   reviews   of  the   au­ thor's  works.  The information  regarding primary and  secondary material  is stated  to  be  "complete"  up   to  December   3 I, I978,  and  updates are  to  be issued  peri­  odically  to provide supplementary entries  and  to list new  materials published  after
1978.
What  the  ABCMA  project proposes  is
badly  needed   by Canadian scholars  and
students,  who  are  obliged  to work  much of the time with  inadequate or inaccurate or  outdated bibliographical information. Unfortunaely,  this  first  volume   doesn't live up  to  the  claims  made for  it. There are,  first, more  errors of detail  than  can be  excused  in  what   the  editors  claim  is a "dependable" work. Secondly,  there  are far  too many  omissions  of secondary ma­ terials  to  justify  the  editors' use  of   the term  "complete" with   reference  to  this category.  And,  finally,  the  choice  of per-

147

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



sons defined  as Canada's "major" authors will seem to most informed  readers  either arbitrary or iodiosyncratic.
Alan  J. Horne's  bibliography of  Mar­
garet  Atwood  as a prose writer  cannot be
faulted for  minor   errors,  and  his  listing of primary sources  is as complete  and reliable as one could reasonably expect. Secondary materials are  another matter, however. He offers the disclaimer  that, because of the amount of international attention given  to Atwood,  "some articles published  in  the  last  year   [I 978]  may have evaded  my attention." Some, in this case, equals  at least six items, and,  of this total,  those  appearing in the  Journal  of Canadian Fiction  (by  Francis  Mans­ bridge), Studies  in  Canadian  Literature (by  Arnold   and   Cathy  Davidson), and Atlantis    (by   Catherine   Ross),  would hardly  seem  too obscurely placed  to have escaped   notice.  Horne's  disclaimer   does not excuse  his omission of  materials pub­ lished before I 978: articles  by Isobel Mc­ Kenna  (Canadian  Literature, I972), Paula  Anderson  (White   Pelican,  I974), David Savage  (Dalhousie Review,  I975),  and   Dell   Texmo  (Atlantis,   I977)   are among    the   more    than    seven   missing earlier  items.
Susan   J. Warwick's  bibliography  of
Margaret Laurence is marred by  errors
both   minor   and   serious.   In   listing   the contents of the  New Canadian Library edition  of   The   Tomorrow-Tamer  and other  Stories  she   unaccountably   leaves out  "A  Fetish  for  Love"; and  there  are two errors and  one  omission in her  table of  contents for   the   NCL   edition   of  A Bird in  the  House.  Errors  are  made  as well  in  the  citation of  titles  and  sources of secondary materials. Once  again  the obvious problem here is the omission of critical  articles: Philip Stratford (Review of  National   Literatures,    I 976),   Zailig Pollock   (English  Studies  in  Canada, I976),    John   Baxter     (The    Compass, I977),  Peter  Baltensperger  (English
 Quarterly, I977),  and Clara Thomas (Atlantis, I978)  are  among the  missing. The serious  researcher would,  one  hopes, have  more interest in these materials than in  some  of  the   snippets  from   Quill  & Quire,   Weekend    Magazine,   and   Mac­ lean's  that   Warwick   has  conscientiously tracked down  and  included.
The  bibliography of  Hugh   MacLen­ nan   compiled  by   Elspeth   Cameron  is both  inaccurate and  puzzling.  There are at  least  sixteen  errors  and  omissions  evi­ dent  in  the  citation  of  titles,  of  volumes  and   page  numbers,  of  dates  of  publica­ tion,  and  of  the subsequent reprinting of secondary  materials in  other  collections. And  once  more  the  listing  of  secondary materials  is  far   from   "complete." Ten items,  from  the  periodI 968-78, seem  to have    escaped     her    notice:    Kathleen O'Donnell   (University of  Windsor   Re­ view,   I968),    Tom   Marshall   (Quarry,
I 968) ,   Ronald   Sutherland    (Canadian
Literature, I969),  J. Clark   Wilson  (Lit­ erature and  Ideology, I 972),  Gillian Duran  (Literature and  Ideology,  I 973),  Isobel  Bassett  (Journal  of Canadian Fic­ tion,    I973),    Catherine    Kelly 	(Ariel, I975), Robin Mathews (Studies  in Can­ adian  Literature,  I 976),   David   Staines (Mosaic, I978),  and  Ted  Blodgett  (Can­ adian Review  of Comparative  Literature, I978). By  this  point   the  editors'  claims for   the   ABCMA  are   starting  to  sound rather  hollow.   Yet   in   Cameron's  case none  of  the  omitted titles  is unknown to her: all  of  them  appear in  "A  MacLen­ nan   Log,"   which   she  published  in   the Journal of Canadian Studies,  I4  (Winter
I 979-80). There she stated that  a "fuller version" of  her   bibliography  would  ap­ pear  in  the  first  volume  of  ABCMA;  but the  version   appearing  there is obviously not  fuller.  Furthermore,  Cameron's list­
ing  of  secondary sources  in  this  volume stops   in   I 977,  not   I 978,  a  fact   which raises  questions about yet another of  the general editors' claims.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



In contrast to the three  bibliographies already  discussed,  Michael Darling's sec­ tion  on  Mordecai  Richler  stands  as  an example of  accuracy and  completeness. The  number of minor errors is negligible, and  there  are  no  obvious  omissions from his  list  of  secondary sources.  One  good bibliography out  of five cannot, however, redeem  the entire volume.  With  Paul Socken's  treatment of  Gabrielle Roy  we find once  again  an  unsatisfactory level of achievement. Socken's bibliography  can­ not  be faulted for  minor  errors,  and  his listing  of  the   many   articles  by  franco­ phone  critics should  prove  useful to those who need  their  horizons widened. But, as is  the  case  with   Horne,  Warwick,  and Cameron, his listing  of secondary sources is more  selective  than complete. Articles by  Jeannette  Urbas  (Journal of  Cana­ dian Fiction, I972), J. Clark  Wilson (Literature  and   Ideology, I 972),  Mar­ guerite  Primeau (Writers of the  Prairies, I973),    Allison    Mitcham    (Humanities Association  Review, I973), Linda Shohet  (Canadian Children's  Literature, I975),  and  Paula  Lewis    (Modern   Fiction Studies, I976)  are  not  to be found  here. In  addition,  Socken  has  omitted one  of his own  articles.
In   addition  to  the  omission   of  more
than  thirty-five critical articles from  what was intended to  be a "complete" listing, this first volume  is open to several other negative  comments: the general format described   by  the   editors   is  not  applied with  the  same  consistency  by each  of the five compilers; the  lists of  theses are  not complete in  all  cases;  and  the  record  of the  various  authors' contributions to  an­ thologies  is selective  and  sometimes arbi­  trary -Cameron   notes    that   work   by MacLennan appears in  A. J. M. Smith's Book  of Canadian  Prose  and  in  Klinck and  Watters' Canadian  Anthology; War­  wick does not mention that  work by Lau­ rence  appears in  the  same  two  antholo­ gies.
 If this series is to continue, and  if it is to  live  up  to  the  editors' claims  of  ac­ curacy and   completeness, subsequent volumes  will  have   to  be  prepared  with much   greater  care.  We  do  not  need   a ten-volume  set  of  bibliographies   unless they  are  to  be  in  fact  what  Lecker  and David  state  them   to  be  in  intention. As well, a  project such  as this,  supported - as  the  editors  say it  is-by  the  Ontario Arts  Council,  the  Canadian  Federation for  the  Humanities, the  Association   for [sic] Canadian Community Colleges, and the Association  of Canadian and  Quebec Literatures, ought  to be definitive. If it is not  to  be,  then   the  financial and  moral support of  these  organizations should  be channelled in more  useful directions.
Researchers and  critics  will  find  that this proposed  series, even if the quality of individual volumes  improves, presents them  with  one  additional  problem. The editors have selected Canada's forty-nine "major French and  English  authors" without explaining the  basis for  their selection. The result  is a list that  appears at  best idiosyncratic. Bliss Carman and Charles Roberts are included; Isabella Valancy   Crawford  and   Duncan  Camp­ bell Scott  are  omitted. Dennis Lee  is in;  James  Reaney  is out.  William  Kirby  de­ serves  a  bibliography; John  Richardson and   Thomas  Chandler   Haliburton  do not. John  Metcalf  is included as a major writer,  while Rudy Wiebe and  Ethel Wil­ son are defined, on the  basis of omission, as minor.  Sheila  Watson,  Sara  Jeannette Duncan, Hugh  Garner, Yves  Theriault and   Emile   Nelligan   are   also  excluded. Since   it   would   seem   unlikely   that   the editors  could  produce a definition of  the term  "major"  that   would   justify   their choices   and   no  others,   they   would   be well-advised   to  either change their   title or   extend   the   series.   As   the   list   now stands, it is a covert and  unconvincing judgment passed  on  the  whole  of  Cana­ dian   writing -likely   to   mislead   those

I49

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



who do not know better, and  annoy  those who  do.
DAVID  JACKEL

SIGHTINGS OF THE ENEMY

JEFFREY    MEYERS,  ed.,  Wyndham Lewis:   A Revaluation.   MeGill-Queen's  Univ.   Press,
$33-95-

PREJUDICE   AGAINST WYNDHAM LEWIS, which   he  did  everything to  invite,  dies hard   in   Canada. I  remember a   bibli­ ographer  refusing,   while   I  was  editing  Canadian   Literature,   to  include   in  an annual  checklist    of   Canadian   writing  even  the essays in the special issue of that  very  magazine  which   I had  devoted   to Wyndham Lewis'  period  in  the  country. Her  attitude is still  shared  by  many  for whom  the  title  of Self  Condemned  liter­  ally describes  what  they feel Lewis did in that  novel, which T. S. Eliot  described  as "a   book  of   almost unbearable spiritual agony," but  which   many  Canadians re­ garded -and still regard -merely as an act  of  gratuitous churlishness.
Nevertheless, the  links  between  Lewis and  Canada, which  began  with  his birth in Canadian waters,  are still clearly alive, as they were in his days of service as a Canadian war  artist   in  the  Great  War and  his years of poverty  in Toronto dur­ ing the early  194o's. Jeffery  Meyers' stag­ geringly  expensive  new  collection of essays, Wyndham Lewis:  a  Reualuation,  includes    no   less  than   four   Canadians among its  writers  (Hugh  Kenner, Mar­ shall  McLuhan, C. J. Fox, and  Rowland Smith),   though   such   astute   Canadian Lewisites   as  Sheila  Watson   and   Linda Sandler are  unfortunately  missing.  One  of  the  essays  deals  specifically  with  Self Condemned,  and   another  discusses  the long-lost   Lewis  pot-boiler,  Mrs   Dukes' Million,  which   was   first   published    in Canada  a  lifetime  after  it  was written.
 But   Lewis,   more   than   most   writers, cannot  be  localized;  he  has   to   be   re­ garded  as sui generis, the  purest example of  the  cosmopolitanism of the  modernist movement   to   which    he   belonged    as painter and  writer alike.  He  had  no  de­ fined  affiliations, for   he  considered  the play  of  the  intellect  as  oblivious   to  the boundaries of regions  or nations. Indeed, in  an  age  that   tended  to  produce great  enemies    of   the   intellectual  life,   from Bergson    to   Lawrence,  Lewis   was,   as Pound  accurately remarked:  "The  man who  was  wrong about everything except  the  superiority  of  live  mind   over  dead mind, for which  basic verity God  bless his holy  name." So  the  fact  that  Canadians have   written  a   quarter  of   Wyndham Lewis:  A Reualuation  does not license  us to make  claims  for  Lewis  as a Canadian writer   even  temporarily, in  spite  of  the many  accidental links  between   him  and us;  it  does  show   how   broad-even  if selective -Lewis'  appeal  has  been,   for English,   American, and   French  writers also contribute to  the  book.
Lewis,   whom   Marshall  McLuhan  in his   sadly   brief   note   on   "Lewis'  Prose Style"  justly described as "an  auant garde by himself," was in the classic sense a man of  parts:  a  superb draughtsman, a  fine prose  writer, an  iconoclastic thinker of Nietzschean vigour  and  eccentricity, the best  English  satirist   since  Swift,  an  idio­ syncratic  travel   writer, a  swashbuckling autobiographer,  a  vigorous  poet  outside  the  fashion  of his  times,  and  in  the  end,  when    fate   had   stricken    him   hard,  a novelist  who  tempered his  scorn  with  a strange  oblique compassion. But  one  can punningly use  the  phrase   in  a  different way,  and   consider  Lewis's   parts   as  the facets  of his genius  which  were as distinct within  their  general pattern as the  pieces of  a  mosaic,  so  that   any  study   of  him frustrates a method based on the concept of  progression  from  work  to  work.  Each work  demands to  be  considered only  in

BOOKS IN REVIEW



its  own  right,   and   the  changes one  de­ tects  tend  to show  themselves  not  in  any increase  of quality  or  vigour,  for Tarr  in
I 9I 8  was  no  more  and   no  less forceful than The   Revenge   for Love  in  I937  or Self Condemned  in  I954, but  rather in shifting  methods. "Lewis   went   blind   in his   last   years,"   as   McLuhan   remarks, "with  the result that his prose was much changed in the direction of colloquial, conversational narrative." Before  that   it
had   been  strongly   and   rather  abstractly visual,  so that  characters were  described in the  broken  planes of Vorticist painting. This  aspect  of Lewis  was  summed up
in his own exhortation: "Contradict your­
self. You  must  remain broken   up."  And it  means   that   the  collection  by  various hands, each  dealing in isolation with  a separate work,  or  a  fairly  narrow aspect of  Lewis'  achievement, can  have  its  ad­ vantages.  From    the   present   collection,  which  on the whole  is astutely and  clearly written,  readers   of  Lewis  are  likely  to gain  a  great   deal   of   various enlighten­ ment.
The two main  failings  of Wyndham Lewis:  A  Revaluation are  of  omission: the  absence  of any  direct  comparison  be­ tween   Lewis   the  writer  and   Lewis  the painter, though John Holloway establishes the   relationship  obliquely  in   his  "Ma­ chine   and   Puppet," and   the  lack  of  a thorough   discussion   of   his   magazines, Blast, The   Tyro, and  The  Enemy,  and their  role  in  the  literary-artistic world  of their   time.  Among  the   essays  on  indi­  vidual books the most interesting in open­  ing  new  light  are  those  by  Bernard La­ fourcade  on   the   origins   of  The    Wild Body, Alistair  Davies  on T arr as a Nietz­ schean  novel  with  German  analogues, C. J. Fox  on  Lewis'  almost  forgotten travel  book,  Filibusters in  Barbary,  and   Row­  land  Smith on  Snooty  Baronet as an  ex­ ample  of    Lewis'    fatal    compulsion   to make  enemies. Though one of the other contributors  remarks  on   the   fact   that
 Lewis was so masculine a writer  in his attitudes and  prejudices that  women have rarely studied him, there are in fact very perceptive   esays   by   Wendy    Flory   on Enemy of the Stars and  by Valerie Parker on   "Lewis,    Art    and    Woman."   (Nor should  it be forgotten that, despite  her absence  from  this volume,  Sheila  Watson has written   some  of  the  most  perceptive of Lewis criticism.)
Valerie  Parker's is one  of a number of essays unattached to any  particular work, which   serve   to   link   the   more   specific pieces.  The   most  useful  and  original of these are  Timothy Materer's "Lewis  and the   Patriarchs,"  discussing    the   young Lewis's fruitful relationships with  Augus­ tus  John,   W.  B.  Yeats,  and   T.  Sturge Moore,   3lld  William   H.  Chace's  "The Polemics  Polemically  Answered," which is perhaps the best study  to date  of Lewis' political     attitudes    during   the    Hitler period,  so  surprisingly  naive  for  a  man who prided himself on intellectual clarity.  This   aberrant  interlude  produced  the series   of   books   like   Left    Wings   over Europe and  Count  Your  Dead; They  Are Alive!  (so similar to  Celine's idiocies  of the same  period) , which  Lewis' admirers tend  understandably to ignore  and  which he himself later  described, with  his usual honesty, as "ill-judged, redundant, harm­ ful  of  course   to  me  personally,  and   of no value  to anyone else."
So the  Enemy  appears as he should,  a source  of problems, a  pattern of  contra­ dictions, a man  of potentialities that  were never  quite  fulfilled,  perhaps  because  he reached  too  far.  For  E. W.  F.  Tomlin is surely  right  when  he  thinks  of  Lewis  in association  with  his friends  and  contem­ poraries,   Eliot,   Pound   and   Joyce,   and concludes: "But  Lewis remained the odd man   out,   and   his  intellectual  interests differed  somewhat from  those of the  rest, and  were  perhaps  wider."

GEORGE WOODCOCK

BOOKS IN REVIEW



FIDDLEHEAD TALES

Fiddlehead   Greens:   Stories   from  the  Fiddle­ head, eds. Roger Ploude and Michael Taylor. Oberon Press,  $15.00; pa. $6.g5.

FmnLEHEAD  GREENS offers fifteen  stories selected   from   Fredericton's The  Fiddle­ head   (founded in  the  late  forties as  an outlet  for  the  members of  the  Bliss Car­ man   Society).  In   1959  it  accepted  its first   short    story,   Alden   Nowlan's    "A Friend for  Margaret." Appropriately two Nowlan   stories  lead  off  this  anthology; other established CanLit names are Hugh  Hood,   John   Metcalf,  and    (inevitably) Margaret  Atwood.  George  Bowering,  W. D.  Valgardson  and   Joan   Finnigan  are also familiar names; less well known  are William    Bauer,    Fred   Bonnie,    Alistair MacLeod, Cyril  Dabydeen, David  Walt­ ner-Toews, and  Patience  Wheatley-all recent  contributors to the periodical. The  editors   draw   attention   to   the   regional grouping of  their  writers:  four  represent the Maritimes, six are  central  Canadians, and  three are  from the  West.
Nowlan's  "Hainesville  Is   Not   the
World," four  pages  of terse, precise  nar­ rative,  is a perfect cameo presentation of a  classic  situation: a  travelled,   smooth­ talking, "foreign  looking"  boy, manning a   booth   at   a   travelling  fair,   meets   a pretty, naive  country girl  and  picks  her up.  It is a  story-teller's story,  a  rare  ex­ emplar of  how  to do it; its opening para­ graph  and later   details  are  wonderfully evocative of the time and situation. "Life and  Times" is basic,  vintage  Nowlan  in style and  content: a grim yet nostalgic account of a writer's visit to his aged, eccentric father-and to his own  child­ hood -in a small Nova Scotia mill town. Solidly,  artfully done,  it  proved for  this reader a  happy   revisit  to  the  world   of Nowlan's only  novel.
Alistair MacLeod's "The Closing Down of Summer" presents  a team  of expert miners  with  worldwide experience, lazing
 away  the  last  of summer drinking home brew   on  a  Cape   Breton   beach,   before leaving  for  a  dangerous assignment in South   Africa  from  which  some  may  not return. It is not  merely  a "lament for  the passing of summer," as the editors  say, but a convincing evocation of the whole  lives of  these  men  and   their  forebears, a  tri­ bute  to  their  accident-killed friends  and  relatives,  and  a moving  expression  of  re­ gret  about a  lifestyle  which  makes  them  almost  unknown to  their  wives and  chil­  dren. A long,  plotless  sketch  rather  than  a  story,  it  is beautifully, hauntingly  ren­  dered; its deliberate, almost  solemn  prose strongly   suggests  that   MacLeod  wanted to capture the  tone  and  cadences  of  the old-time Scotch  story-tellers of his native  Cape Breton.
William    Bauer's  "What   Is   Interred With  Their Bones," concerning the puzzl­ ing  deaths of two octogenarian sisters-in­  law  in  a  home  for  the  aged,  is  an   un­  common narrative indeed.  It  is done  as
a  report in  nine  numbered sections,  the
first  of  which  is addressed   to  four  cate­ gories  of  those  possibly  interested:   "re­ sponsible  officialdom," relatives, the  writer,  and  "you,  the  casual  reader." Its pretense  of  being   an   investigation into the deaths, prompted by human curiosity about one's  kin,  is actually a  lead-in   to larger  questions of  life  and   death.  Its most  unusual quality, however,  is a mock serious,   philosophic,  often   ironic    tone, well sustained throughout the longish narrative. Only  lengthy  quotation  would adequately  exemplify  it,   but   here   is  a brief  example:

The true  shape of history is to be compre­ hended  best  as  running from   the  thickness of experienced, present event, which may  be grasped  with    assurance and   mental  tran­ quility and officially  recorded, through ever thinning gradations  of  deduction,  inference, guesswork,  until,   as   was   said   before,    the string  runs    out. . . .  Such    residua   as   the following  may  be  regarded, if  you  will,  as visible  knots  in  the  now  invisible thread.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



This  is not  ordinary narrative, but exem­ plary  writing  of a  particular sort, an  en­ ticing  tour-de-force in which writing  out­  weighs  story,  tone  and  craft  replace  plot
-an experiment in  eloquent  prose  too rarely  attempted today.
Other offerings   in  Fiddlehead  Greens are  more  predictable: brittle short  pieces of modem narrative, such  as Margaret Atwood's widely  familiar "Rape  Fanta­ sies,"  which  could  have  been  omitted  in favour  of   work   by   a   less   established writer.  George   Bowering's  "Flycatcher" may  well exemplify "comic insouciance,"  as   the   editors   claim,   but   Cyril   Daby­ deen's  "sprightly exercise  in  West  Indian argot"  is no more sprightly than  its title, "Bitter Blood";  both  are  finger  exercises in  short   fiction.  The good   potential  of Fred   Bonnie's  "Roland Fogg"  is under­ mined   by a  weak  ending and  an  inade­  quately  justified  character  change in  its protagonist.  The   effectiveness of   Joan Finnigan's "A  Flight  to Montreal" is les­ sened  by the role of a wealthy and eccen­ tric  old  alcoholic who  so  dominates the story  that   he  upstages the  presence  and problems  of  the  young  woman   narrator­ protagonist.
"The Practice of the  Craft" eptomizes John Metcalf's sophisticated narrative touch  as he reveals  the  private worries of a  middle-aged Toronto actor   on  tour  in Fredericton. The play  he acts in counter­ points  his own  nagging doubts  about  his wife  at  home.  Efficiently,  dryly  related,  realistic   in  its  apt   details  of  an  actor's  personal  life, this moody  tale left me un­ moved.   Patience  Wheatley's "Mr  Mac­  Kenzie   King"  is  another  well-told   but bloodless  sketch,  an   interlude  of  black comedy  at  a  CWAC barracks whose  in­ mates'  problems, it is inferred, are  trace­  able to King's crystalball communications with  his dead  mother: a wry tale it is.
The remaining stories  are  variously competent and  grimly  effective,  and  with
 the  others,   make   the  anthology on  the whole  worth  reading.
A. A.  MAC KINNON


IN LOVE & HELL

IRVING  LAYTON,   The  Love   Poems   of  Irving
Layton. McClelland &  Stewart, $I oo.oo; pa.
$B.gs.
IRVING  LAYTON,  For  My   Neighbours In  Hell.
Mosaic   Press/Valley  Editions, $12.95;  pa.
$6.gs.

AT AN IMPORTANT  LEVEL, all of Irving Layton's poems,  even  his bitterest  satires, are  love  poems.  A  moral   visionary,   he writes  from  an  overweening concern  for the way the world  turns,  increasingly, out of  grace   towards  heartless   self  interest and  sadistic  cruelty. Sexual  instinct  and creative imagination have always, in Lay­ ton's  work, been  the  means  to power,  the way  of  transcendence and   overcoming and  making   new.  His  best  love  poems, then,  ring  out   their   notes  of   exultation with  the  fearless   touch  of   one  who  has loved  both  wisely  and  too  well. Though they are  often  about  desire  in  the  widest sense,  and   can   be  playful  or  rueful   or furious   and,  often   enough,  slight,   they reveal  this  writer  to  be  a  grateful  and  most  astute   afficionado  of  sexual   plea­ sure.  What  more  delightful content for a book!
While The Love  Poems  of Irving  Lay­
ton   may   not   contain  all   of  his  erotic writing,  or  even,  consistently, the  best of it,  this volume is a fair  sampling, and  a particular treat for  those  who  prefer   to read   Layton   as  the  satyric,   ironic,   and exuberant cartographer of love's labyrin­ thine  landscape. There are familiar lyrics, the early, eager,  breathless ones- "Sac­ rament  By   the   Water,"   "For    Musia's Grandchildren,"  "For  Louise,  Age  I 7." They  hurt  with  an  exquisite  pain  that  is to  be  reverenced   not   rejected. "In  La Minerve," nature and  woman  conspire  to

153

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



strike down  a willing  victim  who lays his gifts  "With a hot  involuntary look,"  on her white table, and whose ribs "most unpaganlike ache  /  With foolstruck Adam  in  his  first  wonder." Sacramental love, touched  with  frost, like leaves curled at the edges, is the  subject  of other  lovely poems.
"I Would  For  Your  Sake  Be  Gentle"
expresses the tension between artistic rage and  blessed harmony, a tension  that  hurls the poet "Sundays against  your Sunday calm." It ends with  a brilliant image  that juxtaposes   the  blinding glare  of  egotisti­ cal  necessity  with   a  selfless  love  which asks only  to  be  made  use of:
It is what  I hold  onto when  madness comes. It is the  soft  night against which   I flare Rocketwise, and   when I fall
See  my  way  back  by  my own  embers.
Similarly,  in  "Berry-Picking," the  red juices staining his wife's lips seem more succulent  to  her  than  poet-husband can ever  hope  to  be. The bright  fruits  com­ prise   her   "unoffending  world."   It's   a poem   of  delicate  gestures,  enriched  by genuinely  ambivalent  emotion.
Customary Layton  postures  are  taken
up   with   customary force-woman   as emasculating  witch,   white   goddess  and fat, fatal spider  whose irresistible  love devours  its mate.  Lust  makes  and  breaks in the same honeyed  breath. Undoubtedly the  best of these acrid  poems is "I Know the Dark  and  Hovering Moth." It is also the most  complex, juggling  in a vision of surrealistic proportions, the impossible in­ stincts   of  man   for   ecstasy,   power   and murder in a materialistic world  teased  by "the   vanishing heel"  of   individual  no­ bility. "Mahogany Red" is a more cynical version  of  Layton's  ebullient "The  Day Aviva  Came   To  Paris."   The   former   is full  of  true,  bold  strokes.  It is a  trouba­ dor's  triumph:

See  how  shapely small   her  adorable ass is; Of  what an  incredible pink  rotundity each
cheek.
 A bas Merovingian and  Valois!
A bas  Charlemagne and  Henri Quatre!
The later  poem merely reminds us of a jubilant past when  it was possible to stuff religion  and  history, all "tombs and  tears" up her "golden rectum." With an air of resignation, it fixes us in the  middle-aged present of  tinted   hair,  discoloured teeth and  "this bitter, inaccurate poem."
Yet,  sour  disappointment is easily  de­
feated in the more recent lyric "Hidden Worlds" that  reveals,  through the  subtly filmic  merging of images,  a  technical  fa­ cility perfectly obedient to the over-riding feeling.   We   are   taken   from   the   spare  architecture  of  November to  oblivion's very edge. The loved one is far away: "A spider's  filament  connects   our   hidden worlds,"  a   tenuous  thread   to   Artemis dancing   and    white    lilac   petals.    The  poem's   wistful   melancholia  remains  in­ tact,  while  deftly  sustaining  the  revelling  deities  of  Layton's  more  jubilant vision. The  craftsmanship and  novelty  in  Lay­ ton's  work  produce a diversity  of reading experiences. His  account of  love  can  tie you   up   in   the   knots   of   metaphysical imagery, or swing you  (when  it's  not  just an  aimless  ramble)  through lines as sure as Lawrence's best free  verse. He  may  be lovestruck, but  he knows what  he's doing. If the   pupil   is  willing,   ecstasy   teaches well.
Heaven  and   hell   are   not   undiluted
blessing and  curse  in Layton's work. He's no fanatical purist, but a realist acknowl­ edging  many   shades   of  grey   while   he damns  and   praises,   and,   like   the   Ro­  mantics, often  adding a dash  of glitter  to hell.  For My  Neighbours In  Hell  either attacks  bluntly  and  brutally, or  conjures with  cosmic  images  of evil that  have  left all  argument to  concentrate on  eleventh hour  shock  tactics.  "Apocalypse," with  its landscape of  despair,  is  a  poem   of  the latter type:
·The  black  solitary trunk
with  its  manifold arms  and   torsos

BOOKS IN REVIEW



twisting  into  the light
squats  like a postcard Hindu  deity.

After   total   destruction, there   is  still  no relief,  for "someone is staring at  the win­
dow   I with   my  amazed   and   deathless
eyes." Unlike  Ted  Hughes with  his apoc­
alyptic  "crow" figure,  Layton does not render up his poetic  consciousness.  When he writes "black," then he is as anguished, though not  as devastating, as  the  British writer.  Other poems  of  stringent, direct warning are "The Lyric," parts  of "Drac­ ula,"  "Male Chauvinist," and "Dirty Old Man," which   turn   the  anodynes of  love and   religion   on   their   falsifying   heads. These  are  not  weeping  poems,  but,  hard  as onyx,  they  admit  that  pity  has not  the power  of plain  talk, in perilous  times.

PATRICIA  KEENEY SMITH


QUIET VOICES

DAVID  HELWIG, A Book Of The  Hours. Oberon, cloth  $1 ·95,
FRANCIS   SPARSHOTT,    The Naming   Of  The
Beasts. Black Moss, n.p.
R. A. D.  FORD, Holes  In  Space.  Hounslow,  n.p.

HERE ARE  THREE QUIET VOICES  outside the  fashionable stream   of  expression   of the violence of the mad artist, dangerous domesticities or the mystics of the breath. Yet  each  has  his own  voice.
Helwig  is gently  persuasive, using lan­ guage  sparely  and  often conversationally. There  is a  certain  sameness  to  his struc­  tures   and   sometimes   the   rhythms   and  figurative  phrasing are  flabby.  Yet  at  his best   Helwig   presents  a  lucid   world,   a vision  that   tries  to  penetrate the  every­ day  surfaces  of life  to reveal  through his sensitive   perceptions  a   larger   meaning which   is  rarely   imposed  on  the  poems, for  they  almost  always  reveal  themselves through  their    precise   details   and   neat turns  of phrase.
The poet  retains a melancholy view of
 the  world: "Dead fish and  birds  I come to  rest  in  the  sand.  This  is dying;   I this is  the  only  omen   we  have." But  this  is
often   subsumed   in  poems  which   try  to mediate between  the  inherent stasis we move to and  our  process of moving  there. The constant onward process  of  change is the  human condition, so that  many  of his lyrics, while they have  a kind of tonal sadness,  express  an  acceptance in  tran­ quilly  positive  terms  of the  mortal  world around the  poet,  for  he  takes  delight in ordinary detail,   in  domestic  life,  in  the flashes of insight  that  break  through the surface.  That makes  the  opening poem, "The Boy Inventor," a strong  beginning, for  through  this  sequence, based  on  the relationship  between   Thomas  Bullfinch and  his protege, the  boy  inventor of  the title,  Helwig  sets  off  the  voice  of  Bull­ finch  in its intellectual if somewhat  pon­ derous  strength against   the  naive  yet in­ sightful   vision   of   the   boy's   inventive mind. The  boy dies young, so melancholy pervades  the account, yet the poem  closes with  an  acceptance  of  human mortality with  the  belief  in  what  it  can  achieve:
"I work and  live faithfully as I can.  I It
is my duty.  I I am apprenticed here." Helwig closes the book with some other
narratives based  on  children's  tales  but
these, in comparison with that  opening poem,  seem  forced   and   finally  alien   to the  poet's  contemplative  awareness.
In  the same  way, Francis Sparshott approaches the minutiae of life with open eyes and  mind,  seeing  sudden   meanings in the everyday  routines of life,  discover­ ing  witty and  sometimes self-deprecatory ideas  within   the  ordinary  dullnesses   of academic life.
Sometimes his insights  are  represented as simple,  brief  lyrics or  haiku; at  others he depicts  small  incidents in  his life  that emerge as off-beat, off-hand but strangely evocative  details summarizing the poet's stance  in facing  the world, as in "Reflex," which  concentrates on the  poet's  way  (or

I 55

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



lack  of skill)  with  a camera. This  poem is indeed  a  camera I,  perhaps the  poet's credo,  for  he  proclaims that  he  relies on simple, straightforward skills, not lenses which  "cost  the earth." But  the  poet says
he has  "never felt  ready  I to give  up  the
earth."  So   his  poetry   retains a  direct
focus without artificial stimulation or ex­ posure: "Fiddling with  chemicals   I  was never  my style."
When  Sparshott tries his hand  at  alle­ gory   and   philosophical  enquiry   in   his verse,  the  poetry  loses its life and  his at­  tempts    at   more    metrically    controlled stanzas  are stodgy  with limping cadences.
Like  Helwig,  Sparshott has  a  longish poem   about   the   life  of  a  young  man, "The Lewis Catechist." Although it has pretensions  towards   Christian  allegory, the poem's  strength lies in its direct phrasing, its straight drive  to present  de­ tail  in  accurate and   economical  terms.
The poems  in  R.  A. D.  Ford's  Holes In   Space   are   disappointingly  flat.  The poet  seems to have  wanted  to reduce  his
view of the world to an unpretentious exactness and brief directness. But in the process  he  has  removed   most  of  the  re­ verberations of language, and  his  figura­  tive phrasing is unexceptional.
In spite of his admirable concern  for reduction  to  essentials,  some  poems  be­ come  repetitive, and  the figures seem  un­ connected to any meaningful pattern. For instance, in  "Hating  Poetry"  the  image of  a  carapace  changes  to  one  of  snow flakes,  the  idea  of  being  drugged   is  re­ peated,  and   the  opening  "blind    with poetry" somehow  becomes  "a  right  note from  the  past" by  the  end  of  the  poem. All of  this  could  undoubtedly work  in  a poem about the inherent use of all senses, their   inadequacies,  the  inability   of  the
 of language come alive on the page. Otherwise, this volume  is the  weakest  of the three  under review,  for it is sadly dull in  a  way  that   the  other two  rarely  sink to, even  though the  ordinariness of  exis­ tence  in  its  mundane  particularity  is at the  centre of  the  poetry.

PETER STEVENS


REPRINTS

Recent paperback reprints include: Ian Adams' Endgame    in   Paris   ($2.75)   and   Jack   Mac­ Leod's Zinger  and  Me   ($2.95), a  thriller and  a   comic   romp,  both    from   PaperJacks;  four
contemporary  Quebec  fictions:   Claude   Jas­
min's  Delivrez-nous   du   mal,   Andre  Major's
L'epouvantail, Jacques   Benoit's  Jos  Carbone
(all  fables of  suppression, from  La  Collection
Quebec ro/Io),   and    Adrienne  Choquette's Laure  Clouet, from  Les  Presses  Laurentiennes; James Reaney's children's  novel   about  W.  L. Mackenzie, The Boy  with  an  R  in  his  Hand (Porcupine's Quill,  $5.95);  and    (under  the title  The  Lure  of the  Wild, ed.  John Coldwell Adams)  C.   G.  D.   Roberts' last   three  maga­ zine  stories, never  before printed in  book  form  (Borealis). In translation-a bilingual edition sensitively prepared by Marc Lebel-appeared Dennis Lee's    Elegies   civiles    (L'Hexagone), with  critical notes;  Lee's poetry, Lebel  writes,  "avant tout  litterale,  . . . semble   dedaigner Ia metaphore  mais,  a !'occasion, Ia pousse  subite­ ment  jusqu'a Ia  parabole."
w.N.






This publication
is available in microform.

University Microfilms International

all-too-human poet  to  make  use  of  sen­ suous  perception,  but   the  poem  is  pre­ sented  in  rather placidly  prosaic lines.
Only   in  his  translations, particularly those  by  Voznesensky,  does  Ford's  sense
 
300  North  Zeeb Road
Dept.  P.R.
Ann Arbor,  Mi. 48106
U.S.A.
 
30-32  Mortimer Street
Dept.  P.R.
London  WlN 7 RA
England





MAILLET & THE PRIX GONCOURT

THE YEAR  I979 WILL GO DOWN  in history as  a  turning point  for  the  Acadians, for it offers  beyond  any  doubt the  most con­ vincing  examples of  their   cultural  rich­ ness  and   vitality.   It  was  in   I979   that  Acadians  from   New   Brunswick,  Nova Scotia,  Prince  Edward  Island, the Gaspe, the   Magdalen   Islands,  as  well  as  their distant  Cajun   cousins   from   Louisiana, celebrated the  three  hundred and  seven­ tieth   anniversary  of   the    founding  of Acadia  by Champlain and  de  Monts.  It was   in   I 979   that  their  troubadours
( "chansonniers") flourished, prophesying,
like  Leveillee,  Vigneault, and  Leclerc  in Quebec, the  coming   of  a  new  time  for their   people.   Also  in   I979,   "Les  aboi­ teaux," sung  and  written by  Calixte Du­  guay,  became  an  unofficial  national an­  them.   It  was   the   "aboiteaux"  (dikes) that  allowed  the first  Acadians to survive in  an  arid  land,  and  now  in  song  they have  become  the  dikes  of a cultural and political    revival,   irrigating  the   "forces  vitales" of  the  Acadian people.  In  I979, Edith   Butler  sang  about her  "Acadie en d·erive"   (Acadia adrift),  the   groups Beausoleil-Broussard  and   "I 755"  played their   Acadian  rock   in   memory   of  the astute  pirate    Beausoleil-Broussard  who legend  says helped  hundreds of Acadians escape  from .the notorious deportation of I755  carried  out   by  Charles  Lawrence. In   I979,  France bestowed   two  honours on  Acadian artists   when   Giscard  D'Es­ taing    personally    gave   the   Louisianian singer  Zachary Richard the  "Grand Prix de  la  chanson  franc;aise"  and   when  the "Academie Goncourt" awarded the  most
 prestigious   French  literary  prize  to  An­ tonine  Maillet. The most remarkable sign of the  I979 Acadian revival  came  in fact from  its  writers,   for  there   appeared an impressive  anthology  of  Acadian   litera­ ture  (Anthologie  de textes litteraires aca­ diens:  J6o6-1975, by M.  Maillet, G. Le­ Blanc, and  B. Emont).
Antonine Maillet has  fast  become  one of the most popular French-speaking Canadian writers. Her unforgettable monologues  in La Sagouine  have  had  the longest  run  of any  play  in  French-speak­ ing Canada and  her latest  novel, Pelagie­ la-Charrette  (literally  translated,  "Pela­ gie-the-Cart"),  will  no  doubt sell  more copies in one year than  any other  French­ Canadian  work   of  fiction.   Pelagie  will also  soon  become  both  a  television  pro­  gramme  and   a  full-length feature. The  movie  will  be  the   most   ambitious  film adventure ever  undertaken in Canada. It will  be  produced by  Rene   Bonniere  for the Toronto firm  Nielson  and  Ferns  with a  budget  of  ten  million  dollars.
Antonine    Maillet  has   met   with   as­ tounding success since  she  left  her  child­  hood  town  of  Bouctouche,  New  Bruns­ wick. She wrote  an  excellent  M.A. thesis on   the   works   of   Gabrielle   Roy:    "La  femme  et  !'enfant dans  !'oeuvre de  Ga­  brielle  Roy."  Her  Ph.D.  thesis,  Rabelais et les traditions  populaires en Aca·die, is a brilliant  study of the  linguistic  and  cul­ tural  similarities  between   the  Acadia  of today  and  the  French Middle Ages and Renaissance. Antonine Maillet has worked as  an  announcer for  Radio-Canada and she has also taught literature at  the Uni­ versities  of  Moncton and  Montreal,  and at  l'Universire Laval. But  above  all,  she has  written   sixteen  books-plays,  short  stories,   novels   and   critical  studies.   In I96o,    she   was   awarded   the    Quebec government's   Prix   Champlain  for   her first novel, Point-aux-Coques. Since  then,  she   has   received    seven   other    literary  awards.  With   one  exception  (Le  bour-

157

OPINIONS & NOTES



geois gentleman, a social satire  of a Montrealer who  dreams of becoming  an English  Canadian) , all her works involve Acadian themes.  The most  predominant theme   is  that   of  the  family  storyteller. Various recurrent  characters have a unique   gift.  They   are  amateur  genealo­ gists or  "defricheteux de  parenre" ("fa­ mily land-clearers").  For such "conteux" and    "radoteux,"   childhood    acquires    a collective   meaning.   Personal   childhood turns   into   national  childhood    as   one traces  one's  history  back  to  the  common ancestor from  Touraine or Poitou,  the birthplaces of  the  first  Acadians.
History   is  yet  another  fascinating theme.  Antonine Maillet  treats  history  in such a way that  traditional heroes are replaced by new ones. She takes great pleasure  in replacing some of the main figures of Quebec history, who in fact dominated history books used in New Brunswick,  by Acadian personalities such as Poutrincourt, founder of Port-Royal. History thus becomes a literary device of decolonization and  demythification.  Per­ haps   the   most   striking   example  is   the attack  on   Evangeline  as   the   symbolic heroine  of   Acadia.   Longfellow's  char­  acter   represents  passivity  and   austerity, while the real Evangelines of New Bruns­ wick, such  as  Antonine Maillet's aunt  or "Evangeline   the  second" in  Evangeline Deuss.e, are  strong, joyous, and  positive­ thinking  women.
Antonine Maillet has done  for  Acadia precisely   what   Jacques  Ferron   accom­ plished  in  Quebec. She  has  transcribed, reconstructed,  and   transformed  history and  legends.  Ferron  often  refers  to folk­ lore  from  the Gaspe and  the  Beauce. He too is a master of demythification. In  his writings,   the   Catholic  soldier   and   re­ nowned   Indian fighter,  Dollard   des  Or­ meaux,   is  replaced  by  the  Patriot  and humanist  doctor,  Jean-Olivier  Chenier. Antonine Maillet readily admits that  Fer­  ron  is the  author with  whom  she  is the
 most   at   ease,   to   whom   she   feels   the closest.
One  of the  most  impressive  character­ istics of Antonine Maillet is her  talent as a superb storyteller ( "radoteuse") ,  both as  a writer   and   as  a   person.   When   I interviewed her  recently   (Lettres quebe­  coises, Fall  rg8o),  she made  it quite  clear that  Acadia  exists  because  of  its  stories and  tales:
I would like  to  state something that  is  no doubt a  little daring but   I will  say  it  any­ way: Acadie exists  because of its storytellers. Let's   take    Pelagie-la-Charrette   as   an   ex­ ample. The most  important  character is the storyteller  Belonie. He  is  the  one  who  per­  suades the  other  exiled  Acadians to go  back home. And  to go  home  means to  never  for­  get.  Tales  ( "les  contes")  are  linked to  our  collective memory, they  are  our  culture. And  we always go back  home  because of our  cul­  ture. One  of  the  key sentences in  Pelagie is the  following:  "And he  dared tell  me  that a  people that  cannot  read   has  no  history."
The folklore  of ancestral Acadia (fiddles, mouthorgans, Jew's  harps,  a  unique way of humming a tune  called  "turlatage") comes alive in Antonine Maillet's works. The rich  legends  of Acadia   (the  cart  of death -"la charrette de la mort";  Cap­ tain   Beausoleil-Broussard  and   his  ship; the  devil   and   his  numerous  manifesta­ tions-the Northern Lights, werewolves,  giant  turtles, fireflies)  are ingeniously in­ tegrated into  her  writings.
Acadia's most  prolific  author is  what one  might  call  a  "literary mapmaker." She has mapped out in stunning detail, in realistic  and  poetic  beauty, the landscapes of  New  Brunswick, centring her  creative eyes on  the  immediate area  surrounding the   Bays  of  Bouctouche  and   Cocagne. Those    who   have   read   her   works   will never forget the dunes, the small natural harbours (the "barachois") and the long white  beaches  of Acadia. In  the  land  of the dikes, of smelt cabins, oyster barrels ("pontchines d'huitres"),  crooked   rail­ fences  and  piles  of  corded   wood,  in  the primitive and  ancient land  that  proudly

OPINIONS  & NOTES



hides the remains of Viking  explorers, Antonine Maillet remains faithful to  the oral   tradition  from   which   she  evolved. The story-tellers, troubadours and "chro­ niqueurs" descended from  Rabelais and his   spirited    Gargantua   are   living   in Acadia and   very  much  alive.  Antonine Maillet has  given  them  new  and  unique  forms,  and  in  so doing,  has  risen  to  the highest   reaches   of   literary  achievement. The  themes   and  symbols   of  her   works entertain while  at  the  same  time  forcing  one  to  reflect  on  a  common ideological  concern: the  struggle of  the  underpriv­ ileged.  In  this sense, the  Acadians repre­  sent all subjugated groups.
The  admirer  of   French   writing    in
Canada cannot help  but  be struck  by the newness  of  the  symbolism   used  by  An­ tonine    Maillet.   Her    figurative   world evolved   from   different   influences   than  those  of  Quebec writers. The  ocean  is the  dominant symbol,  not  the  land   nor the  forest.  In her   very  first  novel,  An­ tonine  Maillet tells  us that since  the first crossing  of  the  Atlantic  by  Poutrincourt and  his settlers  in  I604  (Madame Maillet likes  to  remind  us  that  Acadia is  older than  Quebec by  four  years!) , history  has continually  "put   water   in   the   veins  of Acadians":  "Les  Acadians avaient connu
de quoi, .a travers leur  histoire, se rentrer
la   mer   dans    les   veines"    (Pointe-aux­
Coques). The Sagouine claims  that   her sunken   blue  eyes  come   from   staring   at the ocean,  that  watching out for fish in shallow  water  gave  her  high  cheek-bones and  close-set eyebrows,  that  sea salt is the cause  of  her   hoarse   voice.  In  an  inter­ view, Antonine Maillet further noted that  the  ocean  and  Acadia are  both  feminine  symbols:
Acadia is  feminine,  just   like  the   ocean. It is feminine by its  symbolic temperament,  by its inherent symbolic qualities. Some  nations are  feminine, others  masculine. A  tree  is  a masculine  symbol,  and    the   Qwel:  cois much  more   a  people  of  the   forest   than  a people  of the  sea.
 The    "feminity"  of   Antonine  Maillet's work  is  reinforced  by  the  fact  that   her major   characters  are   women.  The  ma­ jority  of other Acadian writers  also  tend to give women  the major role. It is inter­ esting  to note  that  in contrast men often play  the  dominant role  in  the  imagina­ tive minds  of Quebec writers.
Pelagie-la-CharT<ette superbly  illustrates the cohesive and  representative nature of the writing  of Antonine Maillet. The his­ torian    in   the   novelist   created a   plot founded on historical fact: aroundI 78o, between I 40  and  I 50  Acadian  families scattered  throughout  the   Eastern  Sea­ board   states,   made  their   way  back   to their  homeland only  to discover  that "la  Nouvelle-Ecosse" had quickly  become "la  Nova-Scotia." Approximately half  of the former  exiles  decided  to remain in  Nova Scotia  and  the rest settled  in New Bruns­  wick,  which  was  then  a  land  of  trading posts  inhabited primarily by  Indians.
The plot of Pelagie-la-Charrette has a double  focus:  the  return to Acadia of Pelagie,   Belonie,   and    their    friends    in r 78o;  the  narration of  Pelagie  and  Be­ lonie  the third, who  tell the story of  their  illustrious ancestors. The two perspectives intermingle and   provide an  appropriate mixture of  live  action  and  commentary. And   now   exactly   three   hundred  years after  the  repatriation of  Pelagie  LeBlanc commonly  called  La Charrette, Acadia is in  a  state   of   celebration. The   cart   has started  to move again, but  it is now mov­ ing in  the  new "Acadies," the Acadias  of hope and  survival and  not  those of exi]P located  in Louisiana and  Georgia.
Pelagie LeBlanc was born in the village of  Grand-Pre. Her   last  name   is  one  of the  most common Acadian  names,  and  it was in Grand P11e  that Lawrence  organ­ ized  the  Deportation.  Pelagie's  husband was in  fact  killed  during the  battle  with the  English.  Antonine Maillet transforms her character into  the "heroine du  retour des  aieux  au  pays."  Pelagie   reminds   us

I 59

OPINIONS & NOTES



that  Acadia  has  been  able  to survive  be­ cause  of its women: "Si l'Acadie  n'avait pas  peri  corps   et  biens  dans   le  Grand Derangement, c'etait grace aux femmes." p,elagie  is  a  new   Evangeline,  a  coura­ geous,  joyous and  committed  leader.  She is a realistic  and  believable character, but she is also a legend, a storybook character, a  woman   who  tells  us  that   "le  conte," that   imagination   and   story-telling,   are essential  for  the  survival   of  her  people. For  what  is an  Acadian tale  if it  is not an expression  of  hope  and  a way of living that  transcends the  real world?  Pelagie is an active woman fighting  for dignity  and survival. She is also a fairy-tale character, the  lover of the legendary hero  capitain Beausoleil-Broussard. Pelagie  and  Beau­ soleil  love  each   other   tenderly,  but  be­ cause  of  their  commitment to  their  peo­ ple,  they  are  destined  to be alone.
Antonine Maillet  immortalizes Pelagie and  Beausoleil.  In  the imagination of the reader, they  will  continue indefinitely to pick  up  the  dispersed   Acadians, by cart and  by boat.  And  because  we are  in  the realm  of legend,  they are in fact  "picking up"   the  Acadians of  today   who  live  a passive  "Evangeline" life  and  who  have given  up  hope  of  survival. The  centen­ nial  friend   and   compagnon  of   p,elagie, Belonie, makes it quite clear  that Pelagie­ la-Charrette  addresses itself  to  all  men and   women,   to  all   nations  involved   in the  struggle   for  happiness  and   recogni­ tion.  Antonine  Maillet is concerned with "toutes les balances  pesant les droits  des hommes  et  des  peupls
The   underlying theme of  Pelagie  is  jus­ tice for  the "petits peuples" and  the "pe­ tits  gens."   This  is  why  "le  negre"  be­ comes  a  brother for  the  Acadians,   and this is why  Pelagie's son  proudly  marries  the   Indian  princess   Katarina,  or   why Pelagie  sympathizes  with  the  Americans fighting  for  their  independence.
But  Pelagie-la-Charrette is not a "livre
a these" nor a political  tract.  The  ideology

I Go
 conveyed   by  its  characters is  expressed allegorically  and   symbolically.   Antonine Maillet plays with  the imagination of her readers. One  is continually intrigued for example by the numerous meanings given to "la  charrette." The author uses in  her own  way the  myth  of "la  charrette de la mort"  (the   devil's   cart   of  death).  "La charrette" would   normally   evoke  death, but in the context of Pelagie-la-Charrette, it  does  not  mean   that   the  Acadians are moving   towards extinction. There  is  no doubt that  Antonine Maillet's cart  is the symbol  of  the  Acadians, "un   peuple   en charrettes." And  it does  represent, at  the very least,  the  pushing about of a people. Yet  somehow, the  cart  is a sign of hope. It is not  going  around in  circles.  Slowly, surely,  "la   charrette" is  moving   ahead: "L'Acadie  avanc;ait   au   pas  des  boeufs. Qu' importe si elle anivait en  retard, on avait   tout   l'avenir  pour   se  rattraper." The  original Acadians used to give a cart as  a  dowry,   as  a  symbol  of  continuity: "C'etait  coutume en  Acadie   d'apporter
en  dot  une  charrette a son homme, signe
de perennite." "La charrette" is therefore
an  authentic Acadian symbol of  continu­
ation.
"La charrette" created by Antonine Maillet mysteriously resembles  a  boat.  It pitches    ( "elle   tangue"),  ballasts,   hauls upon  the  wind.  Pelagie  "casts  off"  in her cart.  Two of her helping-hands are called ship  boys  ("mousses") . So, underneath it all,  "la   charrette" is  really  a  boat,   "le vaisseau   du   capitaine   Beausoleil-Brous­ sard." And   captain   Broussard's  ship   is really  Pelagie's cart. Both  means  of loco­ motion   are  indestructible.  One   can   al­  ways  replace a  wheel  or a sail.
Pelagie-la-Charrette is an epic  tale of rebirth, a  tale  in  praise   of  water.   The name    Pelagie    comes   from    the   Greek word  "pelagos" that   means   "high  sea." There will  be  no  shipwreck for  Acadia. Not  if  "Pelagie  LeBlanc dite  La  Char­ rette" has  anything  to  do  with  it!  The

OPINIONS & NOTES



Acadian revival  is at  high  tide.  And  on the   mainland,  the   salmon    are   finally going  up  stream:

Pelagie pouvait dormir tranquille. Son peuple se souvenait de  sa frayere comme  les saumons; et  comme les saumons, il entreprit de  remonter le courant.
DONALD SMITH


ROY'S WEST

FoR  MANY  YEARS   Gabrielle Roy's   fame has  rested   chiefly  on  her   two  powerful novels  of  Montreal life,  Bonheur  d'occa­ sion   ( I945)    and   Alexandre   Chenevert
( I954)  -and, because   of  these   books, Roy has generally been  regarded, both  in Canada  and    abroad,  as   a  prominent Quebec  writer. The fact  that  the greatest bulk  of her  work,  before  I 945 and  after I954,  has  as  its  focus  her  native  Mani­ toba  has  tended to  be  overlooked.  How­  ever,  particularly since the  publication of Un   Jardin  au  bout  du  monde   ( 1975) and  Ces  Enfants  de  ma  vie  (I 977)   the significance   of  Roy's  "western"  writing has  been  increasingly difficult  to  ignore. Roy herself has acknowledged the West
as  the  dominant source  of her  creativity. In  an  essay  entitled "Mon  heritage du Manitoba"1    Roy   discusses   the   shaping role which  her native  province has played in  providing  her   with   the  essentials   of her  life  and  art-a  deep  sympathy for the  natural landscape and  for  all human beings.  Of  the  landscape she  says:   "de tout  ce que  m'a  donne le Manitoba, rien sans  doute  ne  persiste   avec   autant  de force   en   moi   que   ses  paysages"2 ; and then,  elaborating on the "marvelous gift" which  Manitoba has given  her: "y avoir entrevu, toute   jeune  encore, la  disparire de  I'espece  humaine ... et  que  pourtant nous  sommes  tous  en  fin  de  compte des etres  ressemblants.... Toutes ces choses, je les ai  dites  et  redites  et  ne  peux  faire autrement  que  de  recommencer chaque
 fois qu'il  est  question du  Manitoba, car pour  moi ce spectacle  des depayses  qu'il m'a   offert   toute   jeune   est  devenue  in­ separable de  mon  sentiment de  la  vie."3
The  nature of  this  vast  and   difficult
land,  together  with  its extraordinary  in­ habitants, clearly enthrall Roy. The harsh environment becomes  her,  like the desert for Saint-Exupery, a testing ground where the  individual may,  if  he  has  sufficient inner  strength, acquire  wisdom  and  self­ knowledge.  In any  case,  whether he suc­ ceeds or fails in his material endeavours, each  person  engaged  in  the  struggle  be­ comes  intensely  individualistic, and,  Roy shows, exceedingly  vulnerable as well.
Invariably Roy shows her characters embarked  on  enterprises  which   are  ill­ fated   and   frustrating,  and   only   made  bearable by transitory and  usually illusory dreams  of escape  to hills and  water.4  The  overwhelming question, though it is often unspoken  in Roy's western  writing, is the question  asked  by  the  immigrant woman  in   U n   Jardin  au   bout   du   monde -
"Comment  s'attaquer  a pareille   soli­
tude?"5
Roy's passion for harsh  landscapes and for  charting their  impact on  the  human spirit  is everywhere  apparent in her west­ ern  as  well  as  her  northern  work.  Like Rilke  and  Saint-Exupery,  Roy  feels that, paradoxically, the survivors of such harsh­  ness achieve greater health, greater vigour, and   even  greater  understanding of  self
-"Apparemment  ce  qui  ne  meurt  pas de  la durere  de sa  vie atteint mieux  que dans   la  douceur  robustesse   et   sanre."6
Roy's   sympathy   for   the   inhabitants  of harsh  environments is,  however,   not limited  to human beings  only, for  Roy  is very  much   the  ecologist  in  her  concern for  all  forms  of  life and  their  inter-rela­ tionships.  For  instance, in  Get  Ete  qui chantait  ( 1972)   she  remarks: "Mais les plantes  sont comme les humains."7
There are  several   important  implica­
tions  to be  drawn from  this  last  phrase.

OPINIONS & NOTES



First   of  all,  it  leads   to   the   insight   so basic  to  Roy's  work  that  rootless  people are   essentially   as  vulnerable as  rootless plants-and indeed  the  majority of her most   touching  characters  are   rootless: 8 immigrants like Martha in  the  title  story of Un  Jardin  au bout du monde,  or  the families  of all the children, except Merle­ ric,  in  Ces Enfants  de ma  vie, Sam  Lee
Wong  in  "Ou ira  tu  Sam  Lee  Wong?"
( U n  Jardin  au  bout  du  monde) ;  the Doukhobours  in   "La  Vallee   Houdoo" ( Un  Jardin au bout du monde); French­ speaking settlers   uprooted from  the  hills of their  native  Quebec and  struggling to cope   with   the   vast  physical   and   social differences of  the  prairie,  as is shown  so often  in   La   Route  d' Altamont  and through  the  parents in  "Un  Vagabond
frappe .a  notre   porte"  ( Un   Jardin  au bout  du  monde) ; and  vagabonds like "cousin Gustave" in  "U n  Vagabond
frappe a notre  porte."
Secondly,  it is the simple and  touching quality  of  such   phrases,   scattered   pro­ fusely as they are  throughout Roy's work, which   links   her   most  closely  to  Saint­ Exupery-in Le  Petit  Prince,  particu­ larly-and  most  distinguishes  her  writ­ ing,  stylistically,   from   that   of   her   con­ temporaries   such    as   Frederick   Philip  Grove   and   Sinclair   Ross,  from   whom, thematically,  she  is  frequently  not  sep­ arated by any  great  barriers.  Grove  and  Ross, masters as they  are  at  charting the steps  in   the  struggle   for  survival,   both physical   and   spiritual,  on   the   prairies,  tend   to  lack   the   tenderness,  gentleness and   humour  which   are  so  apparent in Roy's   treatment  of  all   her   characters, whether they are survivors or not. This indeed, it seems  to me, is Roy's  essential difference from  all other Canadian prairie writers-with the exception of W. 0. Mitchell in  Who  Has Seen the  Wind, a book  in  which  the same  qualities of  ten­ derness   and   humour  are   present.   The  vulnerability and  sensitivity  of  Brian's re-
 actions to life, for  instance, are  very  like those of Roy's children in Ces Enfants  de ma  vie;  and   the  voices  of  the  wind  for Brian,  and  even  at times  for  his  grand­ mother, are  the same  voices  which  move Martha in Un  Jardin au bout du monde:  "Elle  ecouta plutot le  vent.  Qu'il se sou­ vienne  parfois  d'elle qui l'avait tant  aime,  qu'en parcourant le  pays, en  remuant les herbes,  il  dise  quelque chose  de  sa  vie, cela   suffirait,   elle   n'en   demandait  pas davantage;  que  le  vent  dans  son  ennui
se  console  encore   en  elle  et  elle  en  cet esprit  errant....  Tout a coup,  des  voix,
les unes graves,  d'autres haussees  jusqu'a l'aigu, eclarerent en choeur, comme  si, au dehors,   un  peuple   d'ames chantait  dans la nuit."9
Indeed,  it   is   this   very   story   which shows most clearly  the difference between Roy  and   the  others.  Although the  situa­ tion of Roy's  immigrant woman, Martha, is essentially   even  more   bleak  and  soul­ destroying  than    that   of   Mrs.   Eliot   in Grove's Our  Daily Bread  or Ruth Spald­ ing  in  Fruits  of the   Earth,  Roy's   pro­  tagonist   is not  invaded by the  bitterness which  destroys  these  characters. In  fact,  it is, surprisingly, Martha's failure  to be­ come bitter  in adversity that  turns  her husband against her.  So, despite  the  fact that  Martha is dying of cancer in a lonely prairie  shack,   bullied    and    ignored    by turns  by a harsh  and  brutal husband who takes  out  on  her  his own  failure  to cope with  their  alien  environment, she  retains to  the  end  a  faith   in  life.  She  is indeed lonely  and  deeply  puzzled  about life and her role in it, but  the essential  positiveness of her  Pature is symbolized  by the  way in which  she  toils  unflaggingly  to  preserve the  delicate flowers  which  she  has  nur­ tured  year  after  year,  despite  the  hostile environment and  her  husband's mockery.  Yet  Martha's flowers,  unlike  Mrs.  B <:nt­ ley's in Sinclair Ross's  classic, As For Me and   My   House,   not   only   survive   the droughts and   winds,   but  reappear  year

OPINIONS & NOTES



after  year in greater number and  with re­
newed  beauty  and  vigour.
So lifelike are Roy's  portraits, so accur­ ate  her  impressions  of the  land  itself that  the  reader is not surprised to learn  of her continuing concern with  the  authenticity of  her  "reporting," her  desire to  make sure  that   she  has  not  somehow  warped  the  truth. Indeed, Roy admits to her  pre­ occupation  with   accuracy  in  her  essay, "Le  Manitoba," when  she mentions going back   to  review   the  scene   of  La  Petite Poule d'eau "as a criminal retuTilS to the scene  of his crimes!"10
Gabrielle Roy's   literary and  imagina­ tive   return  in   the   late  sixties  and   the seventies  to the West-the setting of her first  published   works11   has   not   been  a mistake. Indeed, these more  recent stories and  reminiscences of the  West, set during the time of the author's youth,  are by and large even  better than   the  earlier  ones. Her   first   reports  on   immigrant  people and    her   early   story,   La   Petite   Poule d'eau,  though  delightful,  lack   the  con­ tinuous control and  the frequency of  deli­ cate  and  original insights  to be  found  in La Route  d'Altamont, Un Jardin au bout du monde, and  above  all, in Ces Enfants de ma vie.
All Roy's  writing about the  West, in contrast  even  to  her   two  northern and her  two  Montreal novels,  is most  notice­ ably   lacking    in   dramatic   occurrences, with   the   possible   exception   of  "De   la truite dans  l'eau  glaoee" ( Ces Enfants de ma  vie). Yet  although  really  in  terms  of action   and   plot  nothing  much   happens in  Roy's  stories of  the  West,  these stories are   none  the  less difficult   to  put  down. The  characters  are  so alive  and  the  im­ pression of truth is so strong that  these fictional  accounts seem  more  true  to  life than   actual  reports. But   then   we  must recall Roy's contention in her last book, Fragiles lumieres  de la terre,  that,  para­ doxically,   fiction   can   usually   bring  out the  multiple aspects  of  truth  better  than
 a  straightforward  recital   of  the   actual facts  as  they  occurred: "Car si l'on  fa­ brique  dans  le metier, c'est ordinairement pour   mieux   rendre  compte  des  aspects multiples de la  verite."12

NOTES

1 "Mon Heritage du  Manitoba," Fragiles  lu­ mieres  de  la  terre   (Monweal:  Les  Editions Quinze, 1978).  {This essay  was  first   pub­  lished  in Mosaic, 3, no. 3  printemps, 1970).
2    Ibid., p. 156.
3  Ibid., p. 154.
4   One   recalls   the   disappearing  and   magical hills in  La  Route d' Altamont and  "Ou  iras­ tu  Sam  Lee   Wong?"  ( U n  Jardin   au  bout du   monde) ;  the   magical  river   in   "De  Ia truite dans   l'eau glacee"  ( Ces  Enfants de ma  vie) ;  the  mountain which  rules  Pierre's quests  in  La  Montagne  secrete; the  haunt­ ing  river  in  La  Riviere  sans repos;  the  lake which  is  the  goal   of   the  old  man  and   the child    in   "Le   Vieillard  et   !'enfant"  (La Route   d'Altamont) ;  the   illusory  river   in "La  VaUee  Houdou"  ( Un   Jardin   au  bout du  monde).
5  Un Jardin  au  bout  du  monde (Montreal: Beauchemin, 1975), p.  176.
'6   Get  ete  qui  chantait (Quebec: Les  Editions
Franctaises,  1972), p.  18.
7   Ibid., p. 30.
s  This is true  not  only  of Roy's  western books, but  of her northern and  Montreal novels too. In La  Riviere sans  repos  Elsa  and  her fam­ ily,  removed from  old  Fort Chima  and the  old   ways,   are   rootless,   "depayses,"   as   is Pierre, the  artist-wanderer  in  La  Montagne secrete.   Similarly,  the    Lacasse    family    in Bonheur   d'occasion, wrenched  away   from  the  country, cannot  put  down roots  in  the  city  any  more   than can   Alexandre Chene­ vert, in  the   novel   which   bears   his   name.
9    Un Jardin  au  bout  du  monde, p. 217.

1o   Also in her  Royal Society acceptance speech, "Retour a Saint-Henri," Roy  imagines  re­
turning to  visit   the   characters she  created in  Bonheur d'occasion.
u Sketches entitled  Peuples du  Canada, writ­ ten  between 1942  and 1944  and  published in  Le  Bulletin des  agriculteurs.
12  Fragiles lumieres de  la vie,  p.  113.

ALLISON MITCHAM

OPINIONS & NOTES



THE ORIGINS OF "THE HIDDEN MOUNTAIN"

A PROPER APPRECIATION of Gabrielle Roy's fifth novel, The Hidden Mountain, with  its  romance  structure, sketchy  ex­ position,   and   heavy-handed   symbolism, continues  to  elude   critics   of   The   Tin  Flute.  Even   those   readers  who  do  not come to The  Hidden Mountain expecting social  realism  leave it with  a vague  sense of   dissatisfaction,   especially   after    the scene   has   shifted   from   the   Canadian North   to  Paris.  It  is  generally   assumed that   this  dissatisfaction  is  due  to  Mme Roy's   dubious attempt  to  employ a North-woods trapper/painter  as  spokes­ man  for  her  personal aesthetic:  the  par­  able  is not  a  genre  which  readily  evokes willing  suspension of  disbelief.
In  noting the   novel's   dedication   to "R.  R."  and   in  identifying the  painter, Rene  Richard, Gerard Bessette has come closest to accounting both  for  the  novel's defects   and   for  its  more  powerful  mo­ ments:   "Meme  si  nous  savons  que  le peintre Rene   Richard-comme  le  sug­ gere   la   dedicace  de  la   Montagne-a servi de 'modele' au personnage de Pierre  Cadorai, il  n'est  pas  difficile  de  montrer que  ce dernier est  aussi Gabrielle Roy."1
Bessette goes on  to offer us a more or less satisfactory interpretation  of the novel as an  allegorical quest  for  the  lost  mother­ figure who recurs  throughout Roy's work, the mountain and  the caribou both  sym­ bolizing  Melina Roy, about  whose death  the author suffers guilt feelings.
I would   like  to  reverse  the  emphasis of  Bessette's   statement,  and   to  suggest that   while  Pierre  undoubtedly is  meant to represent the author, the allegory func­ tions on yet another literal  level, and  in a most  intriguing manner. The  "improb­ able"   adventures  of  Pierre   Cadorai  in fact   mirror  the   real-life   story   of   the painter Rene  Richard  down  to  the  very
 last  detail  but  one. The  difference lies in the  altered ending to the  story,  that  is to say   in   the   interpretation  of   this   life's quest.  The novel's  difficulty   thus  resides in  the  attempt to merge  the  two  real-life figures, Rene  Richard and  Gabrielle Roy, as well as in  the  moralizing of the  form­ er's  life-story.
Born  in Switzerland in  18gs, Rene Richard   followed    his   family   to   Cold Lake,  Alberta, at  the  age of eleven.  Like Tom Thomson, the  painter whose  work he admires, Richard felt the call of the wilderness, with  its free  and  solitary  life, at   an   early   age.   At  seventeen  he   ran away   from   his  father's  fur-trading  post to  begin   life  as  a  trapper. These   early years constitute an incredible story of hardship  and   will-power:  perilous  voy­ ages, back-breaking portages, scurvy, pov­ erty.   Richard  feels  that   this  harsh   life did   much   to  shape   and   determine  his talents as an  artist-as late as 1939, too poor  to purchase oils, he began  to experi­  ment   with   coloured   crayons;  often   his charcoal  sketches  were  made   on  brown  wrapping paper  for lack  of a  better  me­ dium. These  rough   sketches  remain  the heart of  Richard's output, and  are  more highly  esteemed than  the  later  oil  paint­ ings of which  they  form  the  basis.
By 1920 Richard had  made  his way to the  Mackenzie delta, where  the  trapping was   good.   The  painter  abounds  with stories  of  these  early  years  in  the  North, stories  which   made a  strong  impression on his friend  Gabrielle Roy. On "one occasion   as  youth   ... he  shot  with   his last remaining bullet a large cow moose. Food  rations had  run  out  and  extra prov­ ender was imperative. He merely wounded the  animal. . . . Then, chasing  after   the moose  through the  blizzard,  he  attacked it continually with  his axe  until  he killed it."2     Such  incidents  suggest   a   possible conflict  of  interests between   the  trapper and   the  painter; once  while  purchasing provisions for  a  trip  North  his  eyes were

OPINIONS  & NOTES



dazzled   by  a   set   of   paints,  which   he promptly substituted in his gear  for a few "expendable" sacks  of  flour.   "Je   quitte Edmonton pour  les bois, ... et  j'apporte avec  moi ce  precieux butin.  Durant  trois longues  annees   j'en  caresse  les tubes,  les ouvrant  frequemment  pour   mieux  con­ tempter la  divine  couleur, mais  je  n'ose encore  m'en  servir: j'attends de me sentir en   mesure   de   le  faire.   Car   je   voulais peindre, bien  sur,  mais  je voulais surtout devenir  un   jour,    si   possible,   satisfait d'avoir fait  quelque chose  qui  fUt digne de   moi-meme." The  trapper   did   not touch  his oils until  his thirtieth birthday.3
At   first   Richard  worked    hard   as  a trapper  during  the   winter   so   that   he could  spend  his swruners painting. Often he  would  spend   up  to  six  months  com­ pletely  alone  with  his   sketch-book. Eventually his   desire   to   paint   became even  stronger than  his  love  of life in  the woods, and  in  1927 he left for  Paris  with
$3,000 saved  from   the  past  three   years' work  as  a  trapper. Frustrated with  the
restrictive climate of  Parisian academies, Richard was on the  verge of returning to Canada when  he  met  Clarence Gagnon, who  was  to become his teacher and  life­ long  friend.  However,  he  continued  to suffer  from  homesickness  and  ill-health: a  self-portrait  from   this  period   reveals "un   jeune  homme au  visage et  aux  yeux empreints d'une   intolerable  nostalgie."4
Here   ceases  the  resemblance  between the lives of Rene  Richard and  Pierre Ca­ dorai: three  years  later,  in 1930, Richard was  back  in Cold  Lake   joyously  prepar­ ing  for  another  fruitful  expedition  into  the  North  Woods.   This  time   he  slowly made   his  way   down   the   Churchill  to Hudson Bay  and  eventually to  the  Un­  gava,   a   region   with   which    he   imme­  diately   fell   in   love   and    to  which   he would  return many  times. While  we have no single painting of any "hidden moun­ tain,"  there   exist  vigorous   sketches  and
 oils of the Chubb crater, and  one superb painting simply  entitled "Ungava."
Gabrielle  Roy has hinted  at  the differ­ ence between Richard and the protagonist of  The   Hidden   Mountain  in  her   1967 preface   to  a  catalogue of   the  painter's work on exhibition at the Musee  du Que­ bec.   Discussing   Richard's   decision    to settle  down  in  Baie-St.-Paul, she  notes:
A  present, dans  sa  belle   vieiiie  maison  an­ cienne,  entre   campagne   et    ville,    Rene Richard  est   parvenu  au   troisieme  acte en quelque sorte   d'une vie  riche  en  peripeties, qui   s'acheve, comme    pour   Prospero, dans The  Tempest, dans Ia serenire et Ia douceur, dans  l'amitie et  Ia  tendresse.5
This   shift  from   a  life  of  hardship and isolation  to one  of community and  com­ munication contrasts sharply  with Pierre's continued isolation  at  home  and  abroad. In   contrast  to  the   Prospero  of   Shake­ speare's romance, Pierre  Cadorai  suffers the obsession and  the tragical helplessness of the more sensitive Hamlet:
Pierre felt   that  now  and   forever  his  heart was  knit   in  friendship  to  this   prince -so out  of  the  common mold  and  yet  so like  us all.  Courage, a  certain  noble   indecision  of the  soul-he  understood that  these  things could go  together; he  did  not  see how  they could  be wholly  separate.e

Such  an explicit  and  self-conscious trans­ formation of the contented, older painter into  a  more  anxious and  ultimately self­ immolating artist   clearly  indicates a  de­ sire on Gabrielle Roy's part  to investigate what  she considers  the  real  story  behind  Richard's  success.   In   her   attempt  to record   the  discrepancy  between   the  sur· face  facts  and   the  reality   behind   them,  Gabrielle Roy  seems, however,  to  reveal a  great   deal   more   about    herself   than  about  the  painter Rene  Richard.
The   novelist's   darkly   romantic   con­ cept  of the artist's quest  is evident in  her tribute to  Richard as  well  as  in  her  fic­ tion.  In  contrast to  the  pleasantly crusty image   of  Richard  which  emerges   from  numerous interviews, Roy's  pamphlet for

OPINIONS & NOTES



the Quebec museum gives the impression of a  more  dramatic kind  of stoicism.  In her  discussion  of his sketches  and  paint­ ings she  tends  to focus on "les images  de Ia creation sous son aspect souvent  le plus denue et  Ie plus  hostile:  pauvres arbres  effiles   comme    des   roseaux,    chiens   de traine  quasi  morts  d\ puisement,
bles  cabanes   .a  demi   entervees   sous  Ia
neige,"7   rather  than   on  those  which  re­
veal  "close  to abstract fire and  fervour"8 or the more  bucolic influence  of Clarence Gagnon.
In   the   novel   the   author  has   even
greater freedom to present  the  painter as she views him, and  Pierre  Cadorai resem­ bles Gabrielle Roy  in  temperament and sensibility  much  more  than  he  resembles Rene   Richard. Thus  Richard's  natural preference for  the friendship of trappers to  life  in  the  city  is transformed in  the novel  into  a  real  need  for  total  solitude.  Perhaps the one example which  best illus­ trates  the direction taken  by the fiction is the   caribou  episode:  whereas   Richard recounts the incident almost  with gusto, concluding "Does  that  story make you squeamish?"9  Gabrielle Roy transforms it into  a  powerfully pathetic scene  where pursuer and  pursued become  one.
Such  close correspondences to  the  life of Rene  Richard may help  account both for  the novel's strengths and  for its weak­ nesses. At its best The  Hidden Mountain transcends  its  origins   to  take   its  place beside  another great   Canadian  kunstler­ roman, The  Mountain and the Valley, as for   example  when   Gabrielle   Roy   des­ cribes   Pierre's epiphanic   rediscovery   of light  and  colour  in  the spring,  or  his at­  tempt  to capture in  paint  the  movement of  water.   Nor  should  we  forget   or  dis­ count  the author's desire,  however  quali­ fied in  the process, simply to record  Rene Richard's story:

He  lifted  his head, repeated to himself: "To tell  my  story  ..." Yes,  such   was  the  deep desire  of   every   life,   the   longing  of  every

166
 soul:  that  someone should   care   enough  to recall  it  to  mind  and  to tell  others a little of what it  had   been,  how  hard it  had  strived. So much  commotion, so many secrets  and evasions, all  to finish  with  this  soft  cry: "to tell  my story !"10

NOTES

1 Gerard  Bessette, Trois  Romanciers  Quebe­ cois  (Montreal:  Editions du  Jour,   1973), p.  188.
2    Dorothy   Pfeiffer,   "A    Visit     with     Rene
Richard," Montreal Gazette ,18  April  1962.
a  Rolland  Boulanger, "Rene  Richard,"  Arts et Pensee,  10  (August 1952), p.  103.
4  Gabrielle Roy,   "Preface," Rene   Richard (Quebec:   Musee du   Quebec,  1967),  n.p. For  a  more  complete sampling of Richard's work  see Rene  Richard  (Quebec: Ministere des  Affaires Culturelles, 1978), with  a  pre­ face  by  Michel Champagne.
5   Gabrielle Roy,  preface to  Rene  Richard.
6   Gabrielle Roy, The  Hidden  Mountain, trans. Harry  Binsse   (Toronto:  McClelland & Stewart, 1975), p.  123. See  La Montagne Secrete  (Paris: Flammarion, 1962), p.  144.
7    Gabrielle Roy,  preface to  Rene  Richard.
B  Dorothy  Pfeiffer, "Strong  Color and   Love of Nature," Montreal Gazette, 17 May  1958.
9   Dorothy  Pfeiffer,  "A    Visit     with     Rene
Richard."
l!O   Gabrielle Roy,   The   Hidden   Mountain, p.
123·

MICHELE  LACOMBE


L'HOMME-ARBRE  DE ULA MONTAGNE SECRETE"
LA  MONTAGNE SECRETE n'est  pas,  a pre­
miere  vue,  le  plus  imposant des  romans
de  Gabrielle  Roy.  Dans   une   etude  re­
cente  portant sur  Ia  totalite de  l'oeuvre, Franc;ois Ricard ne consacre  a ce roman
que  quelques lignes  sur  une  vingtaine de pages:

La Montagne secrete, en effet, se presente comme une  tentative de traduire sur  le mode

OPINIONS &  NOTES



allegorique   le  sens  que   Gabrielle  Roy  at­
tribue  a Ia recherche artistique: celui  d'une
longue   marche   vers  un  ideal   inaccessible,
mais dont !'artiste ne saurait  abandonner Ia poursuite   sans  renoncer   du   meme  coup   a
tout  ce  qui  fonde  Ia  valeur   de  son  entre­ prise. C'est  pourquoi toute  la  vie de  Pierre Cadorai, et  tous  ses voyages, sont  l'histoire d'une  interminable fascination qui  le pousse en  avant, toujours  plus  loin,  vers  un  tenne  sans  cesse  lui  echappant.   Ainsi   l'ecrivain  est-il  lui  aussi  conduit   par   un  reve  qui  le possede, qu'il  ne rejoindra  jamais,  mais qui lui  commande   perpetuellement  de  partir.l

Nous  croyons  que  le  monde allegorique de   La  Montagne  secrete  est  fonde   sur
!'image de  l'arbre et  de ses ramifications. C'est  ainsi  un  aspect  de  l'univers  imagi­ naire  du  roman  que  nous nous proposons  d'etudier. II  va done  sans  dire que  notre  etude est diametralement opposee  a d'au­ tres, comme  celle de Gerard Bessette  qui qualifie  La  Montagne  secrete de  "demi­ echec."2  11 est  done  clair  que  nous  nous soucions  ici  d'univers imaginaire et  que nous  ne  sommes   pas  preoccupes par  les insuffisances psychologiques du roman, insuffisances que personne n'a encore vraiment  demontrees  a   notre   connais­ sance. D'ailleurs de nouvelles etudes com­ mencent  enfin  a   reveler   la   richesse mythique de  La  Montagne  secrete.3

* 	* 	*
II y a deja  un  certain temps  que Gas­ ton  Bachelard a signale  une  carence que la critique litteraire n'a  pas encore  com­ blee:

La  vie imaginaire vecue  en  sympathie  avec le vegetal  reclamerait tout  un livre.... Tant qu'une etude  systematique de  ces images fondamentales n'aura  pas  ere  entreprise, la psychologie  de !'imagination litreraire  man­ quera   des  elements   pour   se   constituer  en doctrine.4

C'est  aussi  au  niveau   de  ces  constations que   Bachelard aborde !'etude  des  rap­ ports  esthetiques entre peinture et  ecri­  ture: "croyant que  la  tache  de l'ecrivain est  de   decrire  ce  que   le   peintre  pein-
 drait."5   Ce  n'est   done   pas   une  coinci­ dence  que  La Montagne  secrete, si riche en   images   vegetales,    decrit   !'evolution d'un peintre  que  l'on  finit  par considerer "veritablement"   comme    un    "homme­ arbre"  qui   a   "pousse   en   hauteur"  et "dont  l'epiderme  use,  fendille,   asseche"  ressemble a  "de  l'ecorce."6
En general  la reverie stimulee par le monde  vegetal  n'est  pas, dans  La  Mon­ tagne secrete, une  source  de bonheur. En effet, une fois seulement le peintre Pierre  Cadorai se laisse  aller  a  la  nostalgie  d u jardin    heureux.   Ainsi,   !'artiste  qui  ne cesse "de  monter vers  le  cercle  polaire" regrette  la  vegetation   et   la  compagnie humaine  qu'il   a  laissees  deux   semaines  auparavant un  peu plus au  sud:  "Oh, le beau  jardin  de Gedeon dans  la clairiere, sous la lune, c'est  alors  qu'il  eut  tout  son prix  dans  le souvenir de  Pierre!"
Mais !'image vegetale  privilegiee,  pour ne  pas  dire   unique, du   roman   de  Ga­ brielle  Roy  c'est  l'arbre. A lui seul  il re­ presente   souvent  toute   la  realite  de  la douloureuse condition  humaine:    "On sentait  que  la  vie de  cet  arbre  etait  une folie  comme   apparaissent  folie   tant   de nos entreprises." Ainsi  le  travail  du  vrai peintre n'est  pas  de  reproduire  mais  de lire,  traduire et  ecrire   l'ame  de  l'arbre puisque: "La  detresse   de  l'arbre vivant  etait   angoissante, mais  plus angoissante encore  celle de l'arbre fixe sur le papier." Des exemples  comme ceux  choisis plus haut  ne sont pas rares. En effet, ce roman  de  222 pages  contient  plus  de  250 allu­  sions directes  ou  indirectes a !'image   de l'arbre  que   l'on   peut    bien   considerer comme  une  metaphore obsedante. D'ail­ leurs  les  figures  basees  sur  la  repetition constituent un  procede generateur duro­ man   dont    les   structures   peuvent  etre clairement  analysees.7    Mais  "la   descrip­  tion des formes  est plus  facile  que  la des­ cription des  mouvements"8 : ce que  nous tachons  d'analyser  c'est   une  experience vecue en sympathie avec !'image de  l'ar-

OPINIONS & NOTES



bre, ou du moins la transcription des mouvements de  son  imaginaire.
La  notion  que  l'on  considere generale­ ment  comme  centrale dans la dynamique des  images  vegetales  c'est  la  verticalite.9
Le   pin   est   d'ailleurs  considere   comme l'arbre  privilegie    pour    la   representer. Cette  image  verticalisante, nous  rappelle
Bachelard, a  ete  mise  en  relief  par   les mythes  populaires ainsi  que  par  certains auteurs  modernes comme Nietzsche, Claude! et   Francis  James. 10  Mais   chez Gabrielle Roy  ce  n'est  que  paradoxale­ ment   que  l'energie  verticalisante du  pin se developpe.
C'est, par  exemple, "sur  des  branches
de  sapin" qu'un soir  Pierre  "deploya sa couverture," ainsi  l'arbre devint  un sym­ bole d'horizontalite invitant aux  reveries du  repos.  Mais  le  meme  soir  Pierre  "se retourna sur sa couche de branches,  plein d'une attente extreme."  Puis, pousse  par une  force  mysterieuse,  "il  devint'' pour lui "impossible de  rester en  place." C'est ainsi  que  pour  la premiere fois le peintre decide    de   monter   dans   son   canot    et d'aller  vers  le  nord:  "Sans   nulle   part  s'arreter, tout cette  nuit  Pierre  voyagea."
On  peut  considerer que  la  substance du pin  donne  a l'homme qui  se couche  sur
elle la force  verticalisante. Ainsi, c'est  un aspect   particulier,  relevant    de   la   sub­ stance  ( et  non  de la forme ou la position
habituelle)  qui   nous   renvoie  a l'image
premiere  du   pin:    le  courage   de  I'elan
vertical.  Gabrielle  Roy   fait   ici   preuve d'une subtile  originalite. En effet, Bache­
lard  nous  dit  que  le pin offre a l'homme
un  exemple,  une   "lec;on  dynamique."11
L'arbre suggere  "au reveur affaisse": "Allons,   soit  droit   comme   moi  ...  re­ dresse-toi."  C'est   done   l'energie   poten­
tielle   du   pin   qui   est  communiquee  a
Pierre.
D'autres exemples illustrent le fait  que l'homme reprend courage  en presence  du pin.  C'est   ainsi   que   Pierre,  apres   avoir risque sa vie dans  les rapides d'une riviere

r68
 situee   au   nord   du   Churchill et  qui   ne figure  "sur  aucune des cartes qu'il  avait pu  avoir  des Terres et  Forets," decouvre "au  sommet  de la berge"  un  paysage  des plus decourageants; mais la "sterile foret de   petites   epinettes  inanimees"  lui   re­ donne son  courage  puisque  le  chapitre finit  avec  ces mots: "Mais il se  redressa.  Vers  ce cote  ou  il y avait encore quelque clarte, il se mit  en  marche." Ce  courage et  cette  purete du  pin  s'appliquent tout  naturellement aux  valeurs  morales.  C'est
ainsi  que  Pierre   raconte a Stanislas, un
jeune  peintre parisien  qui  deviendra son
ami, que c'est dans une foret de "petites epinettes" qu'il  retrouva "le  petit  Bill"  a
qui  il  devait  de !'argent et  que  le  regle­ ment  de cette  dette  mit  sa  conscience en paix.

* 	* 	*
Mais  le  grand mouvement  fondamen­ tal  dans  l'univers imaginaire de  La M on­ tagne  secrete est  de  nature  oscillatoire: le pole humain et le pOle vegetal  en cons­ tituent les deux limites.  Puisque l'homme et   l'arbre   partagent  la   triste   condition d'un   tronc   isole   et   !'expression d'une
souffrance  seculaire, ils  peuvent  a  tout
moment etre  consideres comme  symboles
l'un  de l'autre, surtout dans  leur  difficile approche d'un Nord  qui  reste  toujours a
decouvrir, a conquerir.12   C'est   done   un
rapprochement,  une    force   d'attraction
reciproque, enfin  un effet  metonymique global  qu'il  s'agit  d'etudier.
C'est ainsi que la personnification de l'arbre se presente dans  La Montagne secrete  comme   une   veritable  obsession. Le langage qui decrit  habituellement  les formes,  les substances ou  les activites  hu­ maines est  souvent  applique au  paysage. On   nous  parle   en  effet  de  "montagnes chauves," de "la  voix des forets" et meme du  "nez  d'un canot." Parfois la  presence  vegetale domine par une agressivite  et un gout  de conquerir  typiquement humains: "les   buissons   empietant  et   devorant."

OPINIONS  & NOTES



Ailleurs l'humanisation du  paysage se fait d'une maniere feminine, delicate: "une ceinture de  petits  bouleaux fragiles."
Au-dela   breves  et  d'accidentelles  allu­ sions, semblables  a celles que  nous venons de citer,  il y a des passages ou le parallele entre  l'homme et  l'arbre est  amplement developpe. C'est  d'ailleurs dans les perio­ des d'intense et  de longue solitude  que  la meditation  "arborescente" de   Pierre s'erige  en theorie esthetique puis en le ,;on de vie. Suivons  ses pensees apres sa courte  visite chez Gedeon:

A pi'esent, les arbres des climats temperes jusqu'ici aventures paraissaient avoir  endure une  epreuve assez  proche de  Ia  misere  hu­ maine. Sans   plus   d'elan, sans   plus  de   vi­ gueur, ils   montraient  des   corps  debiles   et souffreteux....

Enfin, un   jour,   il  parut  a  Pierre qu'en  ce petit corps  grele  a moitie arrache de Ia berge
et  cependant  tenace encore avec  ses racines
gonfJees   comme  des   veines,  il  contemplait le  dernier peuplier-tremble a vivre  sous  ces
latitudes.   Ensuite   ne    subsisteraient   plus, mais  allant  encore loin   ensemble, jusqu'au delta du  Mackenzie, l'un et  !'autre  presque
toujours  cote   a cote,   que   l'epinette  et   le
petit  bouleau  blanc. Les  arbres  aussi  sem­
blaient  fraterniser,  se   groupant  selon   des traits communs ou  par  quelque ,etrange  soli­ darite.

... [L)e frele   peuplier-tremble. Tres   pen­ che  audessus de  l'eau, l'arbre avait  !'air de considerer  comment   pour   lui   tout   a!lait  bientot finir.

. . . Les   feuilles  de   l'arbre  tremblaient. II
s'en   echappait  un   faible  son   pareil a une
voix de  tendresse. Pierre ecouta un long moment.  11 eilt   aime   a  travers son   dessin
faire entendre aussi  quelque chose  de  cette
VO!X,

L'appel du  Nord  se presente ici un peu comme le chant des sirenes. Comme  le peuplier-tremble, l'homme  a  accepte   le defi,  sachant pourtant qu'au  bout  de  ce voyage  il  ne  peut   y  avoir   que  Ia  mort. Toute force,  a la fois mysterieuse  et  irre­ sistible, finit  par  creer  un  mythe. Le  reve impossible  de  Pierre  serait  sans  doute  de
 capturer la  voix  dans  son  dessin:   il  ne s'agit  plus de peindre mais d'ecrire sans mots.  Capturer la  voix  d'un paysage  est aussi  dangereux qu'ecouter le  chant   des sirenes.  Ainsi,  en  se  penchant sur  l'eau, c'est  aussi  la  reflexion  de  Pierre  qui  ap­ prait.  L'au-dela  mythique s'etablit  done  a  un  premier niveau.  Une  etape  irrever­ sible semble etre franchie puisque le pein­ tre  s'aventure  plus  au   nord   qu'il   n'est permis  aux  peupliers-trembles. Plus  tard  l'heroisme  vegetal  deviendra !'expression generalisee  de  la volonte  humaine: "Par places, tentent malgre tout  de s'implanter c;a et  la, reduits a  la  taille  d'arbrisseaux, des  arbres   du  Sud,  comme   les  hommes acharnes  a   gagner   sur   le  Nord,   a   en defier  l'absurde durete."
Pour Pierre,  la le(_;on stoi:que du petit peuplier-tremble  resistera   meme   au  de­ paysement  qui  sera  cree  par  sa vie  pari­ sienne  ulterieure :

Les   arbres  le   hantaient.   Souvent,  depuis qu'il etait a Paris, il se souvenait du tremble­
peuplier qu'il  avait  vu,   seul,   au   bord   de l'eau,  alors    qu'il  faisait  route  vers   Fort­
Renonciation. A  propos   de   tout,  a propos
de   rien,   le  petit  arbre  du   Nord   venait  se
placer  en   son   esprit... .  [A]    son   regard interieur  apparaissait  l'arbre  eprouve.  Le chant si lointain de  son feuillage revenait en
son  souvenir. II  s'identifiait  presque  a  cet
arbre.

Il y a done  une  geographie interieure et symbolique  qui  s'etablit: la vie artistique a ainsi  son  Nord  independant de  la  lati­ tude   geographique.  Il   faut   s'aventurer au-dela  du  dernier peuplier-tremble pour  faire  face  a  la  solitude  et  au  froid  inte­  rieurs  qu'exige  le   procede  createur. L'etude des limites  de la vie eloigne !'ar­ tiste  de  la  facilite   et  de  la  chaleur  qui abritent Ia fertilire  anonyme du sud. Cette notion   se  retrouve  dans  !'expression  de Stanislas,   le   jeune   artiste   franc;ais,  qui
confesse a Pierre: "Nous  devons etre  trois
ou   quatre  mille   peintres  dans   Paris   a
chercher  a  nous  distinguer  les  uns  des
autres; tout  comme  vos petits  arbres du

r6g

OPINIONS & NOTES



Mackenzie a pousser hors de la foret anonytne."
La  deuxieme etape de  ce  voyage  vers
les froides sirenes se fait avec "l'epinette" et "le petit  bouleau  blanc." Mais  en montant on decouvre que ces arbres  aussi
sont   prets   a payer   le  prix   douloureux
qui,   hors   de   la  foret,   les  menera  vers
l'individualite, vers  l'originalite:
Cependant, meme   les  ,epinettes   et  les   bou­ Ieaux   se   firent  rares.  Ils   n'apparaissaient plus   qu'en   petites  touffes   isoMes,  presque noires   sur  Ie  sol  rocailleux  et  formaient Ia comme des  groupes de  personnages rassem­  bies  au  hasard dans le  grand desert.
Le  desir  de  se distinguer est  pourtant annule  par   la   souffrance  qui   ramime
tous  les arbres,  et  done  tous  les hommes
a un  commun denominateur: "une foret
infinie  de  maigres  arbres  qui  du  premier
au  dernier se penchent de detresse."
* 	* 	*
 Comme les arbres,   Pierre  devra  payer  le prix que demande le nord. C'est  ainsi qu'encore une fois 'arborise' le peintre, comme  ses freres du royaume vegetal, revelera par  son aspect  une  vieillesse pre­ maturee:  "Devenus tres  longs  en  foret,  ses cheveux deja  blanchissants s'agitaient sur  les cotes  de  son  visage.  II  revait  de­ bout,   comme  un   arbre  qu'une  lumiere etrange dans  la foret isole."
Dans ce procede la voix de  l'arbre de­
vient  reflexive et le chant des sirenes se referme sur  une  sphere engendree par  un narcissisme  acoustique: "Lui, tel un arbre malmene par   le  vent,  se  tenait  penche, tel  un  arbre qui  s'ecoute lui-meme chan­ ter."  Mais  cette  meditation  egocentrique produit   !'oeuvre  d'art   qui,   elle   aussi, trouve  son modele dans le royaume vege­ tal:  "En   quelques   jours,  Pierre   abattit plus de croquis que naguere en des mois. Ils  tombaient de  lui  comme   les  feuilles

	* 	*
borification' de  l'homme. On  arrive tout

naturellement  a  cette   sytnetrie  sytnboli­
que  par  un  procede d'identification:
Autour  d'eux  rien   ne  se  detachait   claire­ ment   en  cette  Iueur  de  songe,  hommes  et arbres y  prenant Ia  meme  allure; par   mo­ ments, on  aurait pu  croire  les hommes arre­ tes  et  que   c'etaient   les  arbres qui   pl'ecau­ tionneux avan aient.
Mais  c'est  au  niveau  de  l'individu que se manifeste la fonction 'arborificatrice.' Nous  l'avons   signe  des  le  debut:  Pierre est l'exemple typique  de l'homme-arbre. L'auteur  revient, en  effet,  sur  cette  no­ tion a  plusieurs  reprises:

Malgre  l''epaisseur des  vetements, Pierre en vint   .a  ressembler  a  ces   hautes  epinettes
malades qu'il  avait  si  patiemment  et   tant de fois etudiees; pauvres arbres, sur  eux  ont passe  des  feux  de  foret; presque toutes  leurs branches  leur   ont   ete   arrachees;  si   long­ temps  a  souffle sur  eux  le  meme  vent,  qu'a present, comme vieilles gens  sous  l'effet   de
!'age, jamais ils ne  parviendront a se relever.
Pourtant, ce  sont  des  arbres jeunes,  et  c'est toute  leur  vie  qu'ils auront a vivre  courbes.
 Ainsi nous avons  choisi deux  fonctions,
parmi tant  d'autres, pour  illustrer que l'arbre est, dans  La  Montagne secrete,  le theme unificateur de la reverie  de Pierre. La construction de cet univers  imaginaire est essentielle  a !'artiste qui  doit  vivre ses images.  Vers  la fin de sa vie le peintre se rend   compte  en   se   regardant  dans   le miroir   "qu'il  connaissait moins  son  pro­ pre  visage que  le moindre des arbres."
La  Montagne secrete  rejoint done  par sa  thematique les  ouvrages ou  le  heros vit,  par  !'imagination, sa  metamorphose
en  arbre. Sans  vouloir   remonter a Tor­
quato  Tasso,   plus   pres  de  nous  il  y  a
!'oeuvre de  D.  H.  Lawrence et  celle  de Jack  London, et  encore plus  pres  il  y a la  poesie  quehecoise parsemee d'images vegetales.    Mais    la   grande   originalite, helas  passee  inaper<;ue, du  roman de Ga­ brielle  Roy  reside  dans  le fait  que l'arbre n'est  pas  pour  Pierre   un  refuge  mais  un but  a  atteindre. Le  peintre, en  effet,  au-

OPINIONS &_NOTES



dela  de  sa  mort-car  I'art   ne  demande rien moins que la vie-vivra dans !'image de l'arbre: "Du  ciel, des rayons  de clarte, des arbres ressuscites,  tout  ce qui  est bon a voir provenait des petits  crayons  deja presque  aux  trois-quarts uses."

NOTES
1 Fram;ois Ricard, "Le Cercle enfin   uni  des hommes,"  Liberte,   18,   no.   1   (janvier-fe­ vrier 1976), p.  75·
2    Gerard  Bessette, "Gabrielle  Roy" en  Trois Romanciers quebecois (Montreal:  Editions du  Jour, 1973), pp.  179-237.
a Marie Grenier-Francoeur, "Etude  de  !a structure anaphorique dans  La  Montagne secrete  de  Gabrielle Roy," Voix  et  Images,
1, no.  3  (avril 1976), pp.  387-405.
4    Gaston   Bachelard,   L'Air     et    les   songes: Essai    sur    /'imagination    du    mouvement (Paris:  Jose   Corti, 1948), p.  231.  Bache­ lard   indique  d'ailleurs  quelles  seraient  !es grandes   !ignes    d'un   tel    ouvrage:   "Les themes generaux  curieusement  dialectiques en  seraient Ia  prairie et  Ia  foret, l'herbe et l'arbre, Ia touffe  et  le buisson, !a  verdure et l'epine, Ia  Iiane   et   le  cep,   les  fleurs  et  les fruits-puis  l'etre meme: Ia racine, !a  tige et  les feuilles -puis le  devenir marque par les   saisons   fleuries  ou   depouiUees -enfin les  puissances: le  bJ,e et  !'olive, Ia rose  et  le chene -Ia  vigne."
5   Ibid., p.  23 t.
a  Gabrielle Roy,  La  Montagne secrete   (Mon- tn al:
7   Marie Grenier-Francoeur, pp.  387-405.
B   Gaston Bachelard, p. 8.
ll Gilbert Durand, Les  Structures  anthropolo­
giques     de    l'imaginaire    (Paris:    Bordas,
1969), pp.  54,  28I, 379,  399·
1o  Gaston Bache\ard, op. cit., pp.  232-35  et  pp.
146-85.
11 Ibid., p.  233.
12  Jack  Warwick, L'Appel  du   Nord   dans   la litterature canadienne-franftaise, traduit par Jean Simard (Montreal:  Hurtubise HMH,
1972).
ALEXANDRE  L.  AMPRIMOZ

REFERENCES
Frank  Morley's  Literary  Britain   (Harper   &
Row,  $25.95) is an  extraordinary compilation:
 a  walking tour of  the  Kingdom, pointing out authorial associations and  the  haunts of literary characters.  Some   of   the   glimpses   one   as   a Canadianist might hope  for-of  Niven's Scots hills  and   factory  townscapes -are  not   there, but   there  are    enough  other   anecdotes -of Buchan, Galt,  Ballantyne,  and   George   Van­ couver   as  well   as   of   the   greats  of   English literature - to   make    this    a   companionable volume. Among  other recent reference volumes, several    are   noteworthy.   Irma   McDonough's bibliography, Canadian   Books  for  Young People   1980    (Univ.  Toronto Press,  $15.00), describes the  contents  of  each item  and  classi­ fies it according to age level  and  genre.  Canada on  Stage, the  Canadian Theatre Review  Year­ book  1979, ed.  Don  Rubin (CTR, $I9.95), is an   illustrated  account  of   theatre  production across   the   country,  of   enormous interest  to theatre historians. The  Brock   Bibliography  of Published  Canadian   Plays   in   English  17 86-
1978, ed. Anton Wagner (Playwrights, $14.50; pa. $7-so), is a much expanded, extremely  use­ ful version  of the  I972  edition, with descriptive commentary  and   helpful  historical  data.  The Canada Gazetteer  Atlas   (Macmillan,  in   co­ operation  with   the  federal  government)  is  a collection of  clear  political  maps,   which   pro­  vides   a  kind   of   bird's  eye  sense   of  self  and  makes  a useful companion to the  historical and resource  atlases  lately   on  the   market. Among  Gale's  various  series,   Contemporary   Literary Criticism, vol.  14  ($54.00), and  Contemporary Authors, 89-92 and   93-96    ($54.00 each),  all include entries on  Canadian  writers, much   of it  limited, though  in   CA    89-92,  there  are longer items  on Harry Pollock  and  Maurice Gibbons and  an  interview with  Joe  Rosenblatt. In  Gale's  Pseudonyms & Nicknames  Diction­ ary,  ed.  Jennifer Mosman ($48.oo),  I  found Ralph Connor but  not  one  of  the  other dozen  Canadian  writers  I  checked for   at   random.
W.N.

ON THE VERGE

*****   PIERRE    BERTON,    The   Invasion  of
Canada:  r8r2-13.    McClelland  &    Stewart,
$I9·95·   Pierre Berton is  an  astonishing  com­ bination of  the  good  amateur scholar  and   the skilful  hack.  He  has  written some  of  the  worst recent Canadian  books  and   some  of   the   best, and  neit!Ier  he  nor  his  publisher  seems able  to tell   which   is  which. Among   the   best   is  cer­  tainly his  inimitable history  of  the  rush   to  the Yukon goldfields, Klondike,  which   showed an ability  to  draw  the  colour  and   drama out  of

ON  THE  VERGE



historical  facts    (and  to  do  it  in  a  vivid   but accurate prose) from which  most professional historians  could    have   learnt  a  great   deal   if they  had  been  willing. His  two  volumes  on  the creation of  the   CPR-The  National   Dream and  The   Last  Spike-suffered from  a  failure to reconcile the  Creightonian myth of Canada's westering destiny with  the facts  of western existence. But  in  The   Invasion  of Canada,  the first  volume of  a  two-part history   of  the  war of 1812-14 and  a book  well worthy to be corn­ pared with  Klondike, Berton faces  head-on the conflict between  myth   and  actuality. He  pro­  duces   an  account of  the  first  year  of  the  war that   reveals  both   the  gross  ineptitude of  the American  commanders,  and  also  the  absurdity of  our  own  national  legends   concerning  the  war.   He   shows   very   convincingly that,   far  from  Canada having been  saved  and  strength­ ened   by   a   gallant   militia  of   farmers  and lawyers' clerks,  the  country we  know  owed  its possibility  of   emergence  to   a   few   thousand well-trained  British   regulars,  a  smaller   num­ ber  of  desperate Indian braves,  and  two  indi­ viduals, Brock  and  Tecumseh, neither of whom had  any  conception of  the  future or  the  land  they  saved   or  any  liking  or  respect  for  Cana­ dians. A fine,  realistic  contribution to  the  his­ tory  of  our  origins.
G.W.


****   w.   J.  KEITH,  The   Poetry  of  Nature: Rural  Perspectives in  Poetry  from Wordsworth to the  Present. Univ. of Toronto Press, $2o.oo. W.  J. Keith has  already written two  excellent books  on   writers  of  the   English   countryside: The   Rural   Tradition, a  study   of  non-fiction prose,  and  Richard  Jefferies:  A Critical  Study. There  is  no  direct  link   between   these   books and  The  Poetry af Nature, but  it follows  in  the same   line   of   interest,  dealing  entirely  with English writers, and  concerned less with  direct observations  of  the   natural  world   than  with works  that consider-as Charles G. D. Roberts put  it-"nature  in some  one of its many  rela­ tions   with   humanity."  Starting  with   Words­ worth, Keith keeps  him  constantly in  view,  as an  inspiration to and  an  influence on  the  later  poets  whom   he  discusses -Clare  and  Barnes,  Hardy,  Robert  Frost    and   Edward   Thomas, Edmund  Blunden,  Andrew Young  and   R.  S. Thomas.  But   in  stressing the   durability  and  adaptability of  Wordsworth's  insights, he  does not  attempt to  establish a  Wordsworthian tra­ dition, and  he  successfully  presents each  of the  poets   he   discusses   as  significant  in   his   own right.
a.w.
 ****  RICHARD GWYN,  The  Northern  Magus. McClelland  &   Stewart,  $I7·95·   This  is   an able  and  ambivalent book.  Richard Gwyn,  one of   our    better   political  journalists   and    the author of  a  sound   book  on  Joey   Smallwood, has   written  a   new   study   of   Pierre Trudeau whose strongly defined theme is that  Trudeau, though an  intellectual, is in fact  not  a political leader of  true   and  consistent vision,  and   that he  owes  his  power   partly to  a  reliance on  the new  political techniques associated with opinion  polls   and   the   electronic media, and partly to  the  way  he  has  used  his strange and charismatic  personality to  enchant  the  people of  Canada. It is  at this   point that  the  ambi­ valences of  the  book  become strongest.  For  to be  enchanted is  to  be  bewitched, and  clearly there is a strong undercurrent in  The Northern  Magus   which    suggests that   Canadians  have  become a  new  kind  of  Gadarene swine,  led  by outlandish  impulses to   hasten  down   a   steep  slope   towards  their  own  national destruction. Yet  one  wonders  how far  Richard Gwyn  him­ self   has   become   subject  to   the   spell   of   the magician he  studies. For   though he  is  honest and  factual in  his account of Trudeau's career, and   not  afraid to  criticize, by  the  end  of  the book  he  seems  to  be  breathlessly admiring  the way  the  old  trickster has  done   it  yet  again. I would  recommend anyone who  reads  this  book to  read  also  Thomas  Mann's  chilling  novella, Mario  and  the  Magician. For  there have  been other  magicians and   other enchantments, and  if   what   Mr.   Gwyn   says   is  indeed  true,  we should perhaps be concerned for  the  mental as well  as  the  economic health  of  our   nation.

G.W.

***  DONALD CREIGHTON,  The  Passionate  Ob­ server: Selected Writings.    McClelland  & Stewart, $19.95.   It is the  privilege of Homers to  nod,  for  even  their  least  inspired works  are  for   special  reasons  as   interesting  as  the   best that lesser  men  can  do.  As our  finest  rnythog­ rapher,  the  inventor of  a  largely fictional but  highly inspiring  version   of  Canadian  history, Donald  Creighton  was  perhaps the  nearest we have  had  to  a  Canadian  Horner; certainly his great  narratives-and one  uses  the  adjective deliberately-have been   epic   in   both   nature and    intention.   The    Passionate   Observer   is something different, a  posthumous selection of Creighton's   uncollected   lectures  and    essays which   appeared  originally in  places   as  varied as  Maclean's  and  a  festschrift  in  honour of  his fellow  historian, C.  P. Stacey. We  have Creigh­ ton  the  opinionated Tory, with   his  open   con­ tempt for  Liberal politicians and  Quebec na-

ON  THE VERGE



tionalists,  and   Creighton  the   devoted friend, with   his  amiable anecdotes. There  is  nothing especially unexpected,  for   even   the  consider­ able  knowledge of and  zest for  English and  con­  tinental  European  fiction   that  emerge from  some  of  the   pieces   could  have   been   deduced from   Creighton's  well-cultivated literary style and  his   almost   novelistic  sense   of   the   form proper to the histories he wrote. The Passionate  Observer is  not  the  best  book  by  which  to  ap­  proach   Creighton  for   the   first   time,   but   his admirers will find it filled with  illuminating sidelights on  the  major works.
G.W.
****   J. A.   KRAULis, ed.,  The Art   of  Cana­ dian   Nature  Photography.   Hurtig,   $27.50. There  are   occasional  scenic   photographs  in this  book,  but  they  are  not  the  reason to  look at it.  The finest  photographs  here   are  of  ani­  mals  - birds,   bears,  insects - and    of   the abstract  shapes  of  nature as  the   camera can  catch  and   compose them.  These  glimpses   of colour,  form,  and   the   wild   are   coupled  with photographers'  anecdotes  and    occasional   at­ tempts  to  evoke   in   figurative  language   their  visual   experience.  The  anecdotes  work   well enough; but   the   verbal similes   are  stale.  The photographers'  sense   of   sight    creates   better metaphor in  the  photographs: this  is  metaphor to see, for  which we can  be grateful.
W.N.

***  TAKEO UJO  NAKANO  with   LEATRICE NA· KANo, Within the  Barbed  Wire  Fence.   Univ. of  Toronto Press,   $10.00.    The  displacement of  Japanese-Canadians from   the  Pacific  Coast during  World  War   II is  by   now   a  familiar story   in   outline.  Peter  Ward's  afterword to this  volume  provides an  able  historical account of   the   numbers  of   people  involved  and   the differences in  attitude that developed in  vari­ ous  parts of  the  nation. The main   part  of  the  book    provides   a   more    unusual    perspective. Takeo   Nakano,   an    Issei,    was   moved    from  Woodfibre in  1942,  first  to  the  interior of B.C. and    later  to   the   Angler   camp  in   Ontario, where he  found  himself  out  of  sympathy with the  gambariya  (pro-Japanese) elements among those  interned:   though  not   out   of  sympathy with  the  traditional  elements of  Japanese cul­ ture.  He  recorded his  daily   life  in  brief  diary entries and   a  series  of  tanka, later  translated, which  have  been  filled  out  by his  Nisei  daugh­ ter    Leatrice  into   this    present    text.    What emerges is a  story  of enormous  inner  resource, an   enquiry  into   the   sources   of   inner  peace. Deprived of  the  emotional  support that close­ ness  to  family   provides, he  found in  the  chal­ lenges   of  the   tanka  form  a way   to  focus  his
 mind; it provided, too,  a  way  of  reconciling himself   with   the   tensions  and   inconsistencies of his  chosen  country.
W.N.
***  GEOFFREY  BILSON, A  Darkened House: Cholera  in Nineteenth-Century Canada.  Univ. of  Toronto Press,  $15.00; pa.  $5-95·     This  is a  book   about  disease, rumour,  fear,  charla­ tanism, medical trust,  quarantine,  and   public  policy,  which  ought to  be  more  interesting to read  than it is. There is a lot  of  data here, and  some    interesting  quotation    from    Victorian commentators. And   the   book  does  glimpse   in its  way   the   whole   society   of   which   Susanna Moodie, for  example, described  only  a regional part. But  the sentences are  so uniform in  their  cadence that   the   book   is  curiously  tiring  to read; the social scientist in the  author seems to wrestle   with   the   narrative  historian,  and   to win.
W.N.
***  DEREK PETHICK, The Nootka Connection.
Douglas & Mcintyre, $18.95·   The years  from
1790  to  1795  were  active ones  for  Europeans on  Canada's Pacific Coast. The Russians had been  there  since  the  1740's, Cook  had  entered Nootka  Sound  in  1778,  John Meares had estab­ lished   a  settlement in   1 788; but   in  the cen­  tury's final  decade, Spanish and  English ships  in  large  numbers traversed the  area, establish­ ing  European trade routes, recording local  cul­  tures   ( Maquinna's in  particular), and  by force  and   by decree  declaring  European  sovereignty over  all. Pethick's book,  though cast  as a series of   narratives, is  most   useful   as  a  sourcebook. It  admirably sorts  out  what happened when, recording from   logbooks   and   archival  records all  known   data about the   ships   that  entered the  region.  The final  story  that emerges  is one more  about power  than glory.  But  it  is for  the details, rather than for  the  drama of the  times, that one  would   consult The  Nootka  Connec­ tion.
w.N.
*  Pluralities 1980.    National Gallery of  Can­ ada, $'9·95·   More than  an   exhibition  cata­ logue,  this  work  contains short  essays  on  nine­  teen    contemporary   Canadian   artists,   useful bibliographies,   and    occasional    photographs. The word  "awesome" is used  to describe some of  these  works; "awesome" they  are  not.  Nor,  surprisingly,  are    they   particularly  "plural." The works  show   a  curious lame  sameness:  a desire   to  establish  temporary blocks  in  space,  and   an  apparent   belief   that life  and   art   are both  illusions  of  space,   wrought by  mirrors.

W.N.

173

ON THE  VERGE



***   MARY    ALICE  DOWNIE  and   MARY   HAMIL· TON,  'And  Some brought Flowers': Plants  in  a New     World.   Illustrated  by   E.   J.  Revell.
Univ.  of  Toronto  Press,   $114-95·  This  is  a beautiful book.  An  anthology of brief  botanical observations  from   a  range   of  early  writers­ Jameson, Traill,  Hearne, Heriot,  Jewitt, La­ hontan, Bishop  Mountain, and  many  others­ it  offers   a  record  of  those  who  looked   about them   when   they   travelled  in  a  new  country. The  brief   biographies  and   botanical  descrip­ tions   that  are   added are  only   adequate, but  they  are   not   the  centre of   the  book.  The   70 watercolours allow   the  reader to  glimpse   na­  ture  along with  the  travellers and  to look  with the   kind   of  eye  that  the   title   alludes  to.  It comes  from   an  account of  Frobisher's  travels  in   1576   off   the   Labrador  Coast:  "he   com­ manded his  company, if by any  possible  means  they  could  get   ashore, to  bring   him   whatso­ ever   they   could  first   find,   whether  it   were living   or   dead,  stock   or   stone,  in   token   of Christian   possession    . . .   and    some   brought flowers."
W.N.
***   KENNETH  JAMES HUGHES, The Life  and
Art    of   Jackson  Beardy.   James  Lorimer,
$14-95·     I  wish   I  could  dissuade  publishers from  printing good  books  in  brown  ink; there is too  strong a  temptation to  put   them  down. But   the   persistent  reader  with   good   eyesight will  here  be  rewarded by an  intelligent  survey of  Beardy's  work,   and   some  sharp full-colour prints.
W.N.

***  ROBERT     CRAIG   BROWN,     Robert   Laird
 spoke,   of  the   historic importance  of  his  sub­ ject.   One  cannot say   that  he   presents  a   vi­ brantly alive  portrait of  Robert Laird  Borden. But  was  RLB, despite his  decency and  historic importance,  vibrantly  alive?  He   was  a  good old   codger,  perhaps  in   the   right   place at  a time   when  someone  more  flamboyant  would  have   been  wrong.
o.w.
***  WAYNE FRANKLIN, Discoverers, Explorers, Settlers: The  Diligent Writers of Early  Ameri­ ca.    Univ.  of    Chicago   Press,    $15.00.     "By breaking through  the  enclosures  of  traditional space," Franklin  writes,   "the  American  trav­ eler   also   was  breaking  the  bonds   of  received language." He  goes on  to explore "the iconog­ raphy of European travel in  America" in order to  account for  the  "formulaic quality" of early  travel  narratives  and   to  weigh   their  cultural significance.   Franklin's  observations apply  to the   shared   history  of   the   British  American colonies.  The  distancing  observer  invests   the new    landscape  with    moral  perfection;   the scientist catalogues it;  the   explorer  acknowl­ edges  the  rigours of  the  landscape and  accepts the   irony   of  discovery:  that   the  discoverer's act  of  publicity will  allow  the  world  of  histori­ cal  event to  intrude into   the  land   of  contem­ plation. When the  author  goes  on  in  his  con­  clusion   to  trace "the  imagination of  American nationhood"  to   the  exploratory  and   political language  of   the  early  narrative,  he   perhaps exaggerates; but   the   suggestion  prompts  one to  ask  why  the  shared  past  should  have   such different   consequences  in   the   north  part  of the  continent.

Borden:   A   Biography.  Vol.   II,  1914-1937· Macmillan,  $24-95·   A  more  decent  man,   in the  Orwellian sense,  probably never  served   as Prime  Minister of Canada  than Robert Borden. He  had  none  of the  roguish  charm of Sir  John A., none  of devious slyness  that  variously  char­ acterized Laurier  and   Mackenzie  King,  none of   the    resounding    righteousness   of   Diefen­ baker,   none    of   the    cold-potato   philosophic arrogance of Trudeau. His oratory was wooden  but   his  campaigning  was  fair.  And   he   took Canada  through  World  War   I   and   in   the process  turned  the  country in  its  own  estima­ tion  and   largely  in  that of  the  world  from   a dominion into something near  an  independent country.  Borden  has   never  stood   high   in  the calendar  of   saints   proclaimed   by   Canadian nationalists, but  they  should reconsider. If one can  judge  from  his  prose,  Robert Craig Brown seems   a   very   Bordenish  man,    and    in   this second   and  final  volume of  his  biography he convinces  one,   writing  as  stiltedly  as  Borden

174
 W.N.
***   Newfoundland   in   the   Nineteenth   and Twentieth Centuries: Essays  in  Interpretation, ed.   James  Hiller  and   Peter   Neary. Univ.  of Toronto  Press,   $2o.oo;  pa.  $7.50.   Like   the western  provinces,  Newfoundland  is  likely   to be  the  centre of  growing controversy and  per­ haps  of deepening crisis  as the  debates on  con­  stitutional  change warm up,  and   for  this  rea­  son  among others Newfoundland in  the   Nine­ teenth  and  Twentieth  Centuries, a  volume   of essays  by various hands, is timely  and  valuable. It gives  us  the  background to  Newfoundland's decision  not   to  enter   Confederation  in   1867 and   to  the  financial  crash   of  1934  that Jed  to the   country's  loss  of   independence  when   the City  of   London  put   it  into   receivership.  It discusses   the   politics  of  railways  and   fishing, the  importance of  W. F.  Coaker in  awakening resistance to  the  old-style patriciate  of  the  St.  John's   merchants,   and   the   historical  impor­ tance  of the  French Shore. Finally, in  chapters

ON  THE VERGE



on   "Party  Politics,  1949-71" and   "The   Col­ lapse   of   the   Saltfish Trade  and   Newfound­ land's  Integration  into  the   North   American Economy," it  brings us  to  the eve  of  the  pres­  ent   situation,  when   Newfoundland  is  ceasing to  be  the  poorest  of   Canadian  provinces and  in   shedding  the   dependence  it   assumed in
1949 is beginning to remember the days of autonomy with  something more than nostalgia.

G.W.
***  PAUL R.  REYNOLDS,  Guy  Carleton, a Biography.   Gage,   n.p.     Guy     Carleton   has been   excessively    praised  and    abused  in   the past,  according to the  political bias of his biographers. That  he  was  an  important  shap­ ing  influence in  the  creation of  the  Canada we know,   there  is  no   doubt. If  in   his   role   of governor  he   had   not   resolutely   and  compas­ sionately  defended  the   interests  of  the   cana­  diens  against the  English  merchants who  came  in  after  the   conquest,  it   is  doubtful  whether Quebec  as  we  know   it  would   have   survived, while   he  held   off  the  first   American attempt to   take   over   the   country  long   before   Brock repeated the  feat  and  gained heroic stature by dying   on  the  battlefield. Carleton  died   in  his bed,  so that a  heroic myth did  not  redeem  him in   the   way   it   redeemed  Brock,   who   in   fact  shared  many  of  Carleton's  faults and   virtues, including   his   arrogance  of   manner  and   his ability to  understand and inspire men  of many different   kinds. If  Carleton instead of   Bur­  goyne   had  commanded  the    ill-fated  British expedition from  the  north during the War  of Independence, it  is  possible   that  the   disaster of   Saratoga   would     not    have    taken   place. Carleton  deserves  a   good   biography,  and   if Paul   Reynolds' book  is  too  slight   to  meet   the need  completely, it  is at  least  a  balanced, fair and  well-written study of an important and insufficiently  recognized  historical  figure.

G.W.
**  ROBERT   STEWART.   Sam  Steele:  Lion   of the  Frontier. Doubleday Canada,  $12.50.  Sam Steele   is a  figure who  fits  uneasily into  Cana­ dian  history. His   place   is   in   the   history  of British   imperial expansion; he  ranks  as  a  de­  fender   and    expander   of   colonial   frontiers rather  than as  a  significant  personality  in  the development  of  an   autonomous Canada.  He was   a   founding   member  of   the    Northwest Mounted   Police,   but   he   was   also   the   com­  mander of  Lord  Strathcona's  Horse, raised   to defend imperial   claims   in   South  Africa, and  he  pursued the  Boer   commandos  as  enthusi­ astically as a  few years before, during the  r88s  rebellion, he  had  hunted Big  Bear.  Comment-
 ing   on  a  dispute  in  British   Columbia,  when Steele    supported   the    claims    of    a    certain Colonel  Baker   against  those  of  the  Kootenay Indian chief  Isadore, his present biographer Robert Stewart remarks, "he  had   a  weakness for  British  gentlemen, and  it  was quite in character  that    he   would    automatically  take the  word  of one  over  that of a native." Steele had  more  than  a  sympathy for  English  gentle­ men; he  aspired to  be one  of them, and it  was appropriate that he died  as an  imperial, not  a Canadian,  general,  and   was   given   a   British  military funeral before he was shipped over  for a   second   round  of   obsequies,   in   Winnipeg, organized by  the  NWMP. Few  people   in  real life  have  fitted   more   into   the   pattern of  im­  perial   adventure   fictionalized  in   the   English boys'  novels  of  the  nineteenth century; Steele  lived   too  late   to  become  a  Henty  hero,  but Robert   Stewart  writes   in   the   "rattling  good tale"  tradition, and   Steele  emerges from   his pages   a  conventional  paladin  of  a   past   era when  the  distinction was clear between  gentle­ men   of   Anglo-Saxon  breed    and    the   "lesser  breeds without the  law."
G.W.
**   STEPHEN   ENDICOTT, james   G.  Endicott: Rebel   out  of  China. Univ. of  Toronto  Press,
$r8.95·   Next    to   Bethune,  the   Endicotts­ James G.  the  father and   Norman  the   son­ have   probably been  Canada's most  celebrated
supporters of  the  Chinese Community  regime. Another  son  of  James  G.,   Stephen Endicott, has  now  written his  father's  biography.  fames G. Endicott: Rebel out  of China, is interesting for  three   reasons:  it  tells  us  much   about  the relations  between  Canadian   missionaries and Chinese political leaders during  the  years  be­ fore   the  Communist takeover of  the  country; it   provides  some   of  the   background   to   that takeover; it  portrays sympathetically  the  trans­ formation of  a  North  American  Christian into  an  apologist not  only  for  Mao's  kind  of  Com­ munism, but  for  Stalin's  as  well.  Like  Bethune, Endicott blinded himself  to  the  reality of Rus­ sian  communism during the Stalinist era, which  was   why   he   was   unable   to   understand  the despotic nature of  the  regime Mao  established. It  seems   to  have  been  only   when   Krushchev officially   revealed   the   atrocities of  the   Stalin era  in  1956  that  Endicott took  them  seriously, and  even  then  he  refused to  repudiate Stalin. When  China   and    Russia    parted   company, Endicott   rejected  Moscow, but   this   led   him  only  into deeper contradictions. When Russian­ supported   Viet    Nam    invaded    Chinese-sup­ ported Kampuchea in  I 978,  he  protested, yet there  is no mention of  his  protesting the  mas­ sacre   of  their  own  countrymen committed by

175

ON  THE VERGE



the  Khmer  Rouge regime   before  the  invasion. Even  Endicott's peace  campaigns were largely negated by his partisanship. It is not on  record, for  example, that  he  protested  the  Chinese invasion  of  Tibet.  Thus  it   would   seem   that the    sub-title   of   the    book-"rebel   out    of China" -is   somewhat  inaccurate;   Endicott rebelled against Methodist orthodoxy only  to accept uncritically an even more oppressive orthodoxy. The true believer  does  not  change his  nature even   when   he  changes  his  beliefs.

G.W,

**  KATINKA  MATSON,  Short   Lives.  William Morrow, $13.25.   Matson's thirty  "portraits in  creativity  and   self-destruction" are   a  pre­ lude  to  her  epilogue on  the  life  and  death of a young poet  named Tom  Boatman;  by exam­ ining  the   pressureful  lives   of   public  figures  from   Judy  Garland  to  Sylvia  Plath, Poe  and  Chatterton to  Mayakovsky and  Marilyn Mon­ roe,  she  attempts  to  sort   out   the   destructive impulse  of   creativity  and    to   separate  irra­ tional  suicide from  a wilful  use  of the  self that somehow constitutes a  kind  of  inevitable  ex­ hausting of  the  possibilities of  auto-identifica­ tion.    The   short   lives   follow   a   seventeenth­ century  pattern in  biography:  these  are  brief essays -including  one  on  Malcolm Lowry­ which draw their information secondhand and foreshorten motives. But  in  the  book  the  effect is cumulative: a tribute and-only perhaps­ an  explanation.
 photographs, despite the  authenticity of their dress,  look  very  much of  our  own  time,  which they  are.  Hence the  book  has  that curious  arti­ ficiality of  the  museum replica, of  the  artifact designed for  the  present rather than  retrieved from  the  past.
W.N.
*  JAMES   HOUSTON,   Eskimo   Prints.     Long­ man   Canada,  $14.95·   Houston's   account  of the  way  he  introduced  colour  print-making to Inuit artists in  the   1950's  footnotes an  extra­ ordinary  movement in  Canadian  art   history. The 48  examples of  prints which  he chooses  to illustrate  his   book   with    are    also   separately pleasing. But   the   book   design, rendering  the pages   crowded  and   the   text   intrusive,  leaves too  much to  be  desired.
W.N.

W.N.
**  WAYNE   BARRETT  and   GEORGE  MACBETH, Kings  Landing: Country  Life in Early Canada. Oxford, $1 2.g5.     The four  most recent volumes in   Oxford's  series   of   regional  photographic studies reveal   an   interesting counterpoint   be­ tween   Eastern  stone   and    brick   and   western wood.   They  also   document   inferentially  the differences in  time  of  settlement. The  quality of  photographs  varies,  and   I found the  most interesting  volume  to   be   that  on   the   New Brunswick heritage  settlement of  Kings   Land­ ing.  Like  Upper  Canada  Village or  Calgary's
Heritage Park, it  represents reconstructed  his­ tory,  attempting to  portray actively the  life  of an  earlier  day.   But   there's  always  something slightly wrong   about  such  visualizations. The  book  on   Kings Landing  certainly  documents handily  the   Maritime   Loyalist  world   of   the
183o's, replete with  the  village  store, the wood­
boat,   the   jars  of  preserves, the  flintlock  mus­ kets,  the  sunbonnets, the  waterwheels,  and  the  quilting looms.  All  very  attractive, made more  so  by  the  camera and   the  cmnfort  of  a  twen­ tieth-century perspective. Yet the people  in  the
