v
1	$z .oo  per copy


CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·9



Summer, 1961


Eclectic  Detachment
BY  A.  J. M. SMITH


Conference of the  Arts

BY  ROBERT FULFORD  AND ROBERT WEAVER


Preface  to a  Novel

BY  MALCOLM LOWRY


The  Princess

BY  ETHEL WILSON


Structure of Loss

BY  HELEN W. SONTHOFF




A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW





SHOOTS FROM AN OLD TREE


0NE  OF   THE  MORE HAPPY  consequences of traditional
colonialism,  in  which  it  seems to differ  profoundly from  the  atomic-economic
imperialisms  of our own day,  has been its complex propagation of cultures-and particularly literary  cultures.  It  is true  that  even today  certain  features  of the North  American  way of living-usually the worst-and certain  equivocal mani­ festations  of  Russian  ideology,  may  find  their  way into  the  neutral  regions of the  earth.  But  the  age  is past  when  large  numbers  of colonists, of  Britons and Spaniards, of French  and  Dutch  and  Portuguese, set out to make their homes in distant  lands  and  carried  with  them  their  native literatures, rooted in the living soil of language.  Little  as one  may  wish to minimise in  any  way  the  destruc­ tion  of indigenous  cultures  by the colonists, there is at  least some consolation  to be drawn  from  the fact  that  they did not create a cultural  vacuum; Peru cannot give us back the world of the Incas, but it has given us the poetry of Cesar Vallejo;  Mexico cannot  give us back the world of the Maya, but it has given us the paint­  ing of Orozco.
The  ties of  language  and  literature  in  particular  have  proved  more  durable than  those  of  politics. Two  centuries  after  New France  was forcibly  detached from  its  parent   country,  almost  as long  after  the  United  States  detached  itself from  Britain,  and  nearly  a  century  and  a  half  after  the  American   colonies of Spain  became  the  republics  of Latin  America,  the  descendants of the colonists still speak  French  and  English  and  Spanish  with  variations  which,  considering the time that  has elapsed, are surprisingly slight. Printing  has conserved languages in a way that  was impossible during the centuries after the breakup  of the Roman Empire.  Nor  has  the  literary  heritage  been  lost;  Racine  and  Shakespeare  and Cervantes  are as deeply read  and understood in Montreal  and San Francisco and Mexico City as they are in Paris and Oxford and Madrid.

3

EDITORIAL



Yet  we  have  already  recognised an  American  literature that-while  sharing the same  roots -is distinct from  English literature, a Mexican  literature that  is distinct from Spanish literature,  a way of writing in Quebec  that is different from the  way of writing  in  Paris. And  we are  becoming  more  and  more  aware  that something  very similar happens when Canadians and Australians  use the English language  to represent their own distinct and individual ways of life.
In fact, it is when "empires gleam I Like wrecks in a dissolving dream" that the
cultures  which  grow  in their  shadows are  liberated  to take  on new and  various forms  in  the  lands  of colonisation.  Rome  has  left  its  indelible  mark  on  every European literature west of the Rhine,  but  this does not  mean  that  French  and Italian, Spanish  and  English literatures  are  merely offshoots of the Latin.  Each has  been  moulded  by the history and  the  physical environment in  which it has developed.  Yet  the  heritage  of  Rome-and the  heritage  of Greece  before  it­ remain,  diffused  and  immensely enriched  by  history's  long  process of  selective breeding.
The  same is happening  to the literature  of Britain. The  colonial empire  merges and  melts  into  the  loose organisation  of the  Commonwealth, and  while  this is happening, the fragments of the culture which the colonists took with them begin to take on new life and  new forms over all those regions where British men and women settled and  where British administrators introduced their own conceptions of education.
In  a recent  issue of Canadian Literature, Dr.  R. E. Watters  showed how dif­
ferently  Australian  and  Canadian writers are solving their  peculiar  literary prob­ lems. The  Penguin and Oxford anthologies devoted to poetry in Canada, Australia and  New Zealand  have further  emphasised the differences between what is being written  in the outlying lands of the Commonwealth and  what is being written  by poets  in  contemporary England.  Now  the  subject  has  predictably   aroused  the interest  of American  scholars, and  pioneer  courses in  Commonwealth literature are  already  being  taught  in some universities south  of  the  border,  while Cornell University  Press has recently published an illuminating collection of essays, edited by Professor A. L. McLeod, under the title of The Commonwealth  Pen (Thomas Allen, Toronto, $3.75.)
The  contributors Professor McLeod has gathered are mostly from the countries
whose literature they  discuss; Canada, for  instance,  is represented  by our  own frequent  contributor, F. W. Watt. The  panorama they present is one of contrast and  variety. It  is true, as one might expect,  that  the countries  where a large pro­ portion  of  the  population  speaks English  as a  first language  are  producing the

4

EDITORIAL



most copious literatures in  that  language.  Poets like Roy Campbell  and  William Plomer  and  Charles   Madge  have  long  made  us aware  of the  claims of South Africa,  and  in  recent  years the West Indians  have been creating  a vigorous and unique  literature in  English.  At  the same time, English  has a special appeal  in countries  where  many  dialects  and  languages  are spoken;  writers  in  India  and West Africa can actually  command  larger audiences in their own countries if they write in  English  than  if they wrote in  their  own tongues,  and  so in  both  these regions  one  finds  considerable  and   very  original  literatures   in  English  which respond to regional conditions and are as far as Australian  or Canadian literatures from being pale imitations of London models.
Much   can  be  gained,  and  nothing  lost, from  closer links  of  understanding among  these  various  awakening  currents  of literature  in  the  English  language, and  one hopes that  volumes like The  Commonwealth Pen will be the beginnings of nearer  contacts, both personally and through  receptive reading, between writers in  the  great  family  of literatures  which  includes,  besides all  those described  in Professor McLeod's symposium, the literatures of America and of Britain itself.




WrH GREAT REGRET we learnt of the recent death  of Anne Wilkinson. Anne  Wilkinson was one of the most sensitive and urbane  poets of the generation   that  made  the  Forties  in  Canada so stimulating in  its  new  literary departures. From  the end  of the  War  onwards  her work appeared  in  the better literary  magazines, and  her first volume, Counterpoint to Sleep, was published  by John  Sutherland's pioneering  First Statement  Press in  1951. She was one of the founders  of Tamarack Review, and  remained  closely associated with it until her death.  She also wrote, in Lions in the Way, a highly personal history of the Osiers, from  whom  she  was descended.  Her  death  has silenced a clear  poetic  voice we had hoped to hear often again.













5



ECLECTIC
DETACHMENT
Aspects of Identity in Canadian  Poetry


A. ]. M. Smith




IN THE  CLOSING PARAGRAPHS of the  Intmduction to Th' Oxford  Book  of Canadian Verse  I made  an  effort  to suggest  in  a  phrase  that  I hoped  might  be memorable a peculiar  advantage that  Canadian poets, when  they were successful  or  admirable, seemed  to possess and  make  use of. This,  of course, is a  risky  thing  to do,  for  what  one  gains in  brevity  and  point  may  very well be lost in inconclusiveness or in possibilities of misunderstanding. A thesis needs to be demonstrated as well as stated. In  this particular case I think  the  thesis is implicit in  the  poems  assembled  in  the  last  third  of  the  book  - and  here  and  there  in earlier  places  too. Nevertheless,  I would  like to develop  more  fully a point of view that  exigencies of space confined  me previously merely  to stating.
The statement itself  is  derived  from  a  consideration of  the  characteristics of Canadian  poetry  in  the  last  decade. The  cosmopolitan flavor  of  much   of  the poetry  of the fifties in Canada derives from  the infusion  into  the modem world  of the  archetypal patterns of myth  and  psychology  rather than   (as in the past)  from Christianity or  nationalism. After  mentioning the  names of James Reaney, Anne Wilkinson, Jay   Macpherson, and   Margaret Avison-those  of  the  Jewish   poets Eli Mandel, Irving Layton, and  Leonard Cohen  might  have  been  added-1 went ontosay:

The  themes  that  engage these writers are not local or even national; they are cos­ mopolitan  and,  indeed, universal. The  bewildering multiplicity  of scientific, moral and  metaphysical   data  with  which  the  poet  must  now  come  to  terms,  and  the burden   of  guilt,  fancied  or  real,  which  the  disintegration of  values  in  religion, politics and  morals  places on his unsupported  shoulders,  make it very  difficult, if not impossible, for him to be anything  but complex, divided, erudite, allusive, and

6

ECLECTIC DETACHMENT



sometimes  obscure.  These,  of course, are  the  characteristics  of modernity  in  the poetry of Europe and  the United  States as well as of Canada.

So far  there  is no  room  for  misunderstanding and  little,  I imagine, for  disagree­
ment. But now we come to the essential point:

But  the  Canadian poet  has  one  advantage-an  advantage that  derives from  his position of separateness  and semi-isolation. He can draw upon French,  British, and American  sources in language  and  literary convention;  at  the same time he enjoys a  measure  of detachment that  enables  him  to select and  adapt   what  is relevant and  useful. This gives to contemporary  Canadian  poetry ... a distinctive quality­ its eclectic  detachment. This  can  be, and  has been, a defect of timidity and medi­ ocrity;  but it can also be ... a virtue of intelligence and discrimination.

The purpose  of this  paper is to examine the  phrase  eclectic detachment  in the light  of its applications, to clarify it if necessary, and  to defend  its validity.  This  is a  useful  undertaking, for  even  if it should  fall short  of its full  purpose it cannot fail  to stir  up some lively controversy and  stimulate thinking about the quality  of Canadian poetry  that   might  be  exciting  and  helpful,  and  that  might  even  ulti­ mately  lead  us to discard a point  of view that  sees the Canadian poet  as in a pre­  dicament, plight,  or fix.


IFIRST   USED the  phrase  eclectic detachment in  an  effort  to define  concisely  the  essential  quality of the  best modem Canadian poetry  in 1955
in a  paper read  at  the  Canadian  Writers' Conference held  at  Queen's University in  the  summer of  that   year,  and  the  poets  then  cited  as exhibiting this quality were  Scott,  Klein,  Anderson, and  Page,  as well as Reaney, who,  of course,  had not  then  yet  published A  Suit  of Nettles. Nobody  took  much  notice  of it at  the time; but  some  comments in  recent  reviews have suggested  the  need  for  amplifi­ cation  and  explicit  illustration. Professor  John  Bilsland in the course  of  a detailed review  of  the  new  Oxford  Book in Canadian  Literature  questions the validity  of the phrase  in a paragraph I will quote:

The  expression  [he  writes]  eclectic  detachment sounds well:  it seems to suggest a learned  objectivity, the capacity in our poets to draw freely on diverse cultures and traditions.

I interpolate briefly  here.  It does not  seem to suggest; it does suggest; as a matter of fact it states.  I believe that  one of the greatest  advantages that a poet like Frank

7

ECLECTIC DETACHMENT



Scott  or  Reaney  or Klein  or Gustafson  really possesses is the fact  that  he is Im­ mersed both  in the European  and  the North  American  cultural tradition-!use "cultural" in  the  widest  possible sense to include  the  sociological and  political aspects of environment and  inheritance  as well as the  literary  and  the artistic­ but he is not of it. He stands apart  and, as all Canadian writers must do, he selects and  rejects.  He  selects those elements  from  varied  and  often  disparate  sources that  are  useful to him, and rejects those that  are  not. Useful to him. This brings in  the  personal.  Detachment  surely  does not  imply  in  this  context  detachment from the Self or from personality. This is where Professor Bilsland, it seems to me, goes wrong. He continues:

One wonders if the very attractiveness of the fine expression has not misled Profes­ sor Smith. Surely a very marked quality of much of the best Canadian  poetry is its intensely personal note. Many of our  poets are  highly derivative, but  writers like A. M. Klein, Anne Wilkinson, and Irving Layton have achieved  a decidedly personal utterance, not particularly eclectic, and not at all detached ....

The  question  at issue is:  What  is the Canadian poet detached  from?  Eclectic detachment would suggest that he is not detached  from everything, but only from what  he chooses to be detached from. This implies also that  there are some things he  chooses to attach  himself to. I emphasise  himself. It is someone,  a person, a poet,  who  is attached   or  detached. The  term  detachment in  this  context  has nothing  to do  with  objectivity  or impersonality.  It is actually  an  affirmation  of personality.  Certainly  in poets like Klein and  Wilkinson and  Layton it is.
The  function  of personality in the poet is to create a thing, a persona, a poem; and in Canada the problem of the critic, if not of the poet, has been to relate this thing  to its place and  to its time. For the scholar,  watching  the critic as the critic watches  the poet, the Canadian  literary scene offers an  almost classic instance of an  easily isolable  phenomenon: the  quick  and  almost  forced  development  of a compact   and  self-contained  literary  tradition-arising from  the  practice  of the poets-and of an  orthodoxy  (rather   rapidly  changing)-arising from  the  sensi­ bility of readers and the cogitations of critics.
The  task that the Canadian establishers of a literary  orthodoxy  addressed them­ selves to with the greatest enthusiasm  was the effort to isolate and  describe some peculiar  quality  that  might be felt to distinguish  Canadian poetry. W. D. Light­ hall in his Introduction to Canadian  Songs and Poems published in London  and Toronto in 1892  was quick to recognize that  there are two main streams of Cana­ dian  poetry, which for convenience I have called the cosmopolitan and the native.

8

ECLECTIC DETACHMENT



The  present  [he  wrote]  is an imperfect  representation  of Canadian poetry from a purely  literary  point  of view, on account  of the limitation  of treatment; for it is obvious that  if only what  illustrates  the country and  its life in a distinctive way be chosen,  the  subjective  and  unlocal  literature  must  necessarily be passed over,  en­ training  the omission of most of the poems whose merit  lies in perfection  of  finish.

The  anthologist himself italicises for emphasis  the phrase  in a distinctive way; and it  is interesting to  note  the  assumptions implicit  in  his point  of view:  that  what is distinctively Canadian  (or  perhaps merely local)  will tend  to be  (a)  technically crude and   (b)   impersonal or  objective. This  second  condition is not,  however, meant to imply  coldness  or insensitivity,  but is an early  perception of a view that later   critics,  looking   back,  were  able  to  substantiate. This  is  the  conception of Canadian poetry  as being  in its essence heroic and  mythological rather than  per­ sonal  and  lyrical  which  Northrop Frye  developed  in his Canadian  Forum review of  the  first  edition of The  Book of Canadian  Poetry  (Dec. I943)  and  his paper on  "La Tradition narrative dans  Ia poesie canadienne-anglaise" in Gants du Ciel (SpringI946),  and   which  is behind   much  of  the  thinking in  James  Reaney's brilliant essay "The Canadian Poet's  Predicament" in  the  University  of Toronto Quarterly  (AprilI 957 ) .
Lighthall's critical introduction is  not  all  forward-looking and   perceptive. It
has  (inevitably)  the  defects  of its time.  The  book was  just  able  to include some of  the  early poems of  Roberts, Carman, Lampman,  Campbell, and  Scott; it illustrates the  spirit   of  rather blatant nationalism characteristic  of  the  post­ Confederation period  and  prepares the way for the Maple Leaf school  of  versifiers and  critics  that  was dominant until  the late  twenties.  A few more sentences from  the Introduction will suffice to indicate the tone.

The  poets  whose songs fill this book are voices cheerful  with  the consciousness of young might,  public wealth, and heroism.... The tone of them is courage,--for  to hunt,  to fight, to hew out  a farm, one must be a man! Through their new hopes, doubts, exultations,  questionings, the virility of fighting races is the undertone. Canadians are, for the most part, the descendants of armies, officers and  men, and every generation of them has stood up to battle.

This is not  language or feeling  or thinking likely to be echoed  or approved today. Yet if we disregard the  Carlylean or Kiplingesque rhetoric we find  that  it all boils down  to the assertion  that the characteristic note of Canadian poetry is the heroic. And  to foresee so early  a tradition that  was to include David and  The  Wind  Our Enemy  as well as At the Long Sault, Brebeuf and His Brethren, and  Towards the Last Spike,  with  nothing more  than  the somewhat tentative efforts  of Heavysege,


9

ECLECTIC DETACHMENT



Mair, and  Crawford to guide him, is not an entirely despicable achievement.
The  effort  to isolate  a peculiar  Canadian quality in the  poetry  of the  Dominion has since  Lighthall's time become  a kind  of occupational hazard of the Canadian critic  and  anthologist. Lighthall's point  of view is a little  naive,  and  it is certainly too narrow, but it marks a beginning.
The modem critic  has  had  not  only  a  much  larger  but  a  much  more  varied
and  complex body  of  work  to consider.  In  the  last  twenty  years  a  new  and  in­ comparably more  vital  and  sophisticated poetry  has arisen  in Canada; and  it  has made  imperative an  effort  to assimilate  it and  evaluate it, which  has called forth  the talents  of a remarkable school of new scholarly  critics.
The  new  poetry  and  the new criticism  have had  their  effect on the poetry of the past.  The   critics  have  had  to  raise  their  sights  as it  were  and  have  imposed an increasingly severe standard of judgment, not only on the early  pre-Confederation versifiers  but   upon   the  poets  of  our  rather glibly  or  perhaps ironically named "golden age"-the Roberts-Carman-Lampman group. This  is much  better  than adulation, but  there  is a danger  too that  something valuable may  be lost.
Reading the serious reviews of the Oxford Book  of Canadian Verse  I have been surprised to  see  how  far  the  revulsion  of feeling  has  gone  and  how  sudden has been  the  reversal  of fortune. Everyone  seems ready  to discard  the colonial  pioneer poets  to  the   junk  pile.  "Victorian versifiers  like  Heavysege and  Sangster and Mair," wrote   George   Woodcock,  "were   dead   before  they  reached the  grave." And  this critic's  praise  of Lampman, Roberts, and  Carman is distinctly unenthus­ iastic.  "One should  not  over-disparage Lampman,"  he warns  I  suppose  himself,  and  goes on,  in  an  obvious effort  to be fair,  to say something, however  vague,  in praise  of the  group. His praise,  however,  is pretty  much nullified by the qualifica­ tions that  precede  it. "[Lampman] and  Roberts may have been minor  Victorians, colonials  in  their  dependence on  English  models,  and  almost  completely deriva­ tive,  but  they  did  bring  to Canadian poetry  what  it  needed  before  it could  even start-a sense of the  image  and  a high craftsmanship...." Nevertheless the critic  found it  laborious "except perhaps in  nostalgia  for  the  Edwardian afternoon, to read  through as much  of the  Confederation poets  as  [the]  anthologists ... give us."  Millar   MacLure  in  Tamarack No.  17  agrees.  He  confesses a long-standing inability to assume  a scholarly stance  before the verses of the Confederation poets. "Lampman,"  he  declares  in a rather self-conscious  effort  to be  unscholarly, "is a good  old  cheese, but  Roberts  and  Carman belong  on captions in the  New Bruns­  wick  Museum  (Carman's verse is to  poetic  speech  what  Baird's Lemon  Extract used  to  be  to  Demerara rum)."  On   the  earlier  poets  he  is considerably more

10

ECLECTIC DETACHMENT



severe. "I can see no reason for taking either  Heavysege  (lie heavy on him, earth!) or  Mair  more  seriously  than  John  Hunter Duvar. ..."Norman Levine,  reviewing the Oxford Book in England, speaks "of the dead  wood of the nineteenth century" and  of "the much  overvalued output of the poets of the  I86os." Donald A. Davie, an  unprejudiced outsider, finds only one  poet before  Pratt-Lampman, of course.
I cite these opinions not mainly  because  they come from intelligent, responsible, and  serious critics but  because  nothing like this emphatic and widespread denigra­ tion  of the  past  found  its voice when  the  three  editions  of  The  Book of Canadian Poetry  appeared in  I943,  I948,  and   I957  or  when  Ralph Gustafson's Penguin anthologies came  out  in  I942  and  1958. I myself  would  not  wish to discard  and do  not  think  it necessary  to scorn  our older  poetry. It is worth  preserving because  it shows  us what  our  ancestors were  able  to do  when  they  tried  to do  their  best. They  do  not  and  could  not  provide  us with  a  tradition, but  neither do they offer us  horrible examples and  furnish  us with  something consciously  to  reject.  They  simply show  us what  it felt like to live here in  I84o  or  I86o  or  I89o. These  earlier  poets  did  not  have  what  the  modern  reviewer  might  call  advantages. They  had  not  read   Hulme or  Eliot  or  Dylan  Thomas, but  we  must  not  condemn  them entirely   for  having read  Wordsworth,  Shelley,  Keats, or  Matthew Arnold,-as  most  of them, and Ithink  fruitfully, had.  Do we condemn the Bartlett prints  be­ cause they are  not like the paintings of the Group of Seven or later  abstractionists?
The  more  tolerant point  of view I have been outlining has never of course been without its  exponents, and  if Icall  one  or  two of these  as witnesses it will  bring  us back  to where  we started-to the question  of our sense of identity and  to some illustrations of our eclectic  detachment.






NRTHROP FRYE, who has the catholicity of the true scholar, is  able  to  see  the  always  changing and  always  developing kaleidoscope of  our literary  history  as a single  pattern, and  thus  can see also the characteristic virtues and  defects  of the  Confederation poets in the new perspective that  modern poetry places  them  in.  Frye  excels in the  art  of making  just discriminations. Speaking of Roberts, Carman, Lampman, and  D. C. Scott, he says-

All four  are  romantic   and  subjective  poets, at  best when  confronting nature  m solitude,  in  moods  of  nostalgia,  reverie,  observation  or  extra-sensory  awareness.


I I

ECLECTIC DETACHMENT



Their  sensibility is emotional in origin, and  they obtain  conceptual  precision by means of emotional precision....

After speaking of the greater frequency  of Lampman's successes and of the com­ mon  tendency for Roberts  and Carman  to "let  their sensibility get out of  focus," he ventures some more general assertions, which bring us closer to the question of a Canadian tradition-though  I am not sure whether  habit might not be a better word.

This subjective and lyrical sensibility, sharp and clear in its emotional foreground but  inclined  to get  vague around  its conceptual  fringes, is deeply rooted in  the Canadian  tradition. Most of its characteristics reappear  in the Group of Seven painters, in Tom Thomson and Emily Carr, with their odd mixture of art nouveau and cosmic consciousness.

This is followed by a statement  that every Canadian writer and reader should take to heart:

The  Canadianism  of Canadian  poetry is of course not a merit  in it, but only a quality in it; it may be revealed as clearly in false notes as in true ones, and may be a source of bad taste as well as of inspiration.

These  sentences  from  Northrop   Frye's  general  survey  of  poetry  in Malcolm Ross's The  Arts in Canada  ( 1958)  bring  us back  to the idea of eclectic detach­ ment. For the person living in Canada, there are two things he cannot be detached from-his personality  and  his Canadianism. These  are  both  invisible  and  often unconscious attachments, and they condition the inevitable  way in which emotion and  thought  rise out  of sensibility. Where  freedom  of choice  comes in is in  the intellectual  effort  of  the  artist  as maker  who  seeks to  eliminate   bad  taste  and encourage  good, who chooses the true  note and  rejects the false. In  Canada this task is made  easier  by the  absence  of conventional  bonds  that  fasten  us to an oppressively superior  tradition  such as that  of  English  poetry  and  leaves us free to pick and  choose just those poets (or  just those aspects of those poets)  that  can satisfy our  needs. The  most exciting  poets  of the  present  revival  have found  re­ freshment  and nourishment  in the most widely varied and often surprising sources
-James Reaney in Chaucer  and  Spenser;  Irving  Layton  in Nietzsche, Catullus, the  Hebrew  prophets,  and  William  Carlos  Williams;  Jay  Macpherson  in Blake and  Northrop  Frye;  Ralph  Gustafson in Job,  Hopkins,  and  Melville;  Margaret Avison in Tycho Brahe, George Herbert, and Marianne Moore.
Professor Malcolm  Ross in the Introduction to his recent  paper-back  selection from the Confederation poets sees this eclectism in them also--and sees it, I think,

12

ECLECTIC DETACHMENT



as a kind of limitation or brake  on a too obvious nationalism:

Our  leap from  colony to nation  [he writes]  was accomplished  without  revolution, without  a  sharp  cultural and  ideological  break from  Europe,  without  the  fission and  fusion of Civil War. Roberts  and Carman learn as happily from Emerson and Royce as from  Browning,  Rossetti, and  Verlaine. And Darwin  is made  to take on the  look of a  Miramichi   backwoodsman!  True,  Lampman,  and  Roberts  suddenly find  they are Canadians. But they are also (and at  the same time)  thoroughgping provincials   (with  a  feeling  for  place) , and  thoroughgoing  citizens of  the  world (with a feeling for time).

The terms   provincialism, regionalism, and   colonialism are  not  generally   o.k. words,  and  a good  deal  of Canadian criticism  has been  a wasted  effort  either  to deny  or excuse  these appelations. Professor  Ross sees, however, that  these local applications do  not  rule  out  but  in Canadian poetry  go along  with  cosmopolitan ones.

Our   group  of  Confederation  Poets  is important for  us  [he  continues]-among other  reasons-because already  it shows forth  the peculiar  and  inevitable  "open­ ness" of the Canadian culture.

It is in an  "open" culture that  an  eclectic  detachment becomes  possible. Milton Wilson,  literary editor of  the  Canadian  Forum, and  perhaps the  most  receptive to  advanced  trends of  all  Canadian  literary critics,  had  already developed this idea  in some  brilliant paradoxes in a paper  read  before  the  Association  of  Cana­ dian  University Teachers of English  at Edmonton in June 1958  and easily avail­  able  in  the  Tamarack Review  No. 9· Part  of his purpose was to reconsider "that doubtful quantity, our  'sense of identity'." He does so by dealing with the problem first  in  relation  to  space-the effect  of  the  vastness  and the  emptiness of  the country into  which  a small  number of quite  divergent regions  have  been  placed  at intervals-and then in terms of time.

When  we  speak   (he  says)  of a  recognizably Canadian poet  we usually  mean  a regional  poet  who  uses the  distinctive  objects and  actions  of his locality as poetic material.  ...

After  mentioning some  of the regions where  an active  poetry  seems to be flourish­ ing particularly at the present  time-Montreal, New Brunswick, southern Ontario and  Toronto, and  the  West  Coast-Wilson goes on to point out that  labels  don't always  stick,  that  the  regionalists hop  about a good  deal, and that  "our regional- ism is perhaps more  a way of looking at things  than  a rooted  stance."                .

Perhaps  our identity is to be one of Miss (P. K.)  Page's 'Permanent Tourists', and

ECLECTIC DETACHMENT



our  larger  sense of  place  is best  expressed  by  the  kind  of  hopping  regionalism exemplified in  (Earle)  Birney's North-Star West-( or F. R. Scott's Trans-Canada)
-with its transcontinental series of scenes joined by compressed  air, and  its rapid shifts of perspective.

The effect of this is named  by the critic, accurately enough but  hardly  I think discriminatingly enough, as "a kind  of continental discontinuity". Not  discrimi­ natingly enough  because I discern  the very same  phenomenon in the contemporary poetry  of the  United States. It is a continental one,  a  North  American one,  not merely  a Canadian one.
Mr.  Wilson,  admitting that  all discussions of the Canadian poet's  sense of space tend  to  be  fanciful and  arbitrary, says that  "something more  substantial can  be said  about   his sense of poetic  time". What he goes on  to say  is something quite new  and  at  first seems startling, if not  bizarre; but  through paradox I believe he has  hit  on  the  truth, and  like the  poor  brother of the  fairy  tale  discovers  in our very limitations the source of our special good luck:

We have often  been told  [he  writes]  of our  necessary dullness because we had  no Revolutionary  War,  no French  Revolution,  no War  Between the States.  In  poetry likewise we  had  no  Renaissance,  no neo-Classicism, no Romanticism. But one of the advantages of a poetry less than  a hundred  years old is that  all the things that couldn't  happen  when they should have happened  keep happening all the time... . The  Canadian poet can be avant-garde with whatever  material  he chooses....  I even wonder  whether  colonialism may not be, in theory at least, the most desirable poetic  state.  It  gives you a catholic  sense of all  the  things  poetry  can  do without embarrassing  you by telling you what at  this particular moment  it can't.... The Canadian poet has all the models in the language  (not to mention other languages) at  his disposal, but  lacks the deadening  awareness that  he is competing  with them.

This bring   us  round   full  circle  to  freedom   of  choice  and   eclectic  detachment. There is only one  flaw,  as I see it, in this provincial paradise. There is a serpent lurking in  the  phrase  "lacks  the  deadening awareness that he is competing with them". It seems  to suggest  a double  standard-which I am  sure  is far  from  Mr. Wilson's intention. The   Canadian poet,  like  every  poet,  is in  competition with every other  poet,  past  and  present,  or, more  precisely he knows  he must be judged by  as severe  standards as any.  And  I  believe  that  it  is an  informed freedom of choice  that   comes  from  being  Canadian that  has  made  it  possible  for  our  best poets  to sustain  this test-and perhaps more easily than  if they had  been  English­ men or Americans.



STRUCTURE OF LOSS
The Poetry   of
Phyllis Webb




Helen W. Sonthoff





IN SEARCH OF  VALUES she cannot c!eacly see and will not live
without, Phyllis  Webb   writes  poems  which  reveal  both  the  lacerating chaos  of
human experience and  a  deliberate cutting in  to the  hard  core,  the  centre  that may  hold.  Since  one  may  not  in  the  instant  know  whether pain  is utimately  to­ ward  life or  toward death, the  experience of pain  in these  poems  is not  resolved in  terms  of  the  one  or  the  other.  The resulting  balance communicates a  kind  of passionate tough-mindedness, an anguished will to completeness.
Many  of  Phyllis  Webb's poems  are  luminous,  sensuous,  richly-colored, free  in
movement; some  burst  into  a rollicking  bawdiness  or gaity.  In  all of them,  from the  most  reckless  to  the  most  serenely  lyrical,  wit  both  releases  and  controls  the emotion. Balance, in  craft  and  in  attitude, is as significant as it is in  the  poems which  look for "seeds of meaning".
In  these  poems,  fury,  despair  and  bitterness  are responses  to the corruption and insignificance of man  in a meaningless world  that  "shifts  like an  island  in the sea, uneasily I like the  age", in a brutal world of "murder, ignorance and  lust",  whose history  is characterized by years "when soldiers  came I and  the  dogs and  harpies visited  churches". This  world  threatens to shatter  or smother whatever value  man may  hope  for. If he  retreats, he is trapped in a self too small,  too dark  to sustain
life. If he  walks  out  under   the  tormenting but  blank  and  nerveless  sun,  his day is splintered, chaotic in its endless round  and  rage.
It  is in  this  life  and  on  this  earth   that  Phyllis  Webb  seeks a  vision  one  might

STRUCTURE OF LOSS



claim  "with  tense impersonal  unworth". If it does not exist here, it does not exist at  all. The  vision and  the  hope' in  these poems  are  that  roundness may show wholeness, that light may be luminous, that  darkness may be "a deep place where green begins". But there is always the other and terrible  possibility, of meaningless circularity,  withering glare, brutal and blank darkness.
In  an  early  poem,  "Sprouts  the  Bitter  Grain", against  the  knowledge  of the
hot  rank  growth  of hatred  in the human  heart  is set a wistful nostalgia for "the weather  of  meadows, I the  seasons and  gardens  of children". But it is not  the brief longing  at  the end  that  balances the horror  of the main  part  of the poem. The  balance  lies rather  in certain images. Fury is seen as a "desperate love";  the bitter  grain  of  hatred,  growing  green  and  fervent,  is seen  also as "a  forest  of green  angels, a  threat  of magnificent  beasts". The  poem  moves from  a sense of
overwhelming   destruction,  through  recognition of  a  kind  of  love,  a  kind  of creativity  and  magnificence  in  the  bitter  experience,  to  a  cry  "to  the  gods of temperate climes". But this cry of other gods, this prayer for "praise" and for the destruction  of "these  criminal  branches",  hints  no  resolution. It is an exhausted posing of the central  ambivalence,  and out of the exhaustion  comes the nostalgia for an earlier, simpler experience.
This  ambivalence  characterizes  not  only  the  private,  singular  experience  but
also the  experience  of love in  its relationship  to society and  history. In  another early poem, love is "like falling glass shaking with stars I the air which tomorrow, or even today, will be I a slow terrible movement  of scars." Always there  are the two  possibilities:  that  our shattering,  fractional life may  be just endless destruc­ tion,  finally  meaningless,  and  that  this  shattering may  be  necessary  to  a  con­ struction  of value. A single poem may incline  toward  one view, but in the frame work of the  total  poem and  in its imagery,  the  possibility of the other is always
maintained.
In "Pain" the dominant  tone is positive.


Whether pain is simple as razors edging the fleshy cage, or whether pain raves with sharks inside the ribs,
it throws a bridge of value to belief
where, towards or away from, moves intense traffic.


Or, should the eyes focus to cubes and lights of pain and the breasts' exquisite asterisks breed circular grief, this bird of death is radiant and complex,
speeds fractional life over value to belief;

STRUCTURE OF LOSS



The  bridge spans by contemporary  pain
Centuries of historical birth.•


The view we  are  given  in  the  first stanza  is that  pain,  whether it cut  into  our flesh from  outside  or  tear  at  us from  within,  does reach  and  reveal  our  essential structure of  bone.  This  structure is like  a  bridge.  Pain   reveals,  establishes "a bridge  of value to belief".
This  is a spatial image. In  the second  stanza, pain  is seen as recurrent in time.
The   primary image is  the  phoenix. The  great  circle  of  flaming death and  life rising  from  it  contains both  the  pain  which,  like a  bright  light,  stabs  and  bums our   vulnerable flesh  and   also  the  pain  bred,  "a  circular grief", in  our  bodies. Pain, like the  phoenix "radiant and  complex", is able  to lift our  "fractional life" to belief.
The space  and  the  time  images  meet  and  spread  out  in  the  final  quick  stanza. Here   the  pain   which   reveals  each  man's  framework and   recurs  in  each  man's time,  our  "contemporary pain" which  has  been, is and  will always  be now, is a bridge  spanning "centuries of historical  birth".
The main  image   is constructive. But  the  bridge  of  the  first  stanza   can  carry traffic  two  ways,  toward  belief  and  away  from  it. The phoenix of  the  second stanza is a  bird  of  death. And  in  the  last stanza,  partly  through the  image  and partly  through the stillness at  the end  of a couplet  in a sequence of quatrains, we are  given  in  "centuries of  historical   birth" a  sense  of  pain  stretched over  vast travail, a sense of death and  futility.
These   undertones, precise  and  finely handled, have  the  effect  not  of blurring
but  of  extending the  meaning of  the  poem.  Characteristic of  much   of  Phyllis Webb's verse  is  the  view  that  in  a single  fact  there  are  conflicting  possibilities, that  it is of vital  importance to know  which  is real,  that  the  real  truth cannot be known  by any  glossing  over  of the fact  itself or dodging of its felt horror. There­ fore  whatever is must  be known,  must  be used. It  cannot be walked  away  from. No  part  or  aspect  can  be ignored. The  most powerful images  in these poems are, therefore, transmuting, not  transcending.




•  We wish to acknowledge  the permission of Miss Phyllis Webb to publish "A Pardon to my Bones", and  of Messrs McClelland  & Stewart  to publish "Pain" and a number of extracts  from other  poems included  in Miss Webb's volume Even Your  Right  Eye.
-Ed.

STRUCTURE OF  LOSS



0NE OF  THESE  IMAGES is bone. Bone is harder  than  flesh, and  deeper;  it  can  be fractured  and  is, finally, dust;  it is shaped  and  shaping,
rigid and  jointed; it is the skeleton which glistens with death  and it is the structure of our living.


This our inheritance is our distress,
born of the weight of eons it skeletons our flesh, bearing us on
we wear it,
though it bares us.


In  this first stanza of "... Is our Distress", the shaping  weight of eons is a dead weight,  but  we are in our living borne along  by it. It is an inheritance of a kind that  we can  neither  lose nor dissipate, since it is our  core, our  central  fact.  Yet there  is a distinction in this poem between our living person and our bones which link  us to  our  dead  and  to our  death: we  are  aware; we wear  our  skeleton. Though we  cannot   choose not  to, our  will  can  consent  or  not.  Here,  the  will consents, and  so it is as if the skeleton were also worn  externally,  apparent and obvious.
The  central  image,  clean as bone in the spare lines of the verse, is complicated in  the first stanza  by the grammatical  tension in the line "bearing us on",  which holds together  the action of our inheritance  on us (it skeletons our flesh)  and our action  (we wear it, though it bares us.) Through rhyme, the word "aware" in the second stanza  carries our wearing of our skeleton which  bares us forward  to des­ pair;  and  through  a kind of hovering sentence structure which has an effect like that  of a  hovering  accent,  despair  is given both  as the  nature  and  as the  result of our  act.  In  the last stanza,  the word "overture" carries  the sense  both of the involuntary and  the voluntary;  both our beginning  and  our act of  disclosure are seen  in  the  worn  skeleton. This  overture,  made  "where   prayers  of  defeat  are sown",  is, in the final image, an inheritance  which is bright, though "bright with
death I spangled with bone".
In  a recent  poem, "A Pardon  to My Bones", the central  image is no less com­ plex,  but  the  statement  and  structure  of  the  poem  are  broader,  easier. In  the singular   human   experience  of  this  poem,  one's  own  skeleton-always  in  some

18

STRUCTURE OF LOSS



way  separate from one's self-though  it seem  sometimes master, sometimes part­
ner, sometimes enemy, can   be  accepted. A  kind  of  peace  or  truce can be  made with  it.
With  the prescribed  number of bones
I have  walked  to this year,
but  have despised dear  bones' intent to grow,  to motivate, to be bent.

Some  cracked, yet show now lovely through the tent of flesh. Although ignored, misused, can now relent in this casual  thirty-third year
because  they walked  me here.

Because  they walked  me here there  has been gross expense of life's uneconomic science,
of love's long argument with common  sense, a relay race from past to present  tense.
The Hom of Plenty muted coming  near.
And so my bones have walked me here.

Because  they walked me here, sleep-walking sight-seer,
urban dirt,  personal graffitti,
the indecent exposure  of my city, plucked from  definite sex a baleful ditty,  moved  to a pagan  shout,  did not come clear because dumb bones have walked me here.

For  they  have walked  me here.
Or  we have danced  or pitched  in pain.
That all these bones are  jointed  by their  hooks
I am  dumbfounded as by a great  book whose leaves lie open, for illustration took the cheating history we revere.
Bones of the appointed animal twitch  the ear, and  I must  be appalled, merciful, must care that  my human bones have walked me here.

The inherited and shaping structure, the  number of whose  bones is prescribed, is imposed on  the  person of this  poem. She  has  walked with  them, but  feels more insistently walked  by  them, as  if  she  were   victim to  them. Because they have

STRUCTURE OF  LOSS



relentlessly walked  her  to this  place, they have involved  her  in  an expense that seems wasteful, in a race from past to present to past to present  that seems inter­ minable and exhausting.
But these bones are  not simply inherited,  shaping.  They  themselves grow and
are  bent. They  may even crack and  yet be finally lovely. Dumb,  persistent, they are also so tenaciously jointed as to make a whole, a single structure, so intricately jointed as to be capable of quick animal responsiveness.
Though the person of the poem has ignored, misused, despised this inherited structure  of her living, struggled or argued or shouted  out against it, she has now arrived at a view both comprehensive and detailed before which she acknowledges, wryly but  honestly and warmly, her own requirement: she must be appalled; she must also be merciful, must be concerned.
The  struggle recalled in this poem with wry humor  is a struggle maintained by
a refusal to stop short, by a will to pay whatever  must be paid that  the full truth of  living  be  known.  "The   cheating  history  we revere"  is not  enough.  But  the search  is  bewildering,  the  searcher  uncertain   because  the  facts  seem  to  speak contraries.
"Double Entendre" is centred  on these contraries,  and  on  the question,  rising from them, whether  "the  right I the light" is in the facts of the impersonal, inimi­ cal  universe or in  those facts seen, reflected in  man's  eye. The  first sequence  of images reveals a connection between structures  of the impersonal world and man­
made structures.


The seed white
 
beneath the flesh
red and diamonded under the skin
rough, round,


of the round pomegranate

hopes in essential shape
for a constellation of fruit

Just as the pregnant woman in the street
carrying her three-year-old son




20

STRUCTURE OF LOSS




is one and entire
 
the tribe of woman
weighed down by the race of man­
always to be renewed,



For the man killed
 
by the Temple clock when it fell
told me time had not stopped - Oh, only for him,

though I saw



in this unflattering
 
accidental
Irony
 



that he had indeed come



to a timely end
 
within the courtyards of the English
Courts of Law.



The  tough skin of the pomegranate is not, like the skin of an apple, a covering for flesh so much  as it is a bag for many seeds, many  cells of seed and  thin  red flesh. Seed  upon  seed  within  the flesh within  the skin, this is the shape,  tasting slightly acid, of hope-for more fruit, more seed.
The  woman  who carries both her unborn  and her born, male child carries seed
upon seed, but in this second image the natural impulse toward eternity, fertility, hope  of which  the  pomegranate is a symbol is reinforced  by the woman's  caring for her three-year-old  son. It is by acts not only of body but also of human imagi­ nation,  or emotion, or will, that she bears the hope "always to be renewed".
This  hope,  moving  in  human  history, is shaped  into  concepts  and  images of Time,  concepts  and  images  of Justice  so important and  real  to  man  that,  for example,  his own "timely  end"  does not end  time. Destroyed by his own images of time, man  may acknowledge the end of time for himself and yet speak its continuance.
These images are seen as "exaggerations  of the nature  of the Thing", and  they are  compared to such  reiterations  in  works of art  as Octavian's successive  mas­ querades  in Der Rosenkavalier, or as "the  portrait  of the artist I holding a  mir­ ror."  The  comparisons  elucidate  the meaning  of the  first sequence  of  images as


21

STRUCTURE OF  LOSS



exaggerations  of the nature  of the thing. When  the painter  uses a conscious con­ trivance  which clearly distinguishes between the man and the painting,  he empha­ sizes the  paintingness  of the  painting,  shows a portrait  not  as a  facsimile but  as itself, a new creation. And these comparisons with works of art also carry us one step  further   than  the  first triad  of images did  into  a  contemplation of man  as making,  as compelled  to make, even out  of his bone  and  flesh, "a  structure for his loss". The  image  of bone and  flesh, and  the next, "seeds of meaning", recall the first and simplest image. For the pomegranate's "hope" obviously requires its own destruction; it is the shape of fertility and eternity  only as it loses, must lose, its singular  form.  So the  woman  "weighed  down  by the  race  of man"; so the man  "indeed   come I to a  timely end".  A  circling  through   the  whole  chain  of images tightens again to the structure  of  hope as a structure for loss, to the copious seed as "pitiful", taken "from the dross".
The  double  meaning  that  lies at  the heart  of many  of Phyllis Webb's  poems leads to this circling  journey which man the maker, the seeker, the observer must
take.

For in his strange
peripheral orbit
of reality and dream


he wanders, wonders,
 
through the play within the play knowing not
which is the right the light


the star in the cold, staring sky,
or the star reflected in a human eye.















22



PREFACE
TO A	NOVEL


Malcolm Lowry



This  preface to the  French Edition of Under the  Volcano, which  casts consider­ able light on Malcolm  Lowry's view of his own  novel, was  prepared  while  Malcolm Lowry was working  with  Clarisse Franc;il­ lon  on  her  translation  of   his  novel;  the final  version   was  actually prepared in French from Lowry's English notes, so that no  English  original  exists.  The  following translation  has   been   made  by  George Woodcock. The  edition  of Under the Vol­ cano  in  which  the  preface  appeared   was published by Correa  and the Club Franc;ais du  Livre in 1949  and  reprinted by Correa in 1960.
IUKE PREFACES. I <ead them. Sometimes I do not 'ead  any
farther, and  it  is possible  that   you  may  do  the  same.  In  that  case,  this  preface
will  have  failed  in  its  purpose, which  is to make  your  access to my  book  a little more  easy.  Above  all,  reader, do  not  regard   these  pages  as  an  affront to  your intelligence. They  prove  rather that  the  author here and  there  questions his own.
To  begin  with,  his very style may assume  an embarrassing resemblance to that
of  the  German writer  Schopenhauer describes,  who  wished  to express  six things at  the  same  time  instead of discussing  them  one after  the  other. "In those long, rich   parenthetical periods,   like  boxes  enclosing  boxes,  and   crammed  more  full than roast  geese stuffed   with  apples,  one's  memory  above  all is put  to  the  task, when   understanding and   judgment should   have  been  called  upon   to  do  their work."
But  to take a criticism  of style-as Schopenhauer conceived  it-as a criticism  ot the  mind  and  character of the  author or even,  as others would  like, of the  man himself,  is beside  the  point. That at  least  is what  I wrote  in  1946,  on  board  a

23

PREFACE TO  A NOVEL



bauxite ship in the middle of the waves between New Orleans and Port-au-Prince. That preface was never published. As for this one, the first reason for my drafting it was the fact that  in 1945 my book received a very lukewarm  welcome from an English  firm  (which  has since done  me the  honour  of publishing it). Although the  publishers  considered the work "important and  honest",  they suggested wide corrections  which  I  was reluctant to  make. (You  would  have  reacted  in  the same way had  you written a book and  been so tormented  by it that  you rejected and  rewrote  it many  times.)  Among other  things, I was advised to suppress two or  three  characters,  to reduce  the  twelve chapters  to six, to change  the subject, which  was too similar  to that  of Poison; in short,  to throw  my book out of the window and  write another.  Since I now have the honour  of being translated  into French,   I  take  up  once again  my letter  of reply to my publisher  and  friend  in London.  The  enterprise  was doubtless  a  foolish one:   to give all kinds of good esoteric reasons why the work should stay just as it was in the beginning.
Those  reasons  I  have  now  almost  completely  forgotten,  and  perhaps  that  is
lucky for you. It is in fact all too true, as Sherwood  Anderson  has remarked,  that in  all  concerning  his work a  writer  assumes the  most extraordinary  pretensions and is ready to justify anything. It is also likely that one of the few honest remarks an  author has ever made  was that  of Julien  Green  on  the subject,  I  believe, of his masterly  Minuit:  "My  intention  was-and has ever since remained  to me­ obscure."
In writing this book, which was started  when I was twenty-six (I am now about to salute  my fortieth  year)  and  finished five years ago, my intention  did  not  at first seem to me obscure, although  it became  more so as the years went on. But, whether  obscure  or  not, it still remains  a fact  that  one of my intentions  was to write a book.
And,  indeed,  my intention  was not  to write  a  tedious  book. I  do not  believe a single  author, even the most irascible of them  all, has ever had  the deliberate intention  of wearying his reader, though it has been said that boredom can be used as a technique. But once this book did in fact appear  boring to a reader-and  a professional reader  at that-I thought  it necessary to reply to the observations of that  professional reader, and here is the gist of what I wrote. All this may perhaps appear  to you terribly vain and  pompous, but  how can  you explain  to someone who claims to have been bored by your prose that  he was in the wrong for letting himself be bored?
"Dear Sir,"  I  wrote then,  "Thank you for  your letter  of the  29th  November
1945· I  received  it  only on  New  Year's  Eve.  Moreover,  it  reached  me here in

PREFACE TO  A  NOVEL



Mexico  where,  entirely  by chance,  I  am  living in  the  tower  which  served as a model for the house of one of my characters. Ten  years ago I had only seen that tower from the outside, and-in chapter  VI-it became the place where my hero too experienced some slight vexations as a result of delayed mail ..."
Then  I went  on  to say that  if my work had  already  assumed  the classic form
of the printed  page instead  of the sad and desolate aspect which characterises an unpublished   manuscript, the  opinion  of  the  reader  would  certainly  have  been entirely  different   because  of  the  various critical  judgments that  would  have assailed his ears. Since  the  tiresomeness or otherwise of the  beginning  of Under the Volcano  appeared to me dependent  on the reader's state of mind, on his readi­ ness to seize the  author's intention,  I suggested-doubtless in  desperation  of my cause-that a brief  preface  might  neutralise  the reactions  which my  professional reader  foresaw.  I  continued thus:   "If you tell me  that  a  good  wine  needs no label,  I  may  perhaps  reply  that  I  am not  talking about  wine but  about  mescal, and  that  even  more  than  a  label-once one  had  crossed  the  threshold  of  the tavern-mescal calls for  the  accompaniment of both  salt  and  lemon.  I  hope at least that such a preface may bring a little lemon and salt."
In  this way I wrote  a letter  of round  about  2o,ooo words, which took me the time I might  just as well have employed on starting  the first draft  of a new novel, even  more  boring  than  the  other.  And since, in the eyes of my reader,  the first chapter  seemed  to be the  novel's greatest crime, I limited  myself to an analysis of that  long first chapter which establishes the themes and  counter-themes of the book, which sets the tone, which harmonises the symbolism.
The  narrative, I explained,  begins on All Souls' Day, in November,  1939, in a
hotel called Casino de Ia Selva-selva meaning  wood. And  perhaps  it would not be out of place to mention  here that the book was first of all conceived rather pretentiously  on  the  sempiternal model  of Gogol's Dead  Souls, and  as the  first leaf in the triptych  of a kind of drunken  Divine Comedy. Purgatory and Paradise were  to  follow,  with  the  protagonist, like Chichikov,  becoming  at  each  stage slightly better  or  worse, according  to one's point of view. (However,  if one is to believe a recent authority, the incredible Vladimir  Nabokov,  the progression postulated  by Gogol was rather: Crime, Punishment,  Redemption; Gogol threw almost all of Punishment and  Redemption  into the fire.)  The  theme of the dark wood, introduced once again in Chapter  VII  when the Consul enters a lugubrious cantina  called  El  Bosque,  which  also means  wood, is resolved  in  Chapter IX, which  relates  the  death  of the  heroine  and  in which  the  wood  becomes reality and also fatality.

25

PREFACE TO  A NOVEL



This first chapter  is shown through  the eyes of a French  film producer,  Jacques Laruelle.  He  establishes a kind of survey of the  terrain, just as he expresses the slow, melancholy  and  tragic rhythm  of Mexico itself:  Mexico, the meeting place of many  races, the ancient  battleground of social and  political conflicts where, as Waldo  Frank,  I believe, has shown, a colourful  and  talented  people maintained a religion which was virtually a cult of death. It is the ideal setting for the struggle of a human  being against the powers of darkness and light.
After  leaving  the  Casino  de la  Selva, Jacques Laruelle  finds himself looking into  the  barranca which  plays a  great  part  in  the  story,  and  which  is also the ravine,  that  cursed  abyss which in  our  age every  man  presents to  himself, and also, more simply, if the reader prefers it, the sewer.
The  chapter  ends  in another  cantina  where  people  are  talking  refuge during an unseasonal storm, while elsewhere, all over the world, people are crawling into the  air-raid  shelters;  then  the lights go out,  just  as, all over  the  world  as well, they are  going  out.  Outside,  in that  night  created  by the tempest,  the luminous wheel is turning.
That wheel  is the  Ferris  wheel erected  in  the  middle  of the square,  but  it is also, if you like, many other  things:  the wheel of the law, the wheel of Buddha. It  is even  eternity,  the  symbol  of  the  Everlasting   Return. That  wheel,  which demonstrates  the  very form  of the  book, can  also be considered  in a  cinemato­ graphic  manner  as the wheel of Time, which is about  to tum  in an inverse direc­ tion,  until  we reach  the preceding year. For the  beginning  of the second chapter  brings us to All Souls' Day a year before, in November, I 938.






AT THIS  POINT I tried  modestly  to insinuate  that  my little book seemed to me denser and deeper, composed and  carried  out with more care than  the English publisher supposed; that if its meanings  had escaped the reader, or if the latter  had  deemed  uninteresting  the  meanings  that  float on the surface of the narrative, this might have been due at least in part  to a merit rather  than a failing  of mine.  In  fact, had  not the more  accessible aspect  of the book been designed so carefully  that  the reader  did not wish to take  the trouble  of pausing to go below the surface? "If that  is true,"  I added, not without  a certain  vanity, "for how many books can it be said?"
In  a more sentimental  tone, but  with only an  appearance of greater  modesty,

PREFACE TO  A  NOVEL



I  then  wrote  as follows:   "Since  I  am  asking for a  re-reading  of the Volcano, in  the  light  of  certain  aspects  which  may not  have occurred  to you, and  since I  do  not  wish  to  undertake a  defence of every  paragraph, it may  be as well for  me  to admit  that  in  my view the  principal  failing of the book, from  which all the others flow, lies in something which cannot  be remedied:  the mental bag­ gage of the book is subjective  rather  than  objective; it would better suit a poet-
1 do  not  say a good  poet-than a novelist, and  it is a baggage  very difficult to
carry  as far  as its destination.  On  the other  hand,  just as a tailor who knows his customer's  deformity  tries to hide it,  I have  tried  as far  as possible to hide  the faults  of my understanding. But since the conception  of the work was primarily poetic,  these  deformities  may  hardly  matter  after  all. Besides, poems often  call for several readings  before their meaning is revealed-is exposed in the mind as I believe Hopkins said-and it is precisely that notion which you have overlooked." I demanded the most serious examination  of the text, and I asked how, without appreciating its contents,  the reader  had  reached  his view that  the book was too long, particularly since his reaction might well be different after a second reading. Did  not  readers,  just as much  as authors,  take a risk of falling over themselves by going too fast? And  what  a boring book it must be if so hasty a reading  were
all that could be granted!
I went on  to explain  that  my novel consists of twelve chapters,  and  the main part  of the narrative is contained  within a single day of twelve hours. In the same way, there are twelve months in a year and  the whole book is enclosed within the limits of a year, while that deeper layer of the novel-or the poem-which derives from  myth  is linked  at  this  point  with  the  Jewish  Cabbala, where  the number twelve is of the greatest importance. The  Cabbala  is used for poetic ends because it  represents  Man's spiritual  aspirations.  The  Tree  of Life, its emblem, is a kind of complicated  ladder  whose summit is called Kether,  or Light, while somewhere in its midst  an  abyss opens out. The  spiritual  domain  of the  Consul is probably Qliphoth, the world of husks and demons, represented  by the Tree of Life turned upside  down  and  governed by Beelzebub, the  God  of Flies. All this  was not essential  for  the  understanding of the  book;  I mentioned  it  in  passing so as to give the feeling, as Henry James has said, "that depths exist".
In  the Jewish  Cabbala the abuse of magic powers is compared  to drunkenness or the abuse of wine, and is expressed, if I remember  rightly, by the Hebrew word sod. Another  attribution of  the  word  sod signifies garden,  or  neglected  garden, and  the  Caballa  itself is sometimes considered  as a garden  (naturally similar  to that where grew the tree of forbidden  fruit which gave us the Knowledge of Good

PREFACE TO  A NOVEL



and  Evil),  with  the Tree  of Life planted  in  the middle.  In  one way or another these matters are at the base of many of our legends regarding the origins of man, and  William James, if not Freud,  might be in agreement  with me when I affirm that  the  agonies of the drunkard find a very close parallel  in the agonies of the mystic who  has abused  his powers. Here  the Consul  has brought  everything  to­ gether  in  a  magnificently  drunken  fashion.  In  Mexico,  mescal  is a  formidable drink  but  a drink  which one can get in any cantina  much  more easily, if I may say so, than Scotch whisky in the Impasse des Deux-Anges.  (Let me say in passing that  I see I have done wrong to mescal and  tequila,  which are drinks I like very much, and for that  I should perhaps present my apologies to the Mexican govern­ ment.)  But mescal is also a drug which is taken in the form of  mescalin, and the transcendance of its effects is one of the best-known experiments among occultists. It seems as though  the Consul has confused the two states, and  perhaps after  all he is not in the wrong.
This  novel, to use a phrase  of Edmund  Wilson, has for its subject  the forces
that dwell within man and lead him to look upon himself with terror.  Its subject is also the fall of man,  his remorse, his incessant struggle  towards  the light  under the weight of the past, which is his destiny. The  allegory is that  of the Garden  of Eden,  the  garden  representing  this world  from  which  we are  now even a little more  under  the  threat  of ejection  than  at  the  moment  when  I wrote  this book. On  one level, the drunkenness of the Consul may be regarded  as symbolising the universal drunkenness of war, of the period that precedes war, no matter when. Throughout the twelve chapters,  the destiny of my hero can  be considered in its relationship  to the destiny of humanity.
"I hold to the number  twelve," I then added. "It is as if I heard a clock sound­
ing midnight  for Faust, and when I think of the slow progression of the chapters, I feel that  neither  more nor less than  twelve should  satisfy me. For the rest, the book is stratified  in numerous  planes. My effort has been to clarify as far as pos­ sible whatever  at first presented itself to me in a complicated  and esoteric manner.  The  novel can  be read simply as a story during  which  you may-if  you  wish­ skip  whole  passages, but  from  which  you will get far  more  if you  skip nothing at  all. It  can  be regarded  as a kind of symphony or opera,  or even as something like a  cowboy fihn. I  wanted to  make  of it a  jam  session, a  poem,  a song, a tragedy,  a  comedy,  a  farce.  It  is superficial,  profound,  entertaining, boring, according  to one's  taste. It  is a  prophecy,  a  political  warning, a cryptogram,  a crazy film, an  absurdity,  a writing on the wall. It can be thought  of as a kind of machine; it works, you may be sure, for I have discovered that  to my own expense.

PREFACE TO  A NOVEL



And  in case you should  think  that  I have made of it everything  except a novel, I  shall  answer  that  in  the  last  resort it is a  real novel that  I  have  intended  to write, and even a damnably serious novel."
In  short,  I  made  terrific  efforts to explain  my own idea  of this  unfortunate
volume; I waged a notable battle for the work as it stood, as it was finally printed, and  as it  today  appears  for my French  readers. And  remember,  I wrote all that in  Mexico, in the very place where ten years before I had started  my book, and in the end  I received, from  the hands of the same tiny postman  who brought  the Consul his delayed postcard, the news that it had been accepted.
After  this long  preamble,  my dear  French  reader, it would perhaps  be honest of me to admit  to you that  the idea I cherished in my heart was to create a pioneer work in its own class, and  to write at last an authentic  drunkard's story. I do not know whether  I have succeeded. And now, friend, I beg you continue  your walk along  the Seine, and  please replace  this book where you found  it, in the second­
hand  bookseller's 100-franc  box.

MALCOLM LOWRY,
September, 1948.
















o•oiia•a onfi
••












I. Robert Fulford


"Culture is a many-faceted  jewel, each facet of which must be measured  by a different  instrument ... It is important to all of us to know the  relative  status  of Canada's cultural development
... to keep on knowing it ... and  to make every effort to ensure that   it  keeps  on  expanding,  so  that   Canada   can  continue   to grow as a strong, virile nation."-Program, Canadian Conference of the Arts.

"This is a conference for the suppression of the arts."-Member, Agenda  and   Conference   Committee, Canadian  Conference   of the  Arts.
LaNlGHTS  AFTER  the Canadian Conference  of the Arts con­
cluded   on  May  6, a group  of Toronto painters, sculptors, musicians and  writers
held, in the  beerball basement  of a midtown restaurant, a "Canadian  Conference on  the  Canadian  Conference of the Arts". Signs on the  wall said  "Peace through love"  and  "Peace through art". A badly  played  saxophone made gestures  toward modern  jazz,  and  a  loudspeaker blared. There  was  a  reading of some  Chinese poetry,  and   there   were   "statements",  mostly   incoherent, from   several   of  the painters present. When each  one finished,  a young  lady said over the loudspeaker: "Thank you for  your  contribution. That was very con-tro-ver-si-al, and, after  all, controversy is what  we are here for. We all like controversy."
But  it  was  no  good.  Everyone  drank  a great  deal  of beer,  everyone  eventually
danced and  had  a good  time,  but  no one really  believed  that  an  effective  parody of  the  Canadian  Conference of  the  Arts  had  been  achieved. The conference, it turned out,  was so mindless,  so lacking  in  purpose or  point  of view,  that  it was effectively  parody-proof.
The Canadian Conference of the  Arts  (formerly the  Canadian Council of the

go



A CULTURAL
FLIRTATION Two Views of the Conference of the Arts















Arts)  is the name of an organization  made up of organizations. The  thirty-seven members range in importance from the National Ballet Guild of Canada through the  Association of  Canadian  Industrial Designers down  to the  Brantford,  Ont., Arts Council.  The  conference  which took place-perhaps occurred describes the occasion better-at the O'Keefe  Centre  in May was apparently the result of the national  organization's desire to do something with itself. It was decided to call a conference which would be of a generally artistic nature, which would be open to the public, and  which would bring together both Canadian and  foreign artists in most fields of creative activity.
The  purpose  of this  was not decided  in advance,  and  is not  yet evident. The
front  page  of the  program  carried  a lamentable  slogan,  "To  measure  Canada's cultural  maturity". But  even the  director,  Alan Jarvis,  disowned  this idea as an adman's slogan,  a  week before  the  conference began.  As it finally fell together, the week-end was a mixture  of art exhibit, concert, poetry  reading,  panel discus­ sions, and  speeches. The  art  exhibit  brought  together paintings  and sculpture  by artists  who  had  received  Canada Council  grants,  and  it turned  out  to  be no advertisement  for the  Council.  There  was a good deal of valuable art,  but there was much  that  was bad  and  many of the individual  pieces seemed no more than

A CULTURAL FLIRTATION



eccentric.  The  concert,  given  by  the  C.B.C.  symphony,  was  made  up  entirely of  work  by  contemporary   Canadian composers,  like  Barbara   Pentland, Harry Somers, and  John  Weinzweig. It drew an encouragingly  large audience.
But the speeches and the panel discussions presented  more serious problems. As the conference  drew near, those responsible for it began to exhibit signs of  uneasi­ ness. No one  had  any idea what it was all about.  Sir Julian  Huxley  was coming from  Britain, Isamu  Noguchi was coming from the United  States, and planeloads of painters  and  poets were on their  way from  Quebec.  Yet by  the middle of the last  week  before  the  conference,  those  responsible  for  panel  discussions  were coming  agonizingly  to the conclusion that  they  were in  danger  of acting  out  in public the classic dream  in which a dreamer  becomes a concert  pianist, sits down at the piano  before a huge audience, and then  realizes that  he cannot  play. They were calling  each  other  on the telephone,  begging  for  instructions  and  receiving instead  confessions of equal ignorance. On  the day the conference opened, George Lamming of  the  West  Indies  could  be found  in  the  bar,  asking  what  he  was expected  to do. He  had,  after  all, come a long  way.
This  private  concern  became  a public embarrassment when  the  panel  discus­
sions  began.  On  the  Friday  afternoon,  Lamming opened  the  literary  panel  by remarking:  "One  thing  the  panelists  have  in  common  is an  utter  uncertainty about  why they are  here and  what  they are going to say." This  was followed by a statement from  Mordecai  Richler:  "I don't  know  what  to say to you. I don't see why you're  having  this conference-!don't understand what  it's about." In other  panels held simultaneously-on music, on art, on theatre,  on town planning
-there was more earnest discussion. Yet a distinguished  foreign artist was heard
saying, as he left the  room at the end of the art  panel: "Take me out of here. I
can't  stand  any more of it." He was rushed off to his hotel.
Most  of the  arguments  I heard  had  the intellectual content  of casual, coffee­ house chatter; yet they lacked  the saving grace  of informality,  since most of the panelists  seemed  to  feel that  the occasion called  for  the  most  extensive  possible use of formalized  language  and  even outright  cliche. Suburbia  was condemned,  and  so was the  poor  market for serious books and  the public's lack of interest  in town  planning. Sir Julian  Huxley rose from the audience  at one panel discussion to say that  there  was a great  need for a publicity  campaign  which would  make the public aware  of the need for a better physical environment. Only a few hard­ shelled artists let it slip that  they didn't  much care what the public thought.
In  general,  the artists involved in the conference  found  it pointless and  even a little  degrading. ( Richler  remarked  afterwards that  the most serious controversy

32

A CULTURAL FLIRTATION



of the week-end concerned  whether  the participants should have to pay for their own drinks.)  But for the artistic middlemen-patrons, collectors, critics, directors, producers,  town  planners-it had  some small  value.  They  were allowed  to  ex­ change  ideas,  and   to  obtain  from  each  other  a  sympathetic   hearing  for  their complaints   about   the  public.  Occasionally  they  even  managed   to  inspire  one another.  At one point, in a panel discussion on the applied  arts, the British archi­ tect Jane  Drew sketched  eloquently and  memorably her own hopes for the future of cities. Her  ideas  were naive almost beyond belief, but  their  very  hopelessness gave them  a special charm. This, like most of the conference,  was entirely spon­ taneous. Only  a few speakers arrived with prepared  papers, and of  these only one was genuinely  thoughtful:  Northrop  Frye's  talk on  academicism  in the arts,  in which  he suggested  that  a scholarly and  historical approach  was one of the dis­ tinguishing  marks  of  the  modern  artist.  Later,  during  a  poetry  reading,  Irving Layton paused long enough to condemn Frye's speech and insist that academicism was death for the artist.
Masochistically,   the  audience   of  tastemakers  reserved  its  most  enthusiastic
applause  for a witty attack  on themselves. Russell Lynes, the managing  editor of Harpers, began  by making  his target  obvious:  "this  distinguished  group  that  I think  I can safely call tastemakers."  Then  he said that  what Jacques  Brazun  had called  America's   love  affair  with  culture  was  more  a  flirtation  than  a  serious affair.  Audiences,  he  felt,  were ogling  the  arts  without  really  coming  to  grips with  them,  and  tastemakers  were  setting  artificial  barriers  between  artist  and audience.  "I sometimes wonder if the artist of our time isn't being understood  to death-over-interpreted, over-criticized,  over-explained and  overwhelmed  with self -consciousness.''
The readiness with which the audience accepted this criticism, and the eagerness with  which  Lynes'  point  of view was discussed later,  suggested  to me that  the people who attended the conference were already deeply conscious of their own shortcomings.   "You   have  revealed  us  to  ourselves,"  the  chairman   told  Lynes happily  at  the  end  of the  talk, but it would  have been more correct  to say that he  articulated  certain   fears  which  had  already  half-formed   themselves in  the minds of his listeners. They seemed pitifully anxious to stand condemned of flirting with culture,  of taking  art frivolously, and finally of helping to destroy that which they  affected  to love. But it would  be unfortunate if the  judgment  were not  ap­ pealed, for the role of the tastemaker is surely not without  honor of some kind. We can  examine  several  fields in  which  no tastemakers  operate  effectively-current television,  say,  or  Detroit   automobile  design, or  low-cost  residential  housing-


33

A CULTURAL FLIRTATION



without  finding  any support  for the idea  that  creators  and  public can get along better by themselves. Lynes may be bored-certainly most of the artists at the conference   were  bored-with the  professional  art   appreciators, the  designers' guilds,  the  culture-pushing  women's  committees;   but  in  a  culturally  insecure society these forces  have at  least temporary  value.
On  a more serious level, many of the participants were obviously conscious of a  failure  which  they  could  neither  understand  nor  excuse.  The  theme  of  the conference  emerged  as their  dissatisfaction  with  their  own  efforts  to  develop  a humane   community.  A sense of guilt  turned   up,  again  and  again,  in  talks by town  planners,  architects,  designers, theatre  people. Robert  Whitehead reported on the melancholy condition of the Broadway theatre,  and William Kilbourn  gave an  angry  talk  on  community  planning.  In  both  cases, and  in  others,  the public was given some of  the  blame;  but  in  no case could  the speaker  avoid  his own failure  to make his own ideas applicable  and  effective. They  all seemed to know that  much  of their talk was meaningless except to themselves;  the public was still out  there,  unguided  and  essentially hostile, and  no  amount  of panel  discussing was likely to change it.


2. Robert Weaver
T.CANADIAN   CONFERENCE  of  the  Arts  took  place   at the
O'Keefe  Centre  in Toronto at  the end  of the first week in  May.  Two  or three
days later  one of the  organizers  told a friend  of mine:  "The Conference  was a great  success. Every meal was over-subscribed!"
That  may even  have  been as safe a way as any  to  judge  what  was  (in  large part  deliberately)   a  circus of the  arts.  For  on  another level participants in  the Conference  have  been  arguing  about  its success or  failure  ever since it  ended. Alan Jarvis, who was the Conference's  National  Director,  informed  readers of his syndicated  newspaper  column "The Things  We See" that it was indeed a success. Mordecai  Richler,  who was on the literary panel,  wrote in The  Star Weekly that the Conference was a flop.
The  Conference  was designed to promote unity, but  a good deal of the time it succeeded  in  emphasizing  division. In  the  afternoon panel  sessions the  various arts were carefully segregated-though whether  the miscegenation  that  Mordecai Richler  advocated   would  have  been  a good  idea  is at  least open  to argument.

34

A CULTURAL FLIRTATION



There   was  division  between  the  writers  and  artists  on  the  one  hand  and  their audience  on  the other.  There  was even division between  some of the organizers and  the artists  they had  invited  to attend; at the afternoon  cocktail hour most of the  writers,  painters,  and  musicians were out front  with the  public  buying  their own drinks while segregated  private parties were going on backstage. Most of the comments  about  the Conference  that  I heard came from novelists or poets, but I spoke afterwards to one or two musicians and theatre  people as well. From their point  of view,  Mordecai  Richler  had  it  taped: the  Conference  of the Arts  was a flop.
This  was the second  arts conference  with which I've  been actively concerned,
and  its atmosphere was strikingly  different  from  that  of the first, the  Kingston Writers'  Conference  in  the  summer  of 1955· F.  R.  Scott  got the  idea  for  that gathering. He  came to Toronto  for an informal  planning  session with a few liter­ ary people;  there  was an informal  meeting later in Kingston.  Queen's University provided  an  umbrella  for  the conference;  the Rockefeller Foundation donated  a few thousand  dollars.
From  such  casual  beginnings  the  Kingston  conference  grew into  a  three  day
meeting that  surprised  almost everyone with its cheerful, useful and  unpretentious feeling. It had,  of course, certain  advantages  that  were lacking  in Toronto this year. It was limited  to writers and editors, and  they speak more or less the same language.  (But even at Kingston  the poets tried to scorn the magazine and C.B.C. writers, and  condescended  to the novelists.)  Kingston is a small city, and  no one had  much  trouble  meeting  the people he wanted  to meet. There  were plenty of parties,  and  they were easy to find. There  was enough  privacy for writers to talk seriously, and  without  too much posing, to one another.
(I've  always  thought  that  the success of the Kingston  conference  was demon­ strated  in  a  rather  ironical  way;  as soon as it was over,  the delegates from  the West  Coast  hurried   back  to set  up  their  own  regional  conference.  Despite  the C.P.R., C.N.R., T.C.A. and  C.B.C., British Columbia  still resists Confederation.) There  was little that  was casual or informal  about the Canadian Conference  of
the  Arts.  It was  preceded  by eighteen  months'  planning  complete  with  formal
meetings, minutes,  parliamentary procedure, committees and sub-committees,  and a  permanent secretariat. Its budget  was in the neighborhood  of $75,ooo.oo. The money came from the Canada Council, from the Province of Ontario and Metro­ politan  Toronto, from  the  Atkinson  and  Koerner  Foundations, and  from  more than  thirty companies and individuals.
The  formality  of the Conference  was made inescapable by the decision to hold


35

A CULTURAL FLIRTATION



it  in  the  O'Keefe  Centre.  This  Theatre, which  looms like an  expensive matron over  downtown  Toronto, has a peculiar  place in the  city. Many  theatre  people despise it as nothing more than a home-away-from-home for wandering Broadway musicals, yet in one year it has made Toronto  the second theatre  centre in North America.  The  theatre  itself is large,  handsome  and  not  too  fussy, but  its  sur­ roundings  are  pretentious. The  Centre  provided  the Conference  of the Arts with the space  it needed,  but it made  it hopelessly difficult to find  people and  almost impossible to communicate  naturally  and spontaneously.
The  Conference  of the Arts really had its beginnings in 1945 when the Canad­
ian  Arts  Council  was formed.  This  organization   set  out  to  gather  information about  the arts and to lobby for various cultural  programs. It supported  the Massey Commission and  promoted  the Canada Council. It sponsored a lavish survey The Arts in Canada, which was edited  by Malcolm  Ross and  published  by the  Mac­ millan  Company.  But when  one of the battles  it fought  had  been won  and  the Canada Council had been established, the Canadian Arts Council was faced with a double  irony:  it had  to change its name, and  it had  to find new reasons for its existence.
·  So the Canadian Conference of the Arts was born, and the cultural  circus at the O'Keefe  Centre  was held partly to discover whether a national, semi-annual con­ ference  might  provide  in itself a  useful function.  At  the  same  time  the  annual  business meetings  were held of the  nearly  forty  organizations from  French  and English  Canada that  are member societies of the Conference  of the Arts. These groups  range  from  Actors' Equity  to the Canadian Society of  Creative  Leather­ craft,  and from the Royal Architectural Institute  of Canada to the Brantford  Arts Council.
The  public sessions in the afternoons and evenings ranged over a wide territory. At  the  poetry  reading  on the first night five poets read-Earle Birney, Leonard Cohen,  Gilles Henault, Jay  Macpherson,  and  Irving  Layton-and they were all, I  think  (even  Mr.  Layton) , as astonished  and  terrified  as I was to find several hundred people waiting for the reading.  I've  heard  most of the poets read  better on other  occasions, but  I've  rarely seen a more  attentive  audience. There was a lesson in  the  poetry reading:  it was one of those rare occasions during  the Con­ ference  when  the artist spoke to his public solely as an artist.
But if the poetry reading seemed to be a success, the literary  panel, which I had organized,  was a disaster. I  think  everyone on the two panels  would agree with that  judgment; the writers were sour, gloomy and dispirited. On the first afternoon I wandered  away for half an hour to see what the other  panels were doing. There

g6

A CULTURAL FLIRTATION



was a deathly  hush where the musicians had gathered, and a friend  told me after­ wards  that  the hush was almost unbroken  for two long afternoons.  The  painters were fighting:  a bearded, aggressive, humourless Toronto artist  in the  audience baiting  Alan  Jarvis  (in  the chair)  and  Harold  Town  (on  the panel) . Mr. Jarvis finally offered  the beard  the use of the microphone,  the audience booed its nega­ tive vote, the  painter  left in a huff  (wife in wake).  I left for  the theatre,  where the dramatic arts  were huddled  in discussion on the enormous stage. This panel looked lonely and  puny  in the empty cavern of the  theatre,  but its talk sounded professional if not greatly exciting.
No conference  can  be quite  as complete a failure as Arnold  Edinborough said
this one was:  at the very least people meet and talk together.  But when you con­ sider  the  energy  and  the  money that  went  into the  Conference  of the Arts, the meetings in Toronto  seem an awful bust. There  were plans that  didn't work out. At  one  stage  the  keynote speaker  was expected to be Andre  Malraux,  but  that entangled   the  Conference  in surprisingly  high-level  diplomacy, and  they finally got for the keynote speech  (possibly for their sins)  Sir Julian  Huxley.
Everything  I  have  written  here is hindsight,  of course, and  so have been the
other  public  criticisms made  since the Conference  ended.  No one spoke up loud and  clear in the planning  sessions, partly because long before May the Conference had  somehow  achieved  an  impetus  of its own that,  I suspect, left even its most fervent  organizers somewhat  dazed and  helpless. And  on the other  hand  scarcely any writers or painters or musicians or theatre directors refused to attend: the Conference  was painful evidence that there are no real intellectual  and ideological differences in the arts in this country, and that the arts would be healthier if there were. (Sad  to watch  Mordecai  Richler and Hugh  MacLennan unable  to manage any real disagreement.)  The  Conference  took on that  fatal  air of patronage and condescension that  must hang over Park Avenue committees in aid of Negro sharecroppers. It had  no real aim except to try to discover an aim for itself.
It  is sad  to  think  now  how many  other  functions  the Conference  of the Arts
might  have found  for itself. It  might  have raised $75,ooo.oo  to sponsor some of the writers and artists the Canada Council has to turn  down each year; or to help establish experimental theatres; or to subsidize The Canadian Forum for a decade; or  to  help  begin  a  monthly  magazine  of all the arts.  In  the future  there is one function  it  might  well undertake: it might campaign  annually  to raise the addi­ tional  money the Canada Council needs to do its job adequately. In  any case, no more  Conferences  of the  Arts. For  what  the Conference  at  the  O'Keefe  Centre demonstrated is that  good will is not enough.

37



A	MARITIME
MYTH



Donald  Stephens





IT IS  AMAZING, though   not  surpnsmg, what  Bliss Cat-man means to a majority  of Canadians. They  think back to school days, hesitate, and
mention  "Low  Tide on Grand  Pre", falter over whether  or not he wrote "Tantra­ mar  Revisited",  muse over "Vestigia"   ('I took a day  to search  for  God'), and lapse  into  memories  of other  school days in  other  times. For  the  people in  the Maritimes, things  are  different,  but  not  much.  Thanks to  the  New  Brunswick Tourist  Bureau,  Fredericton  is called the Poet's Comer  of  Canada, with the elms
-some decayed-magically reminiscent of the vaulted  ceilings of the other Poet's
Comer   in  Westminster  Abbey. At  the  University  of  New  Brunswick  there  is a plaque  dedicated  to Carman,  Roberts,  and  Sherman, and  a bronze  bust of  Car­ man  in  the  foyer  of its library  whose much  needed  haircut  receives  jibes  from students,  and  professors, alike. Once a tree was planted  at Carman's grave  ("Let  me have a scarlet maple for the grave-tree at my head") but that was twenty-five years after  his death,  and  was brought  to the  attention  of the  university by an American  tourist, and  the university succumbed  in an  anniversary  mood. People mumble  about  Carman, and  are proud.  His poems are not fondly  remembered; rather,  there  is an  apathy,  a superficial awareness  that  a poet  once roamed  the New Brunswick fields, wrote a few poems, was a nice boy, but died.
And  perhaps  this attitude  is right after all. For was Carman a poet to be proud of? There is pride  here,  but  is it  not  superficial?  There  is the  bronze  bust, the rusted  plaque,  the grave-tree;  but is there anything  more? Should  there be? Is it worth  mentioning  if there is? Is this shallow reverence in the Maritimes  an acknowledgement of a kind  of gift which flourished  with  the  maritime  air,  and was stilled? Is there greatness here?
Carman wrote  some fine regional  poetry,  and  his knowledge  of the maritime

A MARITIME MYTH



scene  is authentic and  clear.  But  does regionalism  make  a good  poet?  Because  a poet  is remarkably Canadian, and  captures the  Canadian mood,  does this make him  great?   Surely  a  poem  which  would  be  understood and  appreciated  every­ where  is called  great. Where is Grand Pre?  The  autumn colours  may  be  scarlet  and   golden,   the  hills  may  be  ablaze  with  colour,  but  does  that  picture appear real  to  a  resident   of  Hawaii, or  to one  who  lives on  the  Canadian prairies,  for that   matter? Regionalism does  not  make  a  poet  great,  though to listen  to some Maritime scholars, one  would  certainly  think  so. What about the  poetry,  then?
The   most   remarkable  thing   about   Carman's poetry-if  not  remarkable, at least  it  is  the  most  noticeable-is that  it  is so highly  imitative. Desmond   Pacey says:

The  fact  is that  Carman is one of the most 'derivative'  poets who ever lived. This is as true of his best poems ... as of the inferior works.

Even  the kindly  James Cappon says the same thing:

Everything  in  Carman's training  and  temperament tended  to attach   him  to the older  tradition in literature ... even his style and  methods  of composition when they have  the most individuality show respect of the standards of older  literature.

Any  reader can  agree  with  these men. There abounds in Carman's poetry a great deal  of conscious,  and  at  times,  unconscious,  borrowing from  the  poets whom  he admired. And  he admired a great  many.  At times this was done skilfully;  at other times the blatant borrowing is stultifying  to the reader.
The most obvious  pattern in Carman's poetry is one that  is essentially Romantic in character and  tone.  From the  publication of Low Tide  on Grand Pre (I 893), through the  Songs of the Sea Children  ( I904) and  April Airs ( I9I6), and  in the Later  Poems  ( I92 I), there  is the  always  present  Romantic tone.  Carman, like his  Canadian  contemporaries, was  much  attracted to  the  beauty   and  magic  of the  songs  of  Wordsworth, Coleridge, Byron,  Shelley,  and   Keats. He  sang  of Nature as Wordsworth did,  with  the same attitude of child-like fascination. From the  Lyrical  Ballads  he learned that  simple diction  was the  best method to describe Nature. It was easy  to  imitate Wordsworth; there  was  the  similar  environment. Carman  was  a  young   man   with  wild   nature all  about him,  and  one  whose memories were  deeply  rooted  in New Brunswick's  wind-swept marshes  and  rocky coast-lines   when   the  nature poetry  of  Wordsworth  with  its  lyrical  magic  took possession of his verse.
Carman's haunting lyricism is best when he writes about Nature:


39

A MARITIME MYTH



And there when lengthening twilights fall
As softly as a wild bird's wing, Across the valley in the dusk
I hear the silver flute of spring.
("The  Flute of Spring")

Like Wordsworth, Carman revelled in the  physical  beauty of external Nature; he worshipped  the  vivid  loveliness  of  a  budding tree,  a  blooming flower,  and   the restless inimitable sea. He attempted, as Wordsworth did,  to liken man  to Nature and its phenomena:

Was it a year or lives ago
We took the grasses in our hands, And caught the summer flying low Over  the waving meadow lands,
And held it there between our hands?

The  while the river at our feet­
A drowsy inland  meadow stream­ At set of sun the after-heat
Made  running gold, and in the gleam
We freed our birch upon the stream. ("Low Tide on Grand  Pre")

Here  is Wordsworth's contemplation and  music,  mingled  with  his plaintive wist­ fulness.  Carman adopted the  Wordsworthian philosophy that  Nature was good.  Both  poets  believed  in  the  essential  goodness  of  man  and  Nature; and  Carman saw God in Nature:

I took a day to search for God
And found him not. But as I trod
By rocky ledge, through woods untamed
Just where one scarlet lily flamed
I saw His footprint  in the sod. ("Vestigia")

But  Carman cannot be  called,  like  Sangster, a true   Wordsworthian Canadian poet,  for  he  was  too  conscious  of symbols  in  his Nature poetry. He  saw  himself as a part  of Nature and  considered that  he, too, was growing like a plant:

Between the roadside and the wood, Between the dawning and the dew, A tiny flower before the sun,

A MARITIME MYTH



Ephemeral in time, I grew.
( "Windftower")

Wordsworth  used the flower as a symbol of Nature,  but his Nature  poetry was a summation  of philosophy  rather  than  true  symbolism. Carman   used Nature,  its growth  and  decay,  as an  inherent  symbol, and  he  related  his myth  of man  to Nature  and the seasons.
As did Coleridge  and  Shelley, Carman  expressed his ideas in terms of physical
sensations. He modelled his first ballads after Coleridge's "Rime of the Ancient Mariner"; the  suggestive  and  pictorial  metaphors  are  not  always concrete  and are  often  illuminated  mystically as are  Coleridge's.  Many  of  his poems, and especially "The White  Gull",  suggest Shelley; there is the use of similes in great profusion and the restless spirit of Shelley:

The gray sea-horses troop and roam; The shadows fly
Along the wind-floor at their heels;
And where the golden daylight wheels, A white gull searches the blue dome With keening cry.

But where  Carman occasionally  uses the fervid tones of Shelley, he sings most frequently  in the autumn calms of Keats. The  Keatsian  love of beauty is manifest in  all his work;  every object  to Carman  was a 'thing  of beauty',  and  what  was sordid  he  disregarded. By the  use of exquisite diction,  he tried  to attain  Keat's supremely  natural utterance  in order to create a poem that  would be individual, spontaneous,  and  poignantly  musical. He never attained  the rapture, the joy, and the exuberance which  Keats  created,  but at times he almost succeeded. With  his classical training, Carman could equal  Keats in subject  matter,  but the Keatsian atmosphere  was unattainable. The  influence of Keats is strongest when Carman uses metaphor and  personification  to give an  excessively Romantic character to
his verse:
Lo, now far on the hills,
The crimson fumes uncurled
Where the caldron mantles and spills
Another dawn on the world.
("A Northern Vigil")

Possibly, too,  the  undercurrent of melancholy  in  Carman's verse owes much to Keats. This  note was originally heard  in his first volume, Low Tide on Grand Pre  ( 18g3) , and  was to occur in most of his verse. He sang sad songs of absent

A MARITIME MYTH



women, of  unrest,  the  futility  of striving,  and  the  Arcadian gardens where  one would  find  love  and   dreams.  His  epitaph, perhaps, best  exemplifies  the  melan­ choly of his poetry:

Have little care that life is brief, And less that art is long;
Success is in the silences, Though  fame is in the song.

Keatsian metaphors seem  to come  naturally to Carman. In "At  Michaelmas" there  is the constant ability to find the right  concrete image  for his thought:

Soon we shall see the red vines ramp
Through forest borders,
And Indian  summer breaking camp
To silent orders.

The images  are  specific;  flowers, for example, are  never  merely  flowers, nor  trees mere  trees;  they  are  always  definite  species  (a  marigold, a daisy,  a scarlet  maple, a  silver  birch) .  The  Keatsian qualities-those  of  predominant colours,  love  of beauty, the  poignant melancholy-are  obvious influences upon  Carman's poetry. He  recognizes  this debt  to Keats in one of his memorial poems:

And so his splendid name,
Who left the book of lyrics and small fame
Among his fellows then,
Spreads through  the world like autumn-who knows when?-
Till all the hillsides flame.
("By the Aurelian  Wall")




CARMAN's GREATEST DEBT was to the  Romantics. His rural background in  the  Maritimes, and  his home  environment, produced a  tempera­ ment  which  can  in  part  be equated with  that  of the great  Romantics. His educa­ tion  made their  poetic  values  coincide  with  his own.  All his life he was conscious  of his own  similarities to them,  and  he attempted to fuse  their influences into  his own  poetry. He  was separated by over  half  a century from them  and  limited  by the standards of a different continent, but like the Romantics Carman was a poet whose  main  inspiration was  Nature; in  this respect he fulfilled  his desire  to con-

42

A MARITIME MYTH



tinue  and  enlarge the Romantic tradition in Canadian poetry.
Woven  into  the pattern of Carman's poetry is one of the marked characteristics of the Victorian age-moral purpose. Carman was brought up in an environment which  accepted the  Victorian values,  a society which  demanded that  any creative work should  justify its own  existence  by having  a definite  moral  significance. Car­ man  was  deeply  aware of Tennyson, Browning,  Arnold, Carlyle, and  Ruskin­ men   who  were  definite   teachers of  society with faith  in  their  message  and  a conscious  purpose to  uplift  and  instruct. But  Carman did  not  have  Tennyson's capacity for  working out  the  flaws in his poems, either  because he did  not  recog­ nize them  or  because  he was too impatient to make a satisfactory change. He did,  at  times,  attain the Tennysonian quality of rhythm and  musical  cadence:

Noons of poppy, noons of poppy, Scarlet  acres by the sea
Burning  to the blue above them, Love, the world is full for me.
(''Noons  of Poppy")

If Tennyson was  an  inspiration to  Carman's method  of  description and  atmos­ phere,   he  was  also  the  source  for  didacticism and   moralism. Carman  saw,  as Tennyson had  seen,  that  perfect  man  was a result of a reign  of order. He was a traditionalist in  politics  and  looked  back  to  the  past  for  an  order  which  would come  out  of a faith  in  that  past.  He  was sceptical  about the  progress  of his own society and  shared Tennyson's fear of democracy in politics:

We have scorned the belief of our fathers
And cast their quiet aside;
To take the mob for our ruler
And the voice of the mob for our guide. ("Twilight in Eden")

But if he learned to teach  from  Tennyson, it was more in the style of Browning and  Swinburne that  this  teaching was established. He  wrote  to his mother from Edinburgh in  1893  that  he had  enjoyed  reading Browning, and  it is at  that  time that the  Browning influence is strongest  in  his poetry.  "The Wanderer", written the same  year, shows Browning's optimistic vigour:

Therefore is joy more than sorrow, foreseeing
The lust of the mind and the lure of the eye
And the pride of the hand have their hour of triumph
But the dream of the heart will endure by-and-by.


43

A MARITIME MYTH



Where  the  vigour  is of Browning,  the rhythm  of the anapaest lines is of  Swin­ burne,  an  influence  which  for  a  time  was predominant in  Carman's  verse. In Behind The  Arras ( 1893),  which has the Browning joy in the challenge, Carman achieves a much different style and tone from the soft, elegiac strain of his previous volume,  Low  Tide  on Grand Pre. Here  the mould  is more of Browning;  he uses the brisk pace and the metrical device of a long line in sharp contrast  with a short one,  which  was a  favourite  of Browning.  He  could  not,  however,  be successful with  the  dramatic monologue,  the  frame  of  which  was  too  vast  for  Carman's mind.  He  lacked  the intellect to give it a clear  and  logical development, or any real artistic unity. He could not creat a picture of life and retain  the sharp flavour which  characterized Browning's  monologues. But, at  times, it was easy for Car­  man  to make Browning's manner  his own. He recaptured Browning's vision and frequently   the  phrases  have  all the  vigour  of  the  master.  Browning's  narrative style,  with  its  realistic and  familiar  scenes, is  especially apparent in  "The Man With the Tortoise"  ( 1901), and in "On  the Plaza"  ( xgoo):

One August day I sat beside
A cafe-window open wide
To let the shower-freshened air
Blow in across the Plaza, where In golden pomp against the dark Green leafy background of the Park St. Gauden's hero, gaunt and grim Rides on with Victory leading him.


Though the Victorian  age is generally characterized as practical  and  material­ istic, nearly  all  the  writers, and  especially the  great  poets, attacked  materialism and exalted a purely idealistic concept of life. Carman saw Tennyson and Brown­ ing  as exemplar  poets fundamentally, since love, truth, brotherhood, and  justice were  emphasized  by them  as the  chief ends of life. He  agreed  with  their ideas, and their poetry had a rapid and far-reaching effect on his own verse.
One  aspect of Carman's poetry which is practically  ignored  by his critics is his love poetry. Here,  the influence of Rossetti is seen most strongly.  His metaphors have  the  Rossetti  qualities  of  picture  and  suggestion,  and  are  often  magically
illuminated:

In the cold of the dawn I rose; Life lay there from hill to hill In the core of a blue pearl,

44

A MARITIME MYTH



As it seemed, so deep and still.
("XXVII", Songs of the Sea Children)

He followed Rossetti's extensive use of colour words to create mood. Though Rossetti's words are  usually applied  to physical descriptions  or room furnishings, Carman applies the  medieval  colour words to external  Nature. He  follows Ros­ setti in  an  over-indulgence in detailed  descriptions. But often  his many  pictures are  too heavy for his verse. In  "Eyes Like Summer After Sundown" ( 1901), the tone is Rossetti, and  the images have the concrete qualities which Rossetti gained in "The  Blessed Damozel":

Eyes like summer after sundown, Hands like roses after dew,
Lyric as a blown rose garden
The wind wanders through.

Swelling breasts that bud to crimson, Hair like cobwebs after dawn,
And the rosy mouth wind-rifled
When the wind is gone.

The  inanity  of the image  "hair  like cobwebs after dawn" is Carman at his very worst,  though  it is not  as bad,  surely, as the image of Rossetti in  "The Blessed
Damozel":
Her hair that lay along her back
Was yellow like ripe corn.

But he does achieve greatness in "Bahaman":

Where the gorgeous sunset yellows pour aloft and spill and stain
The pure amethystine air and the far faint islands of the main.

Carman's poetry is only occasionally Pre-Raphaelite, and  when it is, it is more a  blending  of Keats,  Rossetti,  and  Carman's own distinctive  application of the influences. From  the  Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood, Carman assimilated a musical quality   ("noons of  poppy,  noons of poppy"), a richness  of colour  ("Gold  are the green  trees overhead, and  gold the leaf-green grass"), and  a reaffirmation  of the Keatsian  love of beauty. The  Pre-Raphaelites strengthened Carman's interest in the first Romantics  and so, from the "last Romantics", Carman created a poetry which is for the most part  Romantic in style, thought, and tone.


45

A MARITIME MYTH



Bliss Carman bridged  the era between the last of the great  Victorians,  and  the new  writers  who evolved the complexities of Twentieth Century  poetry. During this  period  no  great  major  poet appeared  on  the  literary  scene:  Yeats had  not yet attained  his greatness; the groupings of poets-the Rhymer's Club,  the Georgians, the War  Poets-never reached  undebateable fame;  Eliot was still extremely  "avant garde"  even  toward  the  end  of Carman's life. World  poetry was in a state of fluctuation; there was no definite contemporary poetry.
Despite  this,  Canadian poetry flourished.  The  well-known  Canadian poets­
Carman, Roberts,  Lampman, Duncan  Campbell  Scott-wrote at this time. None of them were innovators; most of them were imitators. Carman is typical of them in  that  his poetry  is a restatement  of certain  Nineteenth Century  poetic values. These  poets were greatly influenced by the writers in England, and tried to make Canadian poetry in the British tradition. Some poetry of imitation  reaches beyond the  teacher,  but  the  verse of these poets does not.  Rather, it is poetry  which is reminiscent  of  English  poetry,  that  vaguely  refers  to  the  Canadian scene, and poetry that  is never completely successful. It is characteristic of Canadian writers to forget that  to write in the English language  is to compete  with the best writers in Britain and the United States.






CARMAN IS  THE MOST WELL-KNOWN of this flourishing in Canadian poetry,  well-known mainly  because  his poetry  is taught  in  Canadian schools for its strong  resemblance to the great  English  poetry that  is also taught. In  both  form  and  mood  his strongest  link  is to  the  Romantic Movement.  His predominant  mood  is one  of sentimental  emotionalism   which  his sincere  and humble  personality  could  accept  without  any  strongly  mature  stabilizing  factor of mind. This emotional quality has a certain  charm  and poignancy which was characteristic of the age and the result of the simplicity of his personality. He saw everything  in  terms of Nature.  The  connecting  link in  his poetry is seasonal;  he correlates emotion to either spring, summer, autumn, or winter. For the most part, spring and summer, with their awakening and youthful associations, have most attraction for  him. His moods are  always equated with some natural  phenome­ non:  the  budding  of the trees, the falling of the leaves, the ebb and flow of the tide.  This  is  Carman's one  approach   to  originality. The  seasonal  and  natural phenomena  are  present in almost every poem,  and  provide  the central  theme of

A MARITIME MYTH



his  work,  and   also  mark   Carman's poetry  as  distinct  from  that  of other   poets. But it is not, after  all, a very fresh idea.
His  colours  and   imagery, too,  are  derived  from  this  central theme.  There is
little  classical,  Christian, or  literary   imagery  in  his  work.  Even  in  the  Pipes of Pan, the  source  of word-pictures and  music is in the  world  of Nature. Such  word combinations as "gold-green shadows", "soft  purple  haze", "pale aster  blue", are frequently present. His musical  imagery,  too, is derived  from  the same source.  For him  "music is the sacrament of love" and  he is a "harpstring in the wind", aware of the subtle  tonal  effect  in  Nature:

Outside,  a yellow maple tree, Shifting  upon the silvery blue With tiny multitudinous sound,
Rustled  to let the sunlight through. ("The Eavesdropper")

Like many  poets,  Carman uses colour  and  music, not so much  for their  own sake, as  for  the  mood  and   atmosphere which  their  cumulative effect  would  produce. Words  and  images  are  used  to create  intense  mood-atmosphere, and  to evoke in the  reader an  emotional reaction by means  of tonal  effects. Romantic and  Vic­ torian poetry  is  an  attempt to  give  a  subjective interpretation  of life,  and  so is Carman's.
The  whole  tone  of Bliss Carman's poetry  is that  of the  Romantic Movement. His  poetry  is the  manifestation of all the  basic  assumptions of Romanticism. He had  the  Romantic's faith  in the  creative  imagination and  the  potentialities of the individual; the   preoccupation  with  the  particular rather than   the  general; an interest  in  the  past; and  a feeling  of close companionship with  Nature and  God. Since  his was an  emotional rather than  an intellectual personality, Carman found reflections of his own  attitudes and  moods chiefly in the  poetry  of the  Romantics and   the  Victorians, concerned as  they  both  were  with  subjectivity. When  Car­ man  is influenced by the  Victorians, the Romantic elements  of their  work appear in  his  poetry.  Carman  brought nothing new  to poetry  as poetry-though  it  was new  to  Canadian poetry-and  sought  only  to  bring  together  his own  favourite expressions in poetry  which seemed  to suit his limited  view of life.
Carman'whole attitude to  poetry  was that  of the  devotee  rather than  a true creator. He  worshipped at  the  shrine  of  poetry,  but  was  unable  to  penetrate to the  inner  circle; his was a minor  inspiration because  of the narrow range  of  sub­ ject matter and  mood. Had  Carman been  a truly  original poet-in so far  as any

47

A MARITIME MYTH



poet  can  be  original-he would  have  shown  a  development   toward  a  greater assurance  of style and  a deeper emotional and intellectual content.  However, be­ tween the early Carman and  the late Carman  the differences are of minor  tones and  that,  for a time, one idea is predominant over others.  For  a while one may believe that  there is a development, but always he returns  to something which he had  pursued  before. There  is no sign of growth as in Keats,  no strongly conscious change  as in  Yeats. Carman's outlook and  attitude  changed  very little from  the beginning to the end of his work.
In  the  Maritimes,  the  people worship  at  this shrine  of Carman, as Carman
himself worshipped  at  the shrine  of poetry.  Perhaps  the lack of real knowledge about  his work indicates  that  Carman  contributed  nothing  to world  poetry, but because he was at least a poet in a world of few poets there should be the bronze bust,  the  plaque,  and  the grave-tree.  Perhaps,  too, it is guilt  on the  part  of the New  Brunswickers who  realize that  Carman   had  to go  to the  United  States  to have  his work published,  and somehow the material  tributes  can  recompense for this, and show gratitude to Carman's wish to be buried  in Fredericton.
The  myth  persists. Should  it  persist? Everything  that  Carman said  had  been said  before;  it was only the monotonous  effect which  was characteristically  Car­ man.  He  used the same styles and  themes as had  the Victorians  and  Romantics,  but  in Carman  the original intensity was lost. There  is about  his work a pervad­  ing monotony of tone, a lack of strength,  and  a slightness of  content.  His diction and  his ideas lack the vigour of a Shelley or a Browning. He was a poet who had very little to say; yet, there is a characteristic  quality  to his work, a tone showing a delicacy of expression, a haunting melancholy, and  a  musical lyricism. Within his own artistic limits he displayed a consistency of expression; he was always able to capture  the melody of a mood, the tone of an  atmosphere,  the colour of a set­ ting. And  even though  his themes are limited, he was able to give a spontaneous  quality  to his verse. But all this does not  make  him a great  poet;  neither  does it put  him into the category that  critics often do, that  of a "minor but good"  poet, an excuse which the myth surrounding his name seems to demand. It is the quan­ tity  rather   than  the  quality  of his verse which  gives him  a  place in  a study  of Canadian poetry.  He  brought  to Canadians an  awareness  of  poetry and  poets, and  also the  knowledge  that  when  good  poetry  is wanted,  it is found  in  other places rather than Canada.




chraaicle



L'ANNEE  LITTERAIRE
AU CANADA FRANCAIS

Jean-Guy  Pilon
0NNE SAURAIT raisonnablement tenter de r6sumer !'an­
nee  litteraire  au  Canada fran($ais, sans souligner deux  evenements  extremement
importants dont  I'influence  aura  ete determinante: je veux parler  d'abord de la publication  des Insolences du Frere Untel  et ensuite de la fin du regime Duplessis marquee   par  la  victoire  liberale  du  22  juin  1g6o.  Ces  deux  dates  historiques peuvent sembler a premiere  vue eloignees de l'activite litteraire  et culturelle,  mais il  ne  faudrait  pas s'y  tramper: elles ant  provoque  et  rendu  possibles certaines audaces et initiatives qui,  jusque la, semblaient impensables.
Les  Insolences du  Frere  Untel ont  cree  une  veritable  commotion  dans  le
Quebec.  Le succes du  livre-I  15,ooo exemplaires vendus en cinq ou six mois­ tient  au  fait  que  l'auteur, un  religieux enseignant  dans  une ville de la  region du Saguenay,  a dit ce qu'il  pensait du regime d'autorite, du systeme d'education, de l'enseignement de la langue  fran($aise, etc. avec humour  et sans menagement. 11 a parle  clair et franc. 11 a dit qu'il  fallait etre des hommes libres et non  d'etemels  conscrits.
Peu de temps  apres, le peuple  du Quebec  mettait  fin au duplessisme. Une ere se terminait; un gouvemement liberal  etait  porte  au  pouvoir et encore  une fois, l'on   entendait  parler   un  langage   d'hommes  libres.  Un   programme   politique vigoureux et audacieux avait ete propose ala population,  et deux questions princi­ pales  pouvaient  retenir  l'attention des intellectuels:  la fondation  d'un  Ministere des Affaires culturelles  et d'importantes reformes dans le domaine  de l'enseigne­ ment.
Le  Frere  Untel  avait  parle  du  systeme d'education; le gouvemement s'y  in­ teressait au  premier  chef. Les intellectuels du Canada  fran($aiS furent  amenes eux aussi a prendre  part aux debats.


49

L'AN NEE LITTERAIRE



A sAINT-SAUVEUR,  au  debut  du  mois d'octobre   xg6o, se tenait  la  Quatrieme Rencontre  des  Ecrivains  Canadiens. Le  theme  du  congres
etait  le suivant: Comment   concilier notre  culture  fran aise
americaine? Sujet vaste et qui ne manquait pas de difficultes. Or,  par un curieux phenomene,  il arriva  que la plupart  des conferenciers,  jeunes ecrivains canadiens, fit le proces de notre  systeme d'enseignement avec vigueur,  et le mot  laicisation revint  plusieurs  fois dans  les discussions. La  Rencontre se termina  en  adoptant trois resolutions dont la principale etait de demander  au gouvernement provincial la creation d'un  Minisrere de !'Instruction publique.
A  deux  semaines  de  la, la  Compagnie  de  Jesus  annont;ait  son  intention de
demander une  charte  universitaire  pour  le college Sainte-Marie; la  reaction  ne se fit pas attendre. Elle provint  d'abord  des professeurs de l'Universite de  Mon­ treal. Queques  jours plus tard, les journaux  de l'est du pays publiaient  la declara­  tion  de  102 intellectuels qui s'opposaient  fortement  a ce projet  en  invoquant les raisons suivantes:   (a)   Le gouvernement  ne devrait  pas accorder  de charte  uni­ versitaire  avant  d'instituer  une commission d'enquete sur l'enseignement, pour en connaitre  les besoins et en  revaloriser les structures; (b)  I'absence des laics a la direction  de l'enseignement  superieur  ne devrait  plus etre  toleree;  (c)  si la com­ mission d'enquete en arrivait  a la conclusion qu'une nouvelle universite est neces­ saire, cette universite devrait en etre une d'Etat.
Les syndicats  et  quantite   d'associations  se  prononcerent  par  la  suite  dans  le meme sens et l'on  assista, durant deux mois a un debat  passionne, vi£ eta quel­ ques reprises, mechant,  qui devait faire echouer le projet. Les intellectuels avaient commence  a faire entendre leur voix: l'annee  s'engageait bien.
Parallelement a  ce  debat,  des livres de  qualite  faisaient  leur  apparition. Ce
fut  d'abord La  corde au cou de Claude  Jasmin  qui  remporta le Prix du  Cercle du  Livre de France: un roman qui a ete reu
il faut  reconnaitre de grandes qualites, comme celle de demonter le mecanisme de
certaines  habitudes,  de mettre  le lecteur  en face d'une  realite  dure  ou la revolte devient le seul moyen de survivre.
Au  meme  moment,  Claire  Martin  publiait,  simultanement a Paris et a Mont­
real,  son deuxieme  livre, Doux-amer, une  oeuvre  tres attachante qui  raconte  la naissance et la fin d'un  amour,  avec beaucoup  de nuances et de sensibilite.
Dans  le meme  sens que  Claude  Jasmin,  mais sur  un  ton et  avec des moyens differents,  Gerard   Bessette nous  donnait   Le  libraire,  un  livre  excellent  oil  les masques tombaient  avec une sure ironie.

L'ANNEE LITTERAIRE



De  leur  cote,  Ies poetes ne  restaient  pas inactifs.  Pierre  Trottier publiait  Les belles au bois dormant) et Jacques  Godbout CJest la chaude loi des hommes:  deux recueils, deux  manieres,  deux  visions du  monde. D'autres recueils s'ajouterent a ceux-Ia;  mentionnons entre  autres,  ceux de Paul-Marie Lapointe, de Gilles Con­ stantineau, de Gerald Godin.
Les Editions  de !'Homme continuaient  leur  travail  admirable en publiant  des ouvrages  d'actualite et en les diffusant largement  a travers  Ia province a un prix
populaire.  Un  peu  plus tard,  le directeur  des Editions de l'Homme allait fonder sa propre  maison, les Editions  du Jour,  en conservant  Ia meme formule. De telle
sorte que nous avons maintenant a Montreal  deux editeurs  dynamiques qui pub­
lient a toutes les semaines des livres sur des questions d'actualite, des essais et qui
publieront  aussi des ouvrages litteraires, des recits et des romans.
Mais  les problemes  d'education n'etaient  pas oublies. Au  cours  de l'hiver,  le
Mouvement  laic  de  langue  fran aise
clamer  Ia creation  d'un  secteur  d'ecoles neutres et non-confessionnelles,  parallele aux  secteurs  deja  existants.  Car  l'unanimite religieuse n'existe  plus, et ce  plural­ isme dont on ne pouvait  parler  precedemment  ne peut  pas etre passe sous silence. Encore ice, on !'imagine  bien, un debat public s'est engage qui n'est pas a Ia veille de se terminer.  Les intellectuels, faut-ille preciser, y participent tres activement.
Un autre  phenomene  saute aux yeux de qui tente de resumer les faits marquants
de  l'annee  1g6o-61: la  mantee  du  sentiment  separatiste  dans  toutes les couches de Ia population  et en particulier  parmi  les ecrivains et les artistes. La Presse et Le Devoir) les deux quotidiens  de Montreal,  ant entrepris  des sondages en ce sens, et les resultats prouvent  que 70%  des personnes qui ant repondu  favorisent l'inde­ pendance  du Quebec.
Dans  ce panorama, il  convient  de signaler !'apport culture! des deux  revues
Cite  Libre  et  Liberte.  Chacune a leur  maniere,  dans  des perspectives assez  dif­
ferentes, elles ant offert regulierement  a leurs lecteurs des textes dont il ne faudrait
pas sous-estimer !'importance dans  le mouvement  actuel  des idees. Et le 22   juin
1961,  les deux   revues accordaient  le  Prix  Liberte  au  Frere  Untel,  pour  son courage. Ce prix sera dorenavant decerne taus les ans a la personne qui aura  pose un geste d'homme libre au cours de l'annee.
Plusieurs  romans  ant  egalement  paru  dans cette deuxieme  moitie de Ia saison. Yves Theriault, en publiant  a trois mois d'intervalle,  Ashini et Cul-de-sacJ est l'un
des rares  ecrivains  dont  l'activite  ne se ralentisse jamais. Avec  Les  Pedagogues) Gerard  Bessette n'a  pas reussi a retrouver la qualite du Libraire; par contre, Jean Filiatrault, en publiant  L'argent  est odeur de nuit nous a donne son meilleur livre.

L'AN NEE LITTERAIRE



Signalons  enfin  Aucune  creature,  de  Robert  Charbonneau dont  nous  n'avions rien  lu  depuis  une  dizaine  d'annees.  Enfin,  deux  recueils  de  nouvelles,  feu  de masques  d'Ollivier Gouin  qui  est de qualite  inferieure  a  La  cruaute des  faibles de Marcel Godin.




] E   vounRAIS en terminant, souligner  ce fait  qui se degage de ce panorama que  je me suis employe a tracer: le role de plus en plus grand  que les intellectuels  entendent  jouer sur la place publique.  Nous avons deja  eu !'occa­ sion de deplorer  leur absence; ils participent  maintenant davantage aux luttes de la societe. Leur  veritable place est en train  de se definir et il faut  en voir un echo dans les articles recents qu'un  romancier comme Andre  Langevin  vient de publier autour  du sujet suivant: Le  peuple et les intellectuels s'interrogent  dans le meme sens, et dont  je voudrais, pour conclure cet article, detacher  le paragraphe suivant: "Dans  leur  propre  apprentissage, les intellectuels ant  appris la vertu de modestie.
11 n'est  pas vrai  qu'ils  se reunissent entre  eux  pour  parler  du  bout  des levres de
'deniaiser'  le peuple. L'image est trap grossiere pour convaincre.  L'intellectuel sait bien qu'il  n'existe  pas en suspens dans le vide et qu'il  doit s'alimenter a la realite dont il vit s'il veut donner  un sens a sa demarche. Pourquoi  la privation l'aurait­ elle rendu  avare?  Pourquoi,  lui qui denonc,;ait !'absence  de toute generosite intel­ lectuelle, mepriserait-il une soi£ semblable a la sienne?"


















52



review articles




HUMANIZED HISTORY

Margaret Ormsby



DALE  c. THOMSON. Alexander  Mackenzie, Clear Grit. Macmillan. $6.75.


SoMETHING EXCITING has hap­ pened   to  Canadian  History   in   the  last ten  years:  it has been  huil,lanized.  Proba­ bly it was Donald Creighton  who started the   vogue   for   writing   personalized  his­ tory;  at  any  rate,  since  the  appearance of  his portrait of  John A. Macdonald as the   young  politician  and   the  old  chief­ tain,  our  national epic  has  been  sensibly enriched   by  other  historians who   have lured  from  the  shadows such  wraith-like figures as Frontenac, William  Lyon  Mac­ kenzie,  George  Brown-and  now- Can­ ada's forgotten Prime  Minister, Alexan­  der  Mackenzie.
With    each    of   these   emerging  as   a human being,  and  a human being at least as  comprehensible  as  W.  L.  Mackenzie
King   or   J. S.   Woodsworth  or   Arthur
Meighen-men  whose  works  and   deeds are   not   only   fresh   in  memory,   but   re­ corded by historians of  their  own  day­ the  economic and   political  development of  Canada is  appearing  in  a new  light. No  longer  is  the  stuff  of  history  the  ab­ stract   principle, the  confused  issue,  the endangering tension; as past controversies are    related   by    historians  to   private character,  motive  and   act,   the   contro-
 versies   themselves    are   becoming  more vital   and   momentous. In  short,   a  new dimension  is gained  with  the  present tendency   to   write   Canadian  history   in terms of the projection of the human personality, and  the projection of the dreams,  ambitions and  convictions-and sometimes   of  the   base   desires--of  men who once  aspired  to be leaders.
Nor  is this  all.  The setting  of the  sub­ jects of the  new biographies against parti­ cular   backgrounds  is  introducing   us  to unfamiliar  corners of  our  own  national scene.  There  was  a  time,   for  example, when  many  of  those  residing  west of  the Canadian Rockies  regarded  Upper Can­ ada  as a never-never land, notable  chiefly for  its  obscure political  contests. But the   pens   of  the   biographers  have   now sketched   the   peculiar  characteristics  of colonial  Kingston, Toronto  and   Sarnia, and  at  last  these  communities, like  their distinguished sons, have  identity.
In   Alexander  Mackenzie, Clear  Grit,
Dale  Thomson has  related personality to place   in   an   extremely  skillful   fashion. Thus he has  portrayed the  Kingston that was the  provincial capital, as well as the western   port   that    became    the   frontier

53

REVIEW ARTICLES



town  of  Sarnia, as  localities  from  which forces emanated that  were to mould the outlook  of the immigrant lad who arrived from   Perthshire  in I 842  to  pursue   his trade as  stone mason.   Mackenzie's  Scot­ tish antecedents were, of course, not with­  out   influence;  from   them  and  his  boy­ hood  experiences in  Scotland he derived  his   strain    of    religious    conviction;  his habitual attachment to family and friend; his custom  of indefatigable industry; and his  dislike   for  equivocation.  But  it  was in  Canadian  towns  that   he  experienced the  frustrations of  poverty,  social  slight­ ing   and,  at   first,   political   repudiation, and   these  were  the   trials   that   put  iron into   his  will.  From   the  moment  of  his entry  into  parliament in  I86I at  the  age of  thirty-nine until  his  death   at  seventy in  I8g2, Mackenzie stubbornly fought privilege   and   unearned advantage and took  his stand   on  the  side of  justice  and equal   treatment for  all.
At   first   this   plain    and   honest   man
appeared "a clear,  Scotchman, plain  and true";  by  the   time   he  reached  middle age, he was a typical  Upper Canadian frontiersman-a  "Clear Grit" ("pure sand  without a  particle of dirt  in it"). A man  of high  principle, he loathed subter­ fuge  and  detested a  "loose-fish" attitude in  anyone. He   commenced  his  political  career    by  supporting  the   cause  of  the Reformers; in  parliament  he became  the enemy  of  coalition  government and   the champion of  the  party system;  as  Can­ ada's  first   Liberal  Prime   Minister,  he enunciated principles of Liberalism which had  an  "old-country" ring  to  them,  but which   were   more   properly  the   product of  his  Canadian  experience and  the  ex­ pression  of his ambitions for  his adopted land.  No one ever doubted his integrity, questioned  his  sincerity or  overcame  his

54
 inflexibility. His political enemies  dreaded the  scrutiny of  his  penetrating blue  eyes and  writhed under the  lash of his tongue. In  the  House of  Commons, he  wore  "a mask  of  stoicism  and  propriety", and  as Leader of  the  Opposition, he  felt  it  his duty  to suspect  the  worst in every govern­ ment  action. His  reserve,  his certitude of right   and   faith, and   his  pugJJ.acity were thrown   into    sharp   relief    through  his relations  with   his  opponent,  the   genial  and  flamboyant John A. Macdonald, and  with  the  Queen's representative, the  ex­ pansive,  rash  and  cordial Lord  Dufferin. The   depth  of   Mackenzie's  feeling   was indicated  by  the  grief   that   tore  him  on the  occasions  of the  death of members of his own  family  and  of old  political  asso­ ciates.   And    his   fortitude   was   demon­ strated  when   he  continued  to  carry  out  his   parliamentary  duties  after  being stricken   with  paralysis,  when  he  rationed his effort  so that   he  might  still  have  the  strength, through   the  pointed  question, to  probe  and  expose  the  malefactor.
To    Professor    Thomson,   Mackenzie's
life  is  "a tale  of  triumph" and  "a  story of   disappointment  and    defeat".  As   a stonemason,   Mackenzie   was   a   master craftsman:  an   arch  at   Fort   Henry   at Kingston and   buildings near  Sarnia  still testify  to  that. As  a  political figure,  his accomplishment  was   distinguished:  he assisted  George  Brown   to  achieve  Con­ federation, succeeded Brown  as leader  of the   Liberal  party  in   Ontario,   became leader   of   the  federal   Liberal   party, triumphantly turned   Macdonald  out   of office  over   the  Pacific  Scandal, and   for five  years  from   I873 until   I878  served as   Prime    Minister   of   Canada.  His premiership   coincided  with    the   Great Depression  of   the  'seventies. The   extra­ vagant  promise, extended in I 87 I by his

REVIEW ARTICLES



opponents to  secure  the  entry  of  British Columbia  into   the  union, could   not   be fulfilled   and   he  found  himself   with   an unruly province on  his hands as his diffi­ culties  over  constructing the  Pacific  rail­ way   mounted. In   Opposition,  he   had attracted attention by the "awfu' tongue" which  he  had  laid  upon  his  adversaries; in office, his thrift  was regarded as parsi­ mony   and    his   regard  for   propriety  as evidence of his self-importance. He failed  to  catch   the  popular imagination and  as the depression drew  to a close, the Cana­ dian  people  decided that  they  "preferred Macdonald drunk  to  Mackenzie sober". During the  next  fourteen years,  Mac­ kenzie   watched  his   arch-enemy   Mac­ donald   govern,  saw   the   brilliant   and  erratic Edward Blake  replace himself  as leader  of  the  Liberal  party  and  endured "the  incessant  vexations of  the  seething
 cauldron of  public  political  life",  humili­
ated  by increasing physical  incapacity.
Mackenzie's   has    usually    been    con­ sidered   to   have   been   a   lack-lustre  ad­  ministration. In  actual   fact,   there   was substantial   achievement.    The   delicate amnesty   question arising  from   the  Red  River    uprising    was   settled;   territorial government in  the  West  established; the New  Brunswick  school   dispute  handled effectively  and  both  the  Supreme Court of  Canada and  the  Royal   Military Col­ lege  established.  Furthermore,  although to  the end  Mackenzie remained "a  fiery imperialist"  who   talked  of   an   Anglo­ Saxon  mission" and  extolled the superior­ ity of British  institutions, he  was actually one of that  little  band  of  nationalists who advanced Canadian  control of Canadian affairs   and   anticipated  the   day   when  Canada,  still  within   the  imperial frame-




Jl Btacb
or Strangtrs	a remarkable radio  play in prose and  verse by
JOHN  REEVES
who examines the  different ways of love, the loss of  innocence, and  the  human predicament with profundity, unfailing wit and  a superbly  accurate ear  for  speech.

Here is a beach. Here comes driftwood, gulls, anemones, and  people.  Here  the  refugee  citizen evacuates his wife  and  thermos; lap-dogs  haul spinsters  on a leash,· children propel  their  elders with   spades   and   cajolery;  and   paratroops  of lovers  storm   the   gullies.  Here   is  summer  and holiday   and  a  million   volts  in  the  veins.  Here are  the  many  with  all their  histories  and  needs, their  fathom-down thoughts and  their  white-cap words.

A Beach of Strangers  was written for  the CBC in

OXFORD
 1958 and  won  the  Italia Prize in  1959. 	$2.50



55

REVIEW ARTICLES



work,  would  operate within  her  own separate and   individual orbit.   During a visit  to England in  I875,  he  was amazed to  discover  that  "Canada is more  British than  Britain"; but when  he moved  a little in  official  British  circles,  he  realized  that his  heart had  been  given  to  his  adopted land,  for in Canada there  was what he admired  most,  a  "spirit of  toleration of class to class and  creed  to creed".
Professor  Thomson has written a very good   political   history   of  the  fifty  years that followed  the winning of responsible government in the province  of Canada. More than  this, he has given us a fully rounded portrait of a scrupulous, diligent



TROIS  POETES
 and  dedicated Scottish immigrant, turned Canadian. Like  most  of  the  colonials  of his  day,  Mackenzie  was  no  great  intel­ lectual, but  when  it carne  to principle, he would  tolerate  slackness  neither in  him­ self or anyone  else. We have  moved  away from  his time--to  us "jokes" falling  from  the  lips  of  a  sincere  Baptist   concerning total   immersion are  rather  painful, and  we are  no  longer  too familiar with  "total abstinence"   men-but   Mackenzie  still represents a  sense  of  values  and  a  point  of  view  that  outsiders  commonly recog­  nize    (perhaps   too   flatteringly)   as   dis­ tinctively "Canadian".







Jean  Menard


JACQUES GODBOUT.  C'est   la  chaude  loi  des  hommes. Les  editions de  l'Hexagone.
$1.00.
JEAN-GUY PILON. La  Mouette et la large.  Les editions de l'Hexagone.  $I.OO. PIERRE TROTTIER.  Les  Belles  au bois dormant. Les  editions de  l'Hexagone. $I.oo.


L'oN  SE  TROMPERAIT  peu,  si
!'on  affirmait  que  Jacques Godbout a trouve assez tot sa maniere. Dans Carton­ Pate  (Paris, Seghers,  I 956), il  raillait  les travers d'une societe bourgeoise, repue  de cliches,   et   substituait,  a  un   monde de
carton-pate,  un  mondc de  chaude  sym­ pathie. Se refusant de  jouer au demiurge, l'fl.uteur   partait   toujours   d'une  realite  concrete et  palpable. Un  peu  comme  un peintre, il encadrait ses visions, decouvrait
le  ciel  a  travers  une   ruelle.   Dans   Les
paves    sees    (Montreal,   Beauchemin, I 958), sa  maniere restait  Ia meme,  mais s'eJargissait: moins  de  croquis  et  plus  de tableaux. Un  long sejour  en Ethiopie (de
 I 954   a  I 957)    semble   avoir   enrichi  Je poete  de  mille  images.  Des  poemes  pleins de  lumiere, chantent,  non  point  des etes furtifs,  mais  un  solei! lourd:

J'ai fait  un  long  voyage dans un  sale  pays  sec j'ai fait un  long  voyage
Dieu  merci j'avais rna  gourde
son  se1n
dans  le solei!
qui  traversait Ia portiere ouverte

Cette ceuvre, sans  rhetorique, ni delay­ age,   veagissait   contre   la   metaphysique assez creuse  de  certains de  nos prophetes. Dans C'est  la  chaude  loi  des hommes, Jacques  Godbout,  plus  arnbitieux, veut

REVIEW ARTICLES



capter  l'univers,  et   non   plus   quelques paves sees. Il sait qu'il  habite une terre menacee  de  destruction  et  il  se  penche
avec  epouvante sur  ses  enfants.  Mais  a
c8te  de  la  mort   apocalyptique, la  mort
quotidienne,  la  mort   tout   court, si  l'on peut dire.  L'auteur peint  egalement le deracinement de  l'homme moderne qui croit   se  sauver,   en   detruisant  ses  fron­ tieres.

Je n'ai plus  de  nom,  anonyme, je suis anonyme

Seule   une   certaine  fraternite,  semble nous dire le  poeme L'eau, pourra triompher de  l'aneantissement.
Dans   cette   ceuvre  de  transition,  Jac­ ques  Godbout  veut  aborder  des  themes,  plut8t  que   peindre   des   tableaux.  Des poemes, comme  Jamais plus, Un  nouveau voyage, temoignent de hautes aspirations, mais contiennent  aussi des balbutiements. L'auteur  des  Paves  sees  se contente par­  fois  de  quelques  croquis,   et  !'inspiration ne  baisse  pas  pour  autant:

Dans le Haggar il est des  enfants Sans  jouets prefabriques in  U.S.A. lis les font  eux-memes
Mais   n'ont  pas de   papier  n'ont  pas   de ciseaux
N'ont pas  de  couleur de  colle
Alors  prennent des  as
Des  os de  chameaux morts hagards.

* 	*
Il  n'est   pas  de  poetes  qui   nourrissent
de  plus  hautes  ambitions que  Jean-Guy Pilon.   Qu'on  l'aime ou   non,  on  recon­ nait  que  sa  poesie  n'est   jamais  vulgaire,  ni   facile.  On    admire   sa   tranquille ascension, son desir  patient de perfection. Il a renonce assez vite au neo-romantisme superficiel de La  fiancee du matin  (Mont­ real,  editions  Amicitia,I 953) . Qu'il ait, apres    coup,   subi   !'influence  de   Rene  Char,  il  semble  difficile  de  le  nier.  Mais
 
dans  ses derniers recueils,  on entend son chant  a lui.
La  mouette et  le large  ressemble  a un
inventaire. Le  poete   decouvre, non  sans
melancolie,  qu'il  a  trente ans.

Suis-je  deja  pelerin d'une seule  jouissance
Engerbee dans une  ruche
Que  menace l'hiver

Il  ne  peut   oublier   l'enfance  lointaine et  perdue,   qu'il   porte   en  lui,  mais  que la vie lui interdit de contempler.

Je  me souviens je me souviens
Les pants faisaient naitre les rivages
Et  les lies  n'etaient pas  eteintes
Dans leur  solitude d'eau.
Uni  a la femme, le poete  veut  posseder l'univers,  ne  le perdre jamais.  La  femme est  partout  dans   ce  recueil,   et   surtout dans  les poemes  ou  Jean-Guy Pilon  ne la nomme  pas.  On  ne sait  point  ou  debou­ chont   certains vers.  Le  poete  decouvre­
t-il  la  femme   a travers la  nature ou  la
nature a travers  la femme? II ecrit: "Femme:  sorte   de   mouette".  Dans   le cadre  austere des Cevennes, dans  un  pay­
sage  de   genese,   la   femme  'eternelle   se dresse   devant  lui.   Le   romantisme  du
premier  recueil  surgit  a quelques reprises.

A des siecles  de  sa naissance Elle etait nue  et  fievreuse Sous sa chevelure

Qu'on  lise  aussi   "Les   yeux   ferrnes", l'un  des  meilleurs   poemes  du  recueil.

Sous !'arc de  nos  corps
Se brisaient les semaines et les saisons

La   possession   de   l'univers  est   chose rapide  et presque  illusoire: les etes sont lurnineux,   mais  brefs,   et  finalement  en­ sevelis. Des ·poemes qui  s'intitulent  "D'un
hiver   a  d'autre",  "Fille  de   la   neige",
"Nous  franchirons les glaces", chantent la tristesse des instants devastes.
Les  derniers  poemes   du   recueil,   dans

57

REVIEW ARTICLES



!'ensemble  plus   prosai:ques,  contiennent des exclamations plus enthousiastes, que lyriques:

Je  me  rappelle les promesses  d'Amsterdam
La  baie  vertigineuse de  Rio L'emouvante na!ade de  Copenhague Et  les nuits du  monde
Ajoutees aux  bonheurs
Des  jours  sans  pareil

La   poesie   peut    tout    embellir,    mais cette   trop   celebre   nymphe   m'a   toujours paru  aussi  peu emouvante que  le lion  de Lucerne.
 souvenirs litreraires assez mal  digeres.  On devine  une  longue  meditation entre cette ceuvre et Poemes de Russie (Montreal, editions de  l'Hexagone,I 957)' ce livre  si emouvant ou  l'on  decouvre partout  !'in­ fluence  de  la  sainte  Russie.  Deja  la  mort  tourmentait  le  poete,   mais   on   pourrait croire   que   la  liturgie  orthodoxe,  si  pro­  fondement  axee  autour de  la  R:esurrec­ tion,  avait, par  moments, apaise  le poete.

Laliberte  chante pour ceux  qui  ressuscitent.

* 	* 	*
On  dirait que,  pour  Pierre  Trottier, la
poesie n'est  jamais gratuite et que chaque poeme  suppose  un  engagement. Pourtant son premier recueil,  Le combat contre Tristan   (Montveal, les editions de Malte,
1951), peu  original dans !'ensemble, con­
tenait un  certain nombre de cliches et de
 La   mort   est  partout  dans   le  dernier
recueil  de Trottier, Les belles au bois dormant. La  disparition  d'une mere adovee   parait  avoir   precipive   la  course du  flot  poetique.

Dors  rna  femme nue Dors  rna  fille innocente Dors  rna  mere  morte





ARTHUR  S.  BOURINOT

POEMS

PAUL BUNYAN	THREE  LINCOLN POEMS 	&  OTHER VERSE

with a drawing by Thoreau MacDonald

LIMITED  EDITION; PRICE  $3.00 POSTPAID

IN  THIS  VOLUME, the  first  substantial collection since  This  Green  Earth  in  1953, Arthur S.  Bourinot has  gathered, not   all,  but   many of  his  poems which   have seemed more or  less popular  (by  reason of  wide  distribution), if  that word  can be  used  in  connection with   poetry, and   that have appeared in  anthologies and school   books  in  Canada, the  U.S.A., the  United Kingdom, and  other countries. Most  of  them   were  included in  volumes now  out  of  print. An  original drawing by  the  Canadian artist, Thoreau MacDonald, illustrates the  poem, Shadows. The jacket drawing depicts  Paul  Bunyan  as  seen   by  the   author. The  book  was designed by William Colgate who  supervised its  production.

Copies  may  be ordered from  the  author,
Arthur S. Bourinot,  158 Carleton  Road,  Rockcliffe,  Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

REVIEW ARTICLES



Le  destin   a  coupe   l'amarre  premiere et   essentielle,   et   lance   brutalement  Ie poete  sur  l'avenir et  la  mort.
Mais  pourquoi !'auteur  a-t-il  donne  a
cette   ceuvre  funebre  un   titre   aussi   joy­
eux?  On  maquille la  mort, on  lui  sourit en lui tournant le dos, on Ia baptise d'antiphrases. Nous  gardons Ie souvenir d'un certain caveau palermitain ou des jeunes  filles,  au  crane decharne,  grima­ c;aient, en  robes  de  bal,  ou  des  cures  en surplis   tendaient  des  rateliers  qui   tom­ baient   en   poussiere.   Les   belles  au   bois dormant sont  ces  jeunes  filles  de  bonne famille   qui,  tous  les ans,  avaient   accou­
tume   de   faire   da   r'everence   a la  reine
d'Angleterre.

Jeunes filles qui  dansez jusqu'au petit jour
Insouciantes  de   ceux   qui   sont   au   dernier jour

La   mort   prend   ici   des   noms   divers, c'est  "l'embaumeuse eternite", c'est  "la mort  cuisiniere", c'est  la veuve aux  voiles noires. Le poete rejoint !'imagination populaire  qui   a  surnomme  Ia  guillotine "Ia  veuve".

0 tard venu
 Ne crois  pas  que  ta destinee Se cache  sous  un  voile  noir Toutes les veuves  de Ia terre
Sont  trop fideles  a leurs souvenirs
Ou  trop  vieilles  pour toi

Cette  poesie  est  tres  rythmee: !'auteur revient meme parfois au vers traditionnel. Certaines cadences  apaisent,  d'autres evoquent l'eternel retour de phenomenes lancinants et tragiques. En lisant Danse javanaise, poeme  de la mort  et de la  nir­
vana,  nous  songions  a ces fanfares  fune­
bres de Ia Nouvelle-Odeans qui chantent
tout  le chagrin de  Ia terre.
L'auteur a beau  ensevelir  sous Ia neige, Franc;ois  Paradis, le  trappeur  amoureux de Maria Chapdelaine; son ceuvre n'en contient pas moins  une  esperance. Qu'on lise  le  beau   et   mysterieux  poeme   "Le cceur des vieilles filles".

Les   cceurs   des    vieilles  filles   mortes  sans amour
Se   sont   remis    a  battre  un   dimanche de
Piques

Dans   "La   morte   des  quatre  jeudis", les chevaliers de 1'Apocalypse  se sauvent "avec  Ia de du  grand mystere".
L'auteur semble  avoir  subi  !'influence de Villon  et  de Pasternak. Curieux prob­ leme   d'histoire  litteraire:   tout   comme  Jean-Guy Pilon,  il consacre un  poeme  au cirque  de  Navacelles.
Ce   recueil    nous   paralt  la   meilleure
ceuvre de Trottier. Qu'il y ait  parfois  des maladresses,  une   preciosire   et   une   re­ cherche assez  penibles   (jouer sur  le  mot  "vers" n'offre  aucune  espece  d'original­ ire)'  que  ]'inspiration  baisse  de  temps  a
autre  (certain  poeme, J eunes  Delin­
quants, abuse  de  periphrases mal  venues et  artificielles), on  ne  saurait en  douter. Le  lecteur   passe  outre,   et   poursuit, en
compagnie  du   poete,   une   meditation  a
la fois funebre et  lumineuse.


59


THE PRINCESS


Ethel Wilson



PAULINE  JOHNSON.  Legends  of Vancouver. McClelland &  Stewart. Cloth.  $2.50. Paper  $I .so.


THIS  ADMIRABLY BOUND  and produced paper-backed book by Pauline Johnson is published by McClelland & Stewart,  who   have    done   a   service   to letters  in Canada by preserving these legends  and  their   mode  of telling  which might  otherwise have  become  lost  to  us. They  should  not  be lost. The very words and  modes  of  the  telling  proclaim  a day and  days which  are  past. Ben Lim's draw­ ings directly  interpret the sense and sensi­ bility  of  the   legends   in   beautiful  small decoration. Indeed the whole simple print  and  format of  the  book  redresses  a  cer­ tain   lushness  in  the   telling  of  the  tales. The publishers might  easily have  harmed rather  than   helped  the   preservation  of these  legends,  by florid  decoration. I ad­  mire  the   discriminating  presentation  of the  book.
A  careful  reading  leaves  me  with   a sense of melancholy. The good and  lovely woman   who   perpetuated  these   legends was  sustained throughout  her  life  by  a strong  element of romance. She  was a devoted Indian maiden, a Victorian Miss, an intrepid barnstormer; she was well equipped to  be  a  legend-story   teller  but was poetess rather than  poet. Pauline Johnson was the descendant of many Mo­ hawk  chiefs  and  of  three  generations of white  women.  She  had  Indian passion in her  blood  and  it  was  never  quenched by age or circumstance. There is beauty  and

6o
 banality in these stories. We should recog­ nize her  as a sort  of troubadour who with courage and  considerable charm  pursued a  path of  her  own  making, and  did  this with  integrity until  the  last  day  of a  life which  was-despite friends and  admirers
-lonely. It is as  this  figure  that   we  see
her, and  we acknowledge the service of interpretation which  she has  rendered  us, whether we  are  Indians or  Palefaces.
In  these stories  Pauline Johnson is a translator, and  is faced  with  a difficulty experienced by all translators-that of combining sense and  feeling,  while  being true to sense and also to feeling.  She transforms the  language of her old friend Chief   Joe  Capilano who  speaks  his  own kind  of English, into  a language which  is her  kind  of English  and-for purposes of "writing"-she   further changes it   into another form  of English which  is lavishly romantic. Although there is real poetic infusion of feeling in many  of the stories, there    are   also   "grandsires",  "shy   little bride-wives", and "pulses of rioting blood".
A mistake has  been  made in  trying  to create from  Pauline Johnson a purely literary figure.  She  had  the warm  natural gifts   of   the   sympathetic  and   dramatic story-teller, and  was an  interpreter of the Indian ethos  as no one else could  be. Her sympathy  derives   from   a  deeper   wilder place    than  our   ordinary  humanity.  It

REVIEW ARTICLES



comes  spontaneously from  a  deep  sprmg of race  within her.
"A  thousand arrows," she writes with innocent   satisfaction,  "ripped   the   air, two   hundred   gallant  northern   throats flung  forth a death cry exultant, triumph­ ant  as   conquering   kings-then  two  hundred  fearless  northern  hearts   ceased to  beat  ...  'What  glorious  men,'  I  half- whispered  ..."  In  this  book  there  is an echo  of  an  echo  of a  true  echo,  but  one man's  "glory" is  another  man's  melo­ drama.
When   Brutus   urged  Volumnius to  kill him,  he  did  not  say  "We in  our  golden days  of youth   trod  Eton's hall  together". He said "Thou know'st, that  we two went to school together,'' and  our hearts  melt within   us.
In one of her more simply told legends, "The Lost   Island,"  Pauline Johnson touches  us with  a  universal meaning and pathos of  life.  She  comes  nearer   in  that story,  I  think, to  the   place   of  art   than in  any  other. In  "The Deep  Waters" she relates   the   remarkable Capilano Indian version  of The Flood.
I  was   taken   one   night,   when   I  was
 about ten years old, to the plain small Methodist chapel in Homer Street, in Vancouver, to hear Pauline Johnson speak.  What   did  we  hear? Did  she  sing, did  she  recite?   I do  not  remember. But I  recall  a  buxom   glowing   woman   with an  eagle's  feather in  her  hair  and   I  re­ member, too,  at  the  end  of  the  evening, being  propelled forward  to  shake  hands. I heard   the  words  "You  may  come  and  see me if you  like," kindly  spoken.
"Oh thank you,"  I  said  in  terror, floundering in a turmoil of doorbells, princesses,  poets,  eagle's  feathers, escape and   inadequacy   (what    would   we   talk about, I  feared, already sitting   stiffly in a room).
On  the  way  home  the  sardonic goblin who  inhabits and  be-devils  and  preserves shy people of all ages, laughed derisively. This  he  did  daily,  and  I  did  not,  could not,  ring  the  princess's  doorbell.
Many    years   later    I   saw   her   m   a crowded    street.    She   was   much    much older,  yet she  had  a sad  beauty.  She  was ill, walking  very slowly and  lost in sombre thought. Memory rushed  in and,  stricken, I watched her  as though I had  done  it.




















6I



LITERATURE AND THE PRESS
 




Tony Emery



LOFis  m;DEK. Literature   and  the  Press:  A  History  of Printing, Printed  Media  and
Their  Relation  to Literature. Ryerson Press  and  Contact Press.  $s.oo.


MR. DUDEK's  BOOK, according to  the  "blurb" on  its  not  very  attractive dust  jacket,  "covers  half a score of special fields of interest brought together by the main  question: What is the  effect  of the Industrial Revolution in Printing on  per­ manent literature and  literary standards?" One  of the reasons why it is a disappoint­ ing   book  is  that   the  author  is  so  busy pursuing  his  "special  fields  of  interest" that  he does not attack the main  question  until  he  has  reached  the tenth  of fifteen chapters.
The book  rests  shakily  on  three  pre­ mises that  seem to me to be demonstrably false:   One,  that  "since  18oo,  the  Indus­ trial   Revolution  in   Printing, far   more overwhelming in  its  effects  [than Guten­ berg's  invention of   printing from  move­ able  types], in  fact  the  true  determinant of our  present  culture, has  been  virtually neglected." Two,  that "literature has been practically  pushed  out  of existence  by the mass  magazines." Three, that  "today the best writing is to be found  in small maga­ zines which are not even known to the majority of the  reading public." It might also  be  added that   a  book  which  paints such a grim picture of the plight of literature, and  which  is so concerned for the   future of  the  "best   writing':, might have  found space somewhere for a defini­ tion   of   these   important  terms,  or,   in default of that, some examples.
 What the  reader is offered  instead is a grimly   detailed  survey  of  improvements in  printing, papermaking and  newspaper production along  with a trio of essays devoted to  Dickens, Thackeray and Carlyle respectively, on the somewhat specious   grounds  that   they  are  "arche­ typal  figures" whose  fate  "is also the  fate  of   many,  less   distinguished   or   more notorious,  wearing  a   different   cut    of clothes." Dickens  illustrates  the   case  of the gifted  author partly corrupted by "the tyranny of   cash";  Thackeray  represents the  less  gifted   writer, almost  wholly  cor­  rupted by the same vile taint; and  Carlyle stands  for  the  writer   of  integrity, whose great   creative  works  cannot  find   a publisher.
The historian will  not  find  the  histori­ cal  half  of  the  book  very  rewarding. A turgid mass  of  facts  and  figures  is  only relieved    by   some   conclusions  that    are  either  obvious   ("The  discovery   of  the  electrotype  came  in  the  184o's.  It is an invention   associated  with   the   develop­ ment  of  electricity and  electrical power.") or questionable (as  when  the author con­ fuses  population figures  for  England and Wales with those for the British Isles) or misleading (as in  the  use of "still" in  the following: "After World  War  I Lord Northcliffe demanded  a  seat  for  himself at the Peace Conference ... though Lloyd George was  still  able  to  refuse  him.")

REVIEW ARTICLES



It is  difficult   to  accept  the  assertion that   freedom  of   the   press   in   England dates   from   the   end   of  the   seventeenth century. Indeed, the author realizes this later, and  has  to  produce something else called   the   "liberation  of  the   press"   to explain  developments  in   the   eighteenth and  nineteenth centuries. He is frequently more  concerned to point  out  what  should have   happened  in   history   than  to  find out  what  did  happen. It is difficult  not to laugh  when  one  reads: "the publications of  Charles Knight and  the  s.n.u.K.  tried with too much moral seriousness to direct reading habits by offering biography, natural history,  and   mechanical  curiosi­ ties   to   people    whose   interest   required open  discussion  of  politics  (trade  union­ ism,  machine breaking,  strikes,  democra­ tic  government) and  the  social  issues of religion, and  perhaps birth  control." That
 "perhaps" is a master  touch.  Clearly  Mr. Dudek  is  not  in  touch   with  the  climate of opinion  in England in  I 83 2-or at any other  time  for  that  matter. Is it  possible to  agree  with  him  that   the  "Tatler  and Bystander" is  an  example of  a  "general popular magazine" which  is "less special­ ized in class appeal" than  "The Queen"? As to  his  central thesis,  that  the  pub­  lisher,  caught  in   the   twin   toils  of  the "money-profit motive" and  the  necessity of using the  gigantic machinery thrust  on him    by   the    Industrial   Revolution  in Printing,  is  forced   to  print  trash   for  a garbage-hungry public, it  is perhaps  only necessary to point  out  that  poets, philoso­ phers,  novelists,  and   political  economists still somehow  find  their  way into  print  at a  rate  that   baffles the  imagination. It is undeniable that  the majority of the books that  pour  annually from  the  presses every



LIFE OF  JOHNSON
BY    JAMES  BOSWELL
The   text  of  this  master   biography is  the  reliable   Malone sixth  edition, unabridged. There  is a  unique and  compre­ hensive   index   and   a  valuable   introduction  by  Sir  Sydney Roberts. Two  volumes, No.  IOOI and  No.  I002. Each  $1.65.


PLAYS
BY    IBSEN
'A Doll's  House', 'The Wild Duck' and  'The Lady  from  the Sea',   translated  by  R.  Farquharson Sharp and   Eleanor Marx-Aveling, form  an attractive cheap introduction to the great  Norwegian dramatist. No.  I4g4. $.go.


A  BOOK   OF  NONSENSE
BY   EDWARD  LEAR
Fully   illustrated.  Edward  Lear's  nonsense   transcends  the commonplace cap-and-bells order. It  is  nonsense   like  no other  nonsense,   and   various   other   high   priests   of   moon­ magic   keep  him  company-Lewis  Carroll, W.  B.  Rands, E.  T. A. Hoffman. A good  volume  to  keep  on  any  bedside table.  No.  I 8o6. $.go.

REVIEW ARTICLES



year  are  worthless,  but  I find  it  difficult to believe in  Mr.  Dudek's starving genius, the    'consciously
am  sure   that   anybody   who  can  write  a good   book,   no  matter  how  unorthodox the  view  it  bodies  forth, will find  a  pub­ lisher.   And   if  the  writer   cannot   write, surely  it  is  better   for  him  to  soldier  on in   what   Mr.   Dudek   refers  to  cosily  as "little mags" until   he  can  learn   to  turn  a  readable  sentence.
Mr. Dudek himself writes remarkably badly,  if Imay  say so. He  is a master  of the  non  sequitur, many  of which  are  too lengthy   to  reproduce in  a  review.  Here is  a  delightful "tabloid" example:   "Al­ though  Thackeray  was  a  giant  six-feet­ four  in height, he had  an intuitive under­ stariding  of   feminine   character."  The punctuation  throughout  is as  precarious as the  grammar. If I may  misquote  Ezra  Pound, for  whom  Ishare  Mr.  Dudek's admiration,  I should   like  to   point   out that   prose  must  be  at  least  as  carefully  written as  some  poetry.  And  if one  must have  so many  footnotes-5I8, count  'em!
-in 238 pages, they should  be read care­ fully  enough  to  catch   errors  like  "reve­ lant"  "Tattle's  Miscellany" and   "Ford
 Madox Heuffer".
That life is difficult  m the twentieth century for  the  creative artist   is an  un­ deniable fact.  No  writer  can  hope  to  live in  Canada on  the  proceeds  of  his  work, it  is true.  The problem, in  my  view,  will not  be  solved  by a  retreat into  the  cata­ combs of self-praise and self-pity provided by  the   little  magazines,  but   by  a  more courageous   effort   on   the   part   of   the writers  to  find  a  public  with  whom  they can  communicate. To   do  this  they   will first have  to learn  to write.  For  too many  of   today's  intuitive  geniuses   the   labour is  not  worth   the  candle: they  prefer   to whine   and   strike   heroic   attitudes. They must   find   it  very   difficult   to  maintain their   pessimism   in   the  face  of  the  evi­ dence  provided by the  so-called  "Paper­ back   Revolution", which   Mr.  Dudek sweeps  under the  carpet on  the  grounds that  it  is as yet  too  soon  to  assess its im­ pact.    Too   soon,   after   a   quarter  of  a century? I should  have  thought it  would have  provided a more rewarding starting­ point  for  this  study  than   Gutenberg and  the   lives  of   Dickens, Thackeray  and  Carlyle.













MOUNTAIN MAN MYTHOLOGY

HOWARD o'HAGAN.   Tay  fohn. S.  J. Reginald
Saunders. $4-95·

TAY JOHN, Tete Jaune,  Yellowhead. Tay John  is  all   the   Shuswap  tongue   could make  of  Tete Jaune, the  name given  by French-Canadian trappers to  the  yellow­ haired  halfbreed who was regarded by his tribe   as  the  leader  who  would  one  day restore  them  to  the fruitful times of their past.  Yellowhead  he  was  dubbed by the story's   narrator.   And    the   story   is   set largely   in  the  Yellowhead  country. But this  elaborate  pattern  of  coincidence  is not  coincidence  at  all, for  Mr.  O'Hagan has  found in  the  story  of  Tay  John the elements of legend, and  in legend, coinci­ dence    does   not   exist:  we   are   witness rather to  an  inevitable order of  events.
Certainly  the  life  of  Tay   John   as  we are  given  to  understand it  has  a  legend­ ary  quality:  he   turned  away  from   his tribe   to  seek  the   white  civilization, and  when  he  found it, was  as  much  an  alien as he  had  been  among  the  Shuswap who reverenced him. According to the author, he   was  of   great   physical   strength  and
courage, and  held  a powerful sexual fascination for  the  white women  with whom  he  came  in  contact. Here are  the persistent themes of the modern "legend"; the  outsider, disdain for  the  punishment of the  flesh  (he  chops  off a hand to  bar­ ter  it  for  a  horse  he  badly  wants),  and
 the  joyless discovery  of the  need  for woman.   Yet   with  all  the  requisites,  the legend  remains an  artifice  and  the  story rarely attains the  power  to move. Legend, a joining of the wonderful with shared experience, requires altogether less sophis­ tication   to  produce and   to  receive  than  our  society  contains, and  Tay John  is a very  sophisticated book:  the  result  is an element  of straining for  an unfelt  truth.
The  strain  is felt  in  the  rhetoric of the opening   lines:   "The time  of  this  in  its beginning, in  men's time,  is 188o  in  the summer,   and   its  place  is  the  Athabaska valley,  near   its  head   in  the  mountains, and  along  the  other waters  falling  into  it, and  beyond  them  a  bit, over  Yellowhead Pass  to  the  westward, where   the  Fraser, rising  in  a lake,  flows through  wilderness and   canyon   down   to  the   Pacific." Mr. O'Hagan  adopts a  number  of  different styles  in   the   telling   of  this  story,  quite properly,    as   it   is  seen   from    different angles,  but  in  each  of  them,   the  strain, the consciousness  of verbal  elaboration, is an  irritating  presence between   ourselves and   the  story,   and   in   the   end   we  are always  brought round to  the  author  say­ ing, "Here is myth  in the  making." From  the  Olympian detachment of  the  quoted paragraph he  moves  to  a  telling  of  how Red   Rorty, the   putative father  of  Tay  John, came  to  the  Shuswap, and  as  we get  closer  to  the  Indians, the  style  takes on  longer  rhythms and  assumes  a  verbal simplicity  which   has  moments, for  all  its lapses into  a pseudo-King-James-Version­ English,  of   power.
It may  be  that  in  the  wordy  Irishman who  takes  over   the  telling   of  the  story Mr.  O'Hagan has  caught the  accents  of a type,  the  garrulous trapper, alone  with his  windy  formulations for  months at  a time  ("Then we cry, we of the  West, we

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Westerners, we who have come here to sit below  the mountains-for your Westerner is not only the man  born here, blind, unknowing, dropped  by his mother upon the  ground, but  also one  who came  with his  eyes open,   passing  other   lands  upon the  way-Give us new earth, we cry ...") Notwithstanding, Jack  Denham is an  un­ satisfactory pivot  for  the  story,  and  it  is difficult   to   escape   the   feeling   that   he exists  to  throw   Tay   John  out  of  focus rather than to place  him in focus. Unfair to  the   author's  intention,   perhaps,  but this  in  the  effect.  Ultimately, the  legen­ dary  character  is seen to have  lived a life only   dimly   understood  by  others,   and perhaps  by  himself  as  well;  and  legend,  whatever    the   mystery    it   enshrines,    is never  dim.
Still,    there    are    recognitions   of   the tragic   possibilities   of  Tay   John, and   at the   end,   there   remains a  last  haunting image,  of Tay  John seen by another trap­ per  in  the  middle of  a  frozen  lake, in  a blizzard,  pulling a  toboggan   to  which  he had   tied  his  pregnant wife,  a  European woman:








66
 She  was sitting up,  her  back  toward  Tay
John.   One  eye was open.  The  other  closed.
'It was like she winked  at  me,'  Blackie said.
'Her    mouth    was   open   too,   just   a   little,
enough  so  that   I  thought perhaps she  said something I didn't hear.  Then I saw  snow
in   her   mouth. It  was  chock-full   of  snow. One  of her  hands  was dragging in  the snow by  the   toboggan. It  made   a  furrow   of  its own. She was dead.'
GEORGE ROBERTSON






BAGGY-PANTS
RHETORIC

IRVING  LAYTON.  The Swinging  Flesh. McClel­
land  & Stewart. Cloth,  $4.50.  Paper,  $2.65.

"IT  SEEMS TO ME," Irving Layton  writes in  his  Foreword to  The   Swinging  Flesh, "the Wordsworthian phrase   'emotion  re­ collected  in  tranquillity' is  more  applic­ able  to  prose  than to  poetry."  If  this  is Mr.  Layton dwelling within  the  body  of his  work,  it  certainly  must  seem  so,  for the   ten  stories  offered   in  The   Swinging Flesh generate a  great  calm,  a tranquill­ ity  for  sure,  like  the  unexpected sigp.t of satiety   following  a   spate   of   concerted cathartic weeping. But where  is the emo­  tion?  The Foreword speaks of our  vanity, egotism,  malice   and   guilt,  and   rages  on with  such  a  passion   of  itself  that   com­ plexly   contradictory  images   boil  to  the surface  to   congeal  before    the   eye   in affectingly ugly and  malformed concepts; the   stories   murmur  quietly  of   appear­ ances,  awareness of self, the distraction of circumstance, and   the  shadows  we  all call  meanings, and   are  peopled  by  illu­  sions  that   move  in a  continuum of non­  engagement,  dropping  masks   briefly   in

BOOKS IN REVffiW



the   closing   paragraphs  to   reveal   faces, real   live   faces.   But   whose   faces?   And why here?  And  how?  These are questions not  answered by  the  Foreword, for  that was largely  a matter of  word  games,  nor by  the  stories  themselves, which  seem  to be  all   beginnings, until   they   suddenly end,  and  have  no  middles to speak  of at all.  The strangely passive  stories  are  fol­ lowed  by forty-three poems, and certainly they   are   far   more   likely   as   linear descendants of   the   Foreword   than   the  stories,  both  in  their  verve  and  their  rhe­  toric.   For   ultimately,  despite  the   Fore­  word's  protestations of  love for Truth, it is rhetoric that  is Irving Layton's passion;  his verse delights in  the sound  of its own
VOICe.

Voyeur,  voyez! The  moisture of her delicate instep
Is a pool of love
Into  which  sheathed in candy  paper
Anaesthetized politicians  drop  from the skys.

It is a  contagious delight. Mr.  Layton is fun  to  read, he goads  you  to laughter, like  it   or   not,   and   it   appears  that   he wants  you  to like it,  for  when  he is close to  sending   you  away  mad, he  plays  the clown,
Because I love you better
than  artichokes and  candles  in  the  dark, I shall speak  to them.

and   sometimes he  retreats completely,

From  cement  bags, dear  llya, Is poured  our  common  future: A neutral dust  with  no hue.

The Foreword proclaims Poet  as  Pho­ phet   and   Layton  as   Poet,   but   though what    follows   at   first   seems   to   be   an apocalyptic vision,  it  turns  out  to  be the  rhetoric  of  the   proclamation,  extended. Leaping  the    stories,   the   rhetoric  re­ appears in  the  verse,  and  much  of  what  seems at  first  to  be  unique imagery  turns
 out  to be  recurrent conceits  and  favorite turns  of phrase.  Well,  if rhetoric is to be the  instrument, and   we  are  given  verse that  is more  period  than   poetry,  at  least the  rhetoric is exuberant; if our  time  has made rhetoric a barren instrument of communication, then  Mr.  Layton's use of rhetoric as the clown's  flower  that  squirts your   eye  as  you  bend   to  smell  it  is  a present contribution to the saving of our language from  its slide into  numb  mean­ inglessness.
Some  of  the   verse  of  The   Swinging
Flesh is openly  and  conscientiously  ludi­ crous   (as  "Why I Don't Make  Love  To  The First Lady") , some wears the sombre  clown   face   of  the   mock   visionary,   the charlatan  evangelist who  tempts you  in, picks   the   pocket   of   your   vulnerability, and  then  immediately shows you his trick with  a  sudden  imagist  twist   ("I  Know The Dark   And  Hovering Moth"),  and  some  ("Keine  Lazarovitch")  are  sudden reversals,  the  clown  suddenly stripped of blinking    nose   and   cosmetic    tear,    and  looking  back  at  us from  the  mirror.
And   having   come   this   far   with   the verse,  we  find   ourselves   at   the   stories, which are not really stories at all, but statements, expressions  of the stance of clown  in  front  of  the  mirror at  the  end of  his  tum; all  ten  of  them  project this image,  and  those of them  that  are closest to  being  stories  ("A  Plausible Story", for example) allow you to see how the clown face   comes   off,   bit   by  bit,   before   the final  confrontation.
Foreword, stories,  verse,  fifty-four  per­ formances in  baggy-pants  rhetoric-any good   performer  takes   a   bad   tum  and  makes  a  sour  joke  once  in  a while,  and  so  does   Irving  Layton,   but,   to  say   it again, he is fun  to  watch, like it or  not.
BARRIE HALE

BOOKS IN REVIEW



MYTH
INTO MAN

CHARLES E. ISRAEL. Rizpah. Macmillan. $4·95·

HISTORICAL  NOVELS are  often  blood-and­ thunder pieces, Maverick in toga or Pala­  din   in   pantaloons.   Rizpah,  set  in   the tumultuous  days   of    Saul   and   David,  could  have  been another, with  the  Philis­ tines  taking  their   time-honoured role  as the   bad   guys  and   the   prophet  Samuel trumpeting like the  shofar. Charles Israel has  not  chosen   this  easily  popular  way. Here   we  find   no  villains  or   heroes,  in the  traditional sense, although violence it­ self  is  the  shadow   that   falls  across  the entire  story,   while   the   stubborn   ability  of  humans to keep  on  living  and  caring  what   happens to  others takes  on  a  kind of  heroic  quality.
Rizpah is fifteen when her family and suitor  are  killed  by Philistine  raiders.  She is  carried off  to  Askelon,  where  she  be­ comes   the   concubine  of  the  suave  and wealthy  Torash,  finally  accompanying him   to   the   wars  against   the   Israelites. The  raw  and  badly  armed  Hebrews win an   unexpected   victory,   and   Rizpah  is brought  to  Saul,  the  brawny  and  forth­ right  farmer who  has  been  anointed by Samuel as  King  of  Israel.  Saul  becomes Rizpah's one real  love; she stays with him through  his  battles   with  the  Philistines,  his  terrible bouts  of   madness,  his  rejec­ tion  by Samuel and  his final  bitter  con­  test with David. Rizpah is perhaps a little too beautiful, intelligent and  loving  to be entirely   believable,  but   she  comes   stir­ ringly  to  life  in  the  last  splendid scenes of  the  book,  when  she  is  mourning her children.
Saul, David  and  Samuel  all  take  on  a

68
 remarkable reality  as the author attempts to  clothe  with  fallible  humanity the  stif­ fened  bones  of  legend.  David  is not  pre­  sented   as  the   boy  wonder   who  matures into  the  prototype of  the  wise  king.  We see  him   as  intensely  perceptive,  compe­ tent,  capable of  great  affection, but  torn  always   between  loyalty   to  Saul  and   his own   ruthless   ambition.  Saul   himself   is pictured as a  blunt  and  humourless man,  thrust   into   a   kingship  he  never   sought  and  struggling massively to rule well. His incipient madness is brought on  by Samuel's  appalling  order   from   Jahveh that  the  Israelites must  destroy  every  liv­ ing   creature  in   Amalek,  and    by   the prophet's  subsequent   denunciation   of Saul  for  having  spared  the  Amalek  king.
In  Saul's relationship with  David,  we are  shown   two  men  who  value  one  an­ other deeply  but  who  are  driven inexora­ bly  apart by  circumstances,  by  fear  and  ambitions,  until   each retreats  into   the wilderness   of  his  own   hatred.  Yet  both would  have  had it otherwise. These  impli­  cations are  certainly  to  be  found, if  we care   to   look,  in   the   First  and   Second  Books  of  Samuel,  in  Saul's   last   heart­ broken  appeal, "Return, my son David.." or  in  David's elegy  for  Saul,  "How are the   mighty   fallen..".  But  many   of  us, Jewish   and   Christian   alike,   have   been too long  accustomed to the flat images  of tradition-David is the  eternal conquer­ ing   hero;  Saul   is,  at   best,  mad,   or   at worst,  wicked.   The  sorrows  of  men   be­ come obscured, and from  time  to time we need  to have  them brought freshly  to our  awareness.
The prophet Samuel is portrayed  con­ vincingly  as a man  obsessed with his duty to Jahveh. He  is a frightening character, frightening because  he  is so  genuine, be­ cause   he   believes   so  implicitly  that   his

BOOKS IN REVffiW



sometimes-preposterous commands spring from a divine  and not-to-be-disputed source,   frightening  because   he   is  born into  every  age  and  time.
Goliath, the  evil giant to so many generations, is movingly  described as hav­ ing  grown   to  manhood in  the  cramped slums  of  Askelon.  "Until  the  Army  had  liberated  him and made  his  freakish size  an   object   of   admiration.  Standing here  now  between  the  stalemated legions of two nations must have  been  the proud­ est   instant   of   his   life."   Many  of   the novel's  interpretations, like  this one,  ring so  true  that   they  seem  to  be  discoveries rather  than  inventions.
The people  in  Rizpah are  drawn  con­
sistently, one feels, in terms of their own concepts. Thus  we  see  Jahveh   through
their  eyes as a tribal  deity,  fully as blood­ thirsty  as Dagon and  Astarte of  the Phili­  stines.   Soothsayers,  healers,   prophecies, burnt  offerings,  taboos--all   were   taken  for  granted, and  the  author  weaves them into  the  story  in  a  similar  natural man­  ner,   with   no   enlightened   apologies   or anthropologist's  excited   emphasis.
The book  is, I think, rather too  long; the  numerous campaigns tend  to  become tedious.   But   there   is  a  great  deal   else, for    those    who    are   interested    in   the rendering of myth  into man.
MARGARET LAURENCE


PHYSICIAN OF COS

WILDER  PENFIELD.   The   Torch. Little,  Brown.
$s.oo.

DR.  PENFIELD'S  PROTAGONIST, Hippo­ crates, finds  his purpose in much  the way that   the   actual  Hippocrates  must   once
 have   done;  and   pursues   it   throughout this novel, pursues  it in the  face of  ignor­ ance,  superstition, and  gossip, very much  like   that    encountered,   as   far  as   the author's exhausitve research  can  disclose, by the  Greek  physician or  asclepiad  who practised   on   the   island   of   Cos  in   the fifth  century·B.C.
Twenty-three  pages   of   notes   at   the back of the book testify to Dr. Penfield's painstaking investigation; notes  gathered from   histories   and   archaeological  texts, and  from  his own  field-work, carried out on  Cos  and   the   neighbouring  coast  of south-west  Asia Minor. He  follows his sources so closely that  on occasion  the character  Hippocrates  speaks within double  quotation marks; the  second  set indicating a direct  abstract from  the Hip­ pocratic writings.  Where history  is silent, Dr.  Penfield  supplies  plausible speech and  action  for  his  central  character.
Hippocrates  and  the  background against    which    he   moves   are   the   two plausible    creations  of   the   novel.   The other  characters seldom  come  alive;  they are  there  to manipulate or-more often­ to be manipulated by the great physician; the    neurotic   wife,    her    timorous   and  pompous   husband,  her   dull-witted  but decent  son;  sardonic Euryphon, the ascle­ piad  from   nearby  Cnidia, Daphne, his vibrant, lovely daughter, Buto,  the simian pugilist;  all  of   these  have   their  skeleton  existence   in   the   plot,   but,   long   before the  end,  their  bones  are  simmered down to  stock.  The  story   itself   lacks  tension,  for  the  happy  ending is visible  from  the first   third   of   the   novel; and   despite   a climax   which  owes  something to  Greek tragedy, containing as it does four  violent  deaths, the  only  interest lies in  the  chap­ ters   in   which   Dr.   Penfield,  feeling   no doubt  that   the   plot  can   go  hang  for  a

6g

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



while,   brings   Hippocrates  and   his   dis­ ciples  together  under   the  plane  tree  for symposiums  on  euthanasia, abortion, and the  treatment of epilepsy.
I must   admit-perhaps I  didn't  read
the  notes  carefully  enough-that  I found it  difficult  on occasion  to decide  whether the  opinions being  expressed  were  those of  Hippocrates the  man  or  of  Dr.  Pen­ field.  The  latter is  a  distinguished  sur­ geon and  neurologist, and no doubt  found  it  difficult   and   even   undesirable  to  re­ main  entirely  mute on controversial medi­  cal  matters.
Euthanasia  is  discussed   when   Empe­ docles,  physician, philosopher,  poet  and mystic,  comes  to Cos  in search  of a cure  for  his  spinal   tumour. No  cure  is forth­ coming;  but  Hippocrates  refuses  to  end the  old  man's suffering:

Our task  . .  . is  to  save  life,  not  to  end it.  The gods  may  snip   the  thread of  life  at will,  perhaps. But  if  physicians should  take up  the   shears, where would   it  all  end?

This is not the only opinion Dr. Penfield offers,  however; he has  the young Dexip­ pus   exclaim, "If  we   created   our   own gods,  then  why must  we obey them?  And why  should  you  not  give Empedocles the poison   he  wants?" I  cannot   think   that  the  author provides a satisfactory  answer to  Dexippus,  although  in  the  novel  the young   man  is  content  to  hear   that   the Greek-made gods represent different aspects  of an eternal god. But who has provided an  adequate answer?  Dr.  Pen­ field  perhaps does  not  presume to, but  is content to  furnish his readers  with  well­ presented questions.
While  questions like these are being asked,  The  Torch  is good  reading; when the  customs  of  Hippocrates'  contempor­ aries   are   being   described  and   made  to seem  an  integral part  of  the life of men,

70
 it  is good  reading; when  the  pedestrian plot    and    insipid    characters  limp   into action, it isn't.
DAVID BROMIGE




JAPANESE FLOWERS, AUTUMN VISTAS

RALPH  GUSTAFSON.  Rivers among Rocks.  Mc­
Clelland &  Stewart.  Cloth, $3.00. Paper,
$1.5o.
ALDEN   A.   NOWLAN.    Under the   Ice.  Ryerson.
$2.75·

RALPH   GUSTAFSON and   Alden   Nowlan are  very  different in  their  approaches to life and  to poetry.  Gustafson is elegant, literary and  exquisitely  devoted  to detail. His  kind  of  poetic   awareness cannot  be separated from  education and  culture. It is  also  the  product of  serene  periods  of leisure  and   reflection. In  this  sense  it  is social  poetry,  but  very  much   tied  to  the kind  of  public   life  in  which   only  a  few people  can  participate.
It is  hard   to  imagine how  and   what
Gustafson  would   write   without  the  in­ fluence  of concerts, books, paintings,  tra­ vel  and   the  mediation of  his  lively  and interesting mind.  One  cannot picture him
-as one  does  Alden  Nowlan-as a  poet captured by a group of primitive hunters, killing  animals along with  other men,  or chopping  down   trees   beside   them.   Nor can   one   easily   picture  Gustafson's   re­ action when  confronted with  some  of  the grosser  cruelties of  this  world.  No,  I  am wrong;  his  approach  would   be   ironic, integrated  and   compassionately  rational. Yet  somehow   these  cruelties  could  never be  big  issues  with  Gustafson,  and  this  is a limitation.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



It is  pointless   to  condemn a  poet  for what   he  is  not   and   to  complain about the   realities   he  misses.  When  Gustafson drops   his  role  as  a  travel   photographer (as  in  the  Preludes), or  concert-goer, or art gallery viewer, or Japanese flower arranger- as in  the  short  poems, "Que­ bec  Night" and   "The  Blue  Lake", and  becomes   most    himself,    he   is   verbally astringent, intellectually  passionate, emo­ tionally   tender, and   burns   with   a  cool steady  glow.  "The Disquisition" is one of his finest  poems.

Wherefore one  person lives
Until he is alive :
No  poetry's in  the  head:
As none  written until read.

And  further in  the  same  poem:

Now  one  looks  back
The sorrow is the  lack
Of  a merry heart, nor  the  death ... The words without use.

On  the  personal side, Gustafson's several    love   poems    with    their   down­ drawing  rhythms  mark   a  new   richness and   expansion  in   his  feeling.  In   "The Little Elderly Lady Visits" he has written a   poem   so  light,  so   charming, and   so complete that  it will inevitably be antho­ logized.  But  it  is  impossible to  do  justice to  any  poet  in  so  brief  a  review-especi­ ally  to one  who  is as complex and  subtle  and   technically  accomplished as  Gustaf­ son. The production of his book, designed  and  illustrated  by  Frank  Newfeld, with its delightful end  pages  and  its handsome type,  mark   what I hope  is  to  be  a  new phase  in Canadian book  publishing.
Alden Nowlan's work would have benefited by a more  elegant format. But perhaps  this   plain   little   blue   book,  his first  in hard covers  after  two chap-books, is expressive  of the immediacy and  direct-
 ness-and also of  the  awkwardness--<>£ a very gifted  and  original poet.
Nowlan  does not  write  about  literature
or  philosophy or  civilization or  mankind in  general. Being  impatient with  details, he is no Japanese flower arranger. His history  is  the  present, so he  is no  myth­ maker.   It is  the   image   which  obsesses Nowlan,  and  the  impact of  experience on his own  and  other lives. He writes out  of his   isolated   chip-on-the-shoulder Mari­ time  culture,  out  of  the  New  Brunswick rivers  and   woods.   His   mind   is  full   of long autumnal vistas, the  loneliness of the north country, the cruel  violence, and  the terrible  emotional waste and  loss. Nowlan doesn't   know  yet  how  to  handle his  re­ actions   to  violence,  waste  and   loss,  and  in  this book  he  handles them  with  alter­ nate  excesses of  love  and  hate.
One can  certainly imagine Alden  Now­
lan   rising   like   a   phoenix  out   of   the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



romantic conflict  created by being both participator and observer, caught in the struggle   between  loving  what  one  is and where   one   lives,  and   hating   it.  This   is the  poetry  of personal emancipation, and therefore inevitable. One  could  speculate that   Nowlan's kind  of  poetry  is also  the poetry  of native  emancipation; one strug­ gles with  the  bitterness, the isolation,  the geography,  the   long   winters   of   disap­  pointment, and   in  the  meantime one  is telling   the   story   of   that   isolation,   that  geography, and  of  all  those mean,  repres­ sed,  impoverished  and   beloved  people.
Which is all  to  the  good.  Nowlan  has the  important gifts  of  the  poet  as singer and   story-teller.  He   is  a  superb   image maker. But he has one  very serious short­ coming: his  poems  are  felt  through and experienced up  to a point, but few of the issues  he   raises  in   a   poem  are   ever  honestly  resolved.  A  poem  like "Nancy", for  instance,  begins  almost  perfectly.

Nancy  was the smoking  tines
the distant strawstack's blaze at night
when  from my window  all the dark closed darker on that  light.
Nancy  was the cool beneath
the bridge  where  we were forty thieves. Cars went over, gravel  came down Nancy  was this:  and  please
Show me what  Nancy  is, I said, the part  that  can  never  be me.

But   to   this  deep,  to   this   endless, to this dark question, Nowlan gives the shoddy,   vulgar and completely  inade­ quate answer:

And Nancy  naked  was Nancy clothed in denser  mystery.

But  not  all  the  poems  are  so spoiled. One  at  least  ends  completely satisfyingly.

And  in a dream  I saw the meek bequeathed
Their  deep  and  narrow  heritage  of earth.
MIRIAM  WADDINGTON
 ;
MULTIPLE PROVOCATION

Explorations  in   Communication, edited   by
Edmund Carpenter and Marshall  McLuhan. S. J. Reginald Saunders. $4.00.

THE occASIONAL  JOURNAL Explorations, financed by the  Ford  Foundation and  the Toronto  Telegram  and   edited    by   Ed­ mund  Carpenter and  Marshall McLuhan, both  of  the  University of   Toronto, ran for  nine  issues. It was  probably the  most lavish   and   imaginative   journal  ever   to come  out  of  Canada. The stock  response to   it   always included stimulating and provocative,·  in  academic circles  at  least one  also  heard that  much  of it  was  non­ sense   ("although  there    are   good   solid things  by  people   like  Northrop  Frye, of course"), that   it  was  full  of  inconsisten­ cies, and  that  the money would  have  been better    spent   on   something sound-like  the  University of  Toronto  Quarterly.
Given  the ideas of the editors, such reactions  were   predictable.  Stimulating and  provocative merely meant that  the readers had  been made uneasy,  but that "there might be something-not much, mind   you-buried in  it  all."  They  also meant that  the  ideas   were  startling but could  not  be easily  or  totally  refuted.  As the  introduction to  this  anthology of articles from  the  journal says:

Explorations explored  the  grammars of such languages  as  print,   the   newspaper   format and   television.   It  argued   that   revolutions in  the  packaging and   distribution of  ideas and  feelings  modified  not  only  human  rela­ tions  but  also sensibilities.  It  further  argued  that   we   are   largely   ignorant  of   literacy's role  in  shaping Western   man,  and  equally  unaware  of   the   role   of   electronic  media  in  shaping modern  values.  Literacy's vested interests   were   so  deep   that   literacy   itself was  never  examined.  And  the  current  elec-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tronic   revolution   is   already  so   pervasive that we  have   difficulty  in  stepping outside of it  and   scrutinizing it objectively.

The  articles ranged from  sober analyses of such  relatively unconsidered means  of communication  as   the   tactile   and   the kinesic,   through  anthropological   discus­ sions based  on  the  rather  dubious  Whorf hypothesis  that  linguistic structure condi­ tions  reality, to  the  inaccurate meander­ ings   through  the   bawdy  of  Kinsey's bibliographer G.   Legman.  And   dotted  throughout  were  the  infuriating, blithely confident,   deliberately   provoking, fre­ quently  inconsistent dicta  of  the  editors.  But it was the  editors' work  that  gave the journal  its  raison  d' etre,  its  life,  and   in the   long   run,   I think,   what   will  be  of lasting  value.  They  repeatedly forced  the reader-print-bound as  far  as  they  were concerned-to  consider the  structure of print, of  radio,   of  television,  of  film,  of information itself.
The  anthology, regrettably, does not have  the flair of the  journal, use of varied typography, illustration, colour.  One  has only to compare McLuhan's "Classroom Without Walls" in  the  anthology and  in Explorations 7 to see how  much  is lost in the  sober  book.  In the  journ;:tl, set out  as a  kind  of free  verse  and  utilizing  several types,  the  article is much more  convinc­ ing.   (An   observation that   merely   sub­ stantiates one  of  McLuhan's points.)
But  if  the   anthology  lacks  the  visual impact of  the  journal, it  still  has a great deal  to offer: Lawrence Frank on  tactile communication; Stephen Gilman on "Time and Tense in  Spanish Epic Poetry",  Suzuki  on   "Buddhist   Symbol­ ism",  Frye on "The Language of  Poetry",
-and S. Giedion, Jacqueline Tyrwhitt, Fernand Leger, S. E. Hyman, David Riesman, Dorothy  Lee,  Robert  Graves,
 W. R. Rodgers, Gilbert Seldes, and  H. J. Chaytor, and  six articles  by the  editors.
And one keeps coming  back  to the edi­ tors.  They   nag  at  the  mind,  irritate  the reason,   and   leave   one   with   worms   of doubt-about oneself, them, books, radio,  television,  history,  the  present. Rejecting what  they  call  the linearity, the  develop­ ing  argument, of  the  book,  they  sprinkle  their   work   with   the   outrageous  state­ ments   of   poets.   "Gutenberg  made    all history   simultaneous"  says  McLuhan. Elsewhere: "The  professoriat has turned its back on culture for  two hundred years because  the  high  culture of technological society is popular culture ..." "The Rus­ sians are  impotent to shape  technological culture  because  of  their  inwardness and grimness." And Carpenter counterpoints: ". . . the  only  time  anyone smiles o:p.  TV  is  in  corrunercials." "...  the  book  was ideally suited  for discussing evolution and progress. Both belonged, almost  exclusive­ ly, to book  culture." But  if one  gets past one's  own  prejudice  in  favour of  print,  and  rationality, it  becomes  clear  that  the editors   are   tackling  some   of  our   most important issues and  presuppositions.
In a short  review of an anthology it is impossible  to  debate any  article in detail. I should  like, however,  to enter  two reservations about  the whole set of ideas presented. Too  often,  I think,  the  journal
-and consequently  the   anthology­ assumes  that   the  structure  of  American press,   radio,   film,   television   is  in   fact the   structure   of   the   media   themselves. Secondly,   I  suspect   that   sometimes   the editors   confuse   the   method  of  analysis with   the   material  being   analysed. The alphabet segments  and  imposes  linearity, it  is  true,  but  the  spoken  word  remains the  same. Bad  teaching, dictionaries, and print  may foster  the illusion of "one  word

73

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



--one meaning"  but  words in speech are as usefully multivalued  as ever.
All in all, however, even with  adrena­ lin pounding  through  the blood, we must be thankful  for such a journal; and since issues of it  are  now collectors'  items, we must  be happy  to have  the anthology. It is  stimulating,   provocative,-and  pro­ voking.
R.  J• BAKER


CANADIAN
REBEL

The   Selected  Writings of William Lyon  Mac­
kenzie. Edited  by Margaret Fairley.  Oxford.
$6.so.

EDITORS   HAVE  PLAYED a  prominent  part in Canada's public life.  With  Howe, Brown,   Ryerson,   and   Dafoe,   William Lyon  Mackenzie   holds  a  well-deserved place in the front ranks. Recently, his reputation has been enhanced  by several important studies, uniquely  by this latest contribution  to  the   literature   of   Mac­ kenzie.  Margaret  Fairley's  anthology  is based on Mackenzie's pre-Rebellion  writ­ ings,  published   here  for  the  first  time since  their   original   appearance  in   his newspapers, in the public records, and in his  private   correspondence.   Mackenzie has at  last  found  what  he most needed:  a  sympathetic,  intelligent,  and  informed editor  of his own productions.
Mackenzie's   restless  spirit  and   wide­ ranging   interests  would  have  caught   a weasel asleep. Certainly, they invited  dis­ order, prolixity, and mortality in his writ­ ings. Despite  the  passage of years and  a firm corralling  by Margaret Fairley, how­ ever, Mackenzie's vigour and flame shine through  the pages of this handsome  edi-

74
 tion.  Ink  and  fire  flowed  through  Mac­ kenzie's  veins. They  gave  him  an  unre­ lenting  passion for discovering  the  whole truth  and  an  unfortunate  urge  to convey it all  to his readers. One  looks in vain in these pages for some hint of  the calculat­ ing  public  reserve  and  taciturnity  of  his illustrious  grandson.  Mackenzie  held  the highest standards of  journalistic  and  per­ sonal   probity.   He   undoubtedly  owed much   to   Cobbett,   whom   he   admired  greatly, for examples of style, of journal­  istic  enterprise,   and  for  causes  (such  as the  attacks  on  the  Post  Office) ; yet,  he condemned  Cobbett  for his wrong tactics in  a  right  cause  in  making  "statements not always correct  as they might  be". We find   well   documented that  obsessive search  for  "factual  evidence"   that   was prompted  by his passion and prejudice  in public  life. Unlike  Place,  with  whom  he shared   an   urge   for   detail,   Mackenzie could  not  work  through  agents. Instead, through  invective and weight of evidence, he  sought  to  arouse  all  men  at  once  to accomplish  all  those  things  that   would "increase   the   comforts   and   lessen  the misery of the  great  body of the  people".
In  Mackenzie's  Upper  Canada, that "great   body"  was  not  industrial.  Mac­ kenzie  was  a  physiocrat,   an  eighteenth  century   philosophe  in  a  Scotch  Presby­ terian's   clothing.  Politically,  he  assured John   Neilson  at  one  time,  he  was  "in no great  hurry  for  the  Elective System";  indeed,   he  seems  to  have  approved   of New  York's  gubernatorial  veto.  But  he continued   to  pursue  the  goal of an  elec­ tive system.  It was  the  age of  the  Com­ mon    Man,   to   whom   Mackenzie   was totally   devoted.   His   roots   were  Jack­ sonian,  but   they  were  also  Scotch.  He shared  with Carlyle a deep debt to Burns, as  he  acknowledged   in  "The   Constitu-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tion"  of  February 8,  I837:

I have  constantly identified myself  with  the common people of  the country, have earnestly and anxiously sought to raise  them higher in  the  scale  of  intelligence, and   will yet venture to believe  with  the Ayrshire Ploughman, that instead of encouraging Orange Lodges, Established  Priesthoods, close   Corporations,  and    delegated   Tyran­ nies, mankind will become brotherly-minded. What  else   but   this   hope   could  have   sup­  ported me  through  the  struggles of  the  last fifteen  years ?

His  roots  were  homely  and  rural.  Like Joe  Howe, he was his own  best provincial reporter. We see here  his familiarity with township affairs  throughout Upper  Can­ ada.   He   made   his  "Colonial  Advocate" a  provincial journal and  himself  a  pro­  vincial   figure.   That   province,  however,  extended  beyond  Upper Canada. There are   reports  on   Quebec's  reading-rooms, comparisons  of   the   Quebec  and   York colleges,  pictures  of  newly-arrived immi­  grants, of the Quebec theatre, and  of the winter  boat crews at Levis leaping among the   ice-floes   of   the   St.   Lawrence. To Mackenzie, Canada  was  something more than a  narrow,  English-speaking  society in Montreal and  about the Lakes. He foresaw  the  French-English governmental coalitions, and  penetrated into  the  social basis of federalism in Canada long before his fellows.
But   Mackenzie's  vision   stretched   be­ yond  the  borders  of  the  Canadas  and of North  America.  "The   Scene   Abroad" gives  us  Bryonic   glimpses   of   Greece,   a eulogy  of  O'Connell, praise  for  Edward Irving,   a   rallying  call   to   Canada's Quakers to  declare  themselves in  politics as  did   England's  Friends. For   Restora­ tion  France,  Mackenzie has  this  to  say:

Established priesthoods; arbitrary monarchs, and    the    venal   throng  who    bask   in   the guilty sunshine of  their  power; government
 brokers,   bankers and   state creditors;  ambi­ tious and unprincipled   politicians;  the proud, the   haughty and  the overbearing of all   countries-these,   with   few   exceptions, will make common  cause against the  people
. . . Grave  senators,  and    princes,  titled priests    and    hireling   legislators,  . . . say down   even   as   low   as  Father Strachan at York  and   his  hopeful pupil John  Robinson in  the   palace  of   justice  •  . . and   all   their emissaries  will   be   at  work   under  ground, in  the  dark and midnight hour sowing  dis­ cord  in  the  people's camp.

Through foreign  clippings and  comment, Mackenzie repeatedly brought the  moral home  to the  doorstep of his fellow Cana­ dians.  His   faith  in   education-particu­ larly   in   adult   education   through   the public journal-remained his firmest con­ viction.  "We would like to see less apathy, not merely in the government but in the governed". No one did  more  to overcome that  apathy.
Margaret  Fairley's  anthology  suggests
that  Mackenzie brought to the Upper Canadian scene light  as well as heat. Perhaps, however,  in practice he brought too   much    light.   Every   evil   was   spot­ lighted,   but   the  effect   at   the  time  was blinding.  An    anthology   must   bring greater    order    to   Mackenzie's  writings  than   appeared in  the  course  of  his  life­ time.  With   that  caution, the  reader   will find  here   lively,  intelligent  observations on  an  early  Canada, seen  by  a  man   of great  colour,  spirit,  and  purpose. Others have  shown   us  that   he  was  not   just  a rather  comic  demagogue.  Now  we  may discover  this  directly.
ALAN  WILSON





75

BOOKS IN REVIEW



TOLERATION
AND ABSOLUTISM

w.   1.  STANKIEWICZ.  Politics   and   Religion in Seventeenth-Century France.  A Study of Political Ideas  from the Monarchomachs to Bayle, as  reflected  in  the   Toleration  Con­ troversy. University of Toronto  Press. $6.oo.

Two oF  THE  MAIN   concepts which emerged from   the  conflicts  in  France in the I 6th.  and  I 7th. centuries were tolera­ tion   and   absolutism. The   more  obvious appearance of  the  latter  is  indicative of the   importance  of  religious  controversy in  the  growth of political ideas. It is this field  which  Dr. Stankiewicz explores  and it  is  the  conflicts which  surrounded the Huguenots in  which he is primarily interested.
The political   idea  which  was  particu­
larly   affected  by  the   developments   in the concept of toleration was that  of sovereignty, and  Dr. Stankiewicz  gives a detailed picture of how views on the ulti­ mate   source  of  sovereignty  reflected  the fluctuations  in   the   need   for   and   the acceptance  of   religious   toleration. The development of  monarchical and  absolut­ ist ideas  is traced in conjunction with  the history   of   the   Huguenots,  showing   not only  how  important it  is  to  relate   doc­ trines   to   contemporary  events,  but   also the  need  for  political   practice to  follow political   theory. This  point is  made strongly  with  reference to the  fate  of the Huguenot party  in the  162os when  it was loudly   affirming  monarchism, as  it  con­ tinued  to do  up  to 1685, while its actions were of necessity  anti-monarchical.
The central figure  of this study  is Cardinal Richelieu whom Dr. Stankiewicz sees  as  the  Machiavellian genius  behind a  mounting and  increasingly   overt  pres-
 sure  on  the  Huguenots. The  idea  of  the
'halcyon' period   between   1630  and  166o when  the Huguenots enjoyed  religious freedom after  being deprived of their political liberties  is refuted. Richelieu initiated the  policy  of  underground  ero­ sion  of  the  edifice  of  Nantes  motivated by his absolutist ideas  and  by a  "passion­ ate  yet  restrained intensity  imbibed  from  Father Joseph". Mazarin  was the  careful pupil   of  his  master and  had   an  "exag­ gerated   reputation   for   toleration"   to­ wards   the    Huguenots;    Louis  XIV continued   the   policy   with   some   hesita­ tions,   and   prompting from   the   clergy. Richelieu,   like  the   16th century  Poli­ tiques,  treated  toleration  as  a   political expedient rather  than   an  ethical  princi­ ple;   but   now   it   was  a  very  superficial toleration  undermined  by Richelieu him­  self. Dr.  Stankiewicz  succeeds  in  proving Richelieu's intentions ultimately to stamp out  the  Huguenots,  but  is less successful in showing  to what  extent he carried out this  policy  before  his death. Furthermore little   new  is  brought to  light  on  Riche­ lieu's  religious   ideas,   and   although Dr. Stankiewicz admits the  domination of political over  religious  factors  in the final Revocation, his  attempt to assess  Riche­ lieu's  involvement in  the  religious issue, and   to  seek  a  link  between the  attitude of  the  clergy  in  the  final  stages  and  that  of  Richelieu  is  not  entirely  convincing. The  clergy  certainly  played  a  large  part  in  the  final  tragedy  and  we see in  fact  a return of a theological approach to toler­  ation, but Richelieu's part in the  religious  conflict  remains a  matter of  controversy.
Dr. Stankiewicz introduces all the lead­ ing  political and  religJous  thinkers of the day   in  France, but   his  very  liberal  use of quotations from  them  has  the  inevita­ ble  effect  of making his  book  difficult  to



$5,000.00
IN  PRIZES


CANADIAN ADVENTURE BOOKS SERIES
 

Macmillan  of  Canada  will   launch  the   exciting,   new, CANADIAN  ADVENTURE  BOOKS   series in  the   autumn of Ig62.  We are  looking for vivid fiction,  based on dramatic events from our   past;  lively stories  ( IO,ooo-  I 2,ooo words)   with  plenty  of action  and  dialogue, to  appeal  to boys and  girls aged  eight  to  ten  years. CANADIAN ADVEN­ TURE BOOKS  will  feature  significant episodes  from   the lives of Canadian heroes  and  heroines,  or  adventures of fictional   characters against  a   background  of  rousing events  from  Canadian history.  Closing  date  for  submis­ sion  of  manuscripts is midnight, Friday,  November 30,
I g6 I. Write  now for  rules  and  conditions to


CANADIAN ADVENTURE BOOKS  SERIES

MACMILLAN 	OF 	CANADA
70 BOND STREET, TORONTO 2





SOCIAL PURPOSE FOR CANADA









UNIVERSITY
 Edited  by MICHAEL OLIVER PROVOCATIVE, AUTHORITATIVE,  URGENT­
SOCIAL CRITICISM  AT ITS BEST

Some of Canada's most stimulating writers, George Grant, Frank Scott, Kenneth McNaught, P.-E. Trudeau, Keith  Gallard, John Porter, Stuart Jamieson, and  others,  urge  all Canadians to examine with  them vital public  issues-economics, government, foreign  policy, social
welfare,  the arts. Of special  relevance
at the time of the founding of the
New  Party.

450 pages   $4.95  paper    $7.95  cloth
AT YOUR  BOOKSELLERS

OF TORONTO  PRESS

77

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



read.    However  the   treatment  and   de­ velopment of the  main  thesis is carefully  systematic. A selected  bibliography is attached,  and   one   could  wish  that   the author  had   allowed   us  as  complete  a glimpse   of   his  secondary  sources  as  he has done  of  the  primary ones. But  this is a  book  which  political scientists  will wel­ come  as  a  contribution towards  filling  a major  gap   in  their   field,  and   historians will  find  of  interest, notably  for  its view of  Richelieu.
MICHAEL MALLETT



BETWIXT
AND BETWEEN

R.    H.   HUBBARD. An   Anthology   of  Canadian
Art. Oxford. $s.so.

IN  HIS   PREFACE to   An  Anthology  of Canadian   Art  R.  H.  Hubbard  explains that  ever since his appointment to the National Gallery  fifteen  years ago, he has cherished  the  idea   of  writing   a  general history of the arts in Canada. Perhaps because   he  has   waited   so  long,  he  has tried   in   the   present  book  to  cram   too much   into  too  small  a  space.
What  he   has   produced  is  a   picture
book,   introduced   by   a   tightly   written essay and  followed  by a series of capsule biographies  of  major  artists.  It is  clear that   he  intends  the   pictures   to  be  the main   attraction. Yet  to  be  really  mean­ ingful,  in  so far  as painting  is concerned at  least,  illustrations should  be  in  color. However, of the  one hundred and  thirty­ five plates  in  An  Anthology  of Canadian Art  all  but  fourteen  are  monochromes, and  the  fourteen exceptions are  not  par­ ticularly good. One  instance of this inade-
 quacy  will suffice:  Dr.  Hubbard rates Maurice  Cullen's early   scenes  of   Mont­ real  and  Quebec "among the  best  works in  all  Canadian  painting."  But the   two examples shown  are  in  black  and  white,  even  though colour  here  is vital  in order to  reveal   Cullen's   reflection   of  Impres­ sionism.  In  his  essay Dr.  Hubbard's con­  cern   to   be   scholarly,  and   his  urge   to reduce  everything  to  digest   form,   have  robbed  his style of warmth. All in all, his panorama of three hundred years of Canadian art  does not seem very exciting.
Certain shifts  in  emphasis compared with  former writers on  Canadian art  are evident in  Dr.   Hubbard's treatment. In the   period   after   Confederation,  for   in­ stance, Hubbard discerns  a strong Ameri­ can  influence undetected  before,  and  on the  contemporary scene  he  has  dropped half  a  dozen  names  considered  worthy  of mention a  scant  ten  years  ago  by D.  W. Buchanan  in  The   Growth   of  Canadian Painting  (Prudence Heward, Edwin  Hol­ gate, Paraskeva Clark,  Lilian Freiman, Fritz  Brandtner,  Louis  Muhlstock). A serious  omission,  to  my  mind,  is Gordon Smith.
Dr.  Hubbard makes  only passing refer­ ence   to   non-European  arts   in   Canada, although he includes one reproduction of a   Haida  mask   and   one  of  an   Eskimo  carving. Rather than  treat  so glancingly these  two  types  of  sculpture which  have  received   world  acclaim, he  would   have  done  better to  leave  them  out  altogether.
In   sum,   this   book   should   have   been either less or much more: a handy paper­ back  with  lots  of  colour  plates,  or  a  de­  finitive   work  of  reference.  The  latter is what    Dr.    Hubbard   now    proposes    to write.  Let   us  hope  it  proves  more  satis­  fying.
JOAN  LOWNDES

BOOKS IN REVIEW



SHORT
REVIEW

AMONG  RECENT CANADIAN publications in the  French language we particularly wel­ come   the   first   number  of   Archives  des Lettres canadiennes, a new venture of the University of Ottawa. This annual publi­  cation sets  out  with  a  double   task;  each year   it   will   cover   fairly   intensively   a defined  area  of  literary history   (in  Ig6I French  Canadian  literary movements up to  I 86o are  discussed  through their  lead­  ing  trends and   personalities)  and  it  will also   present    an   accounting  of   literary trends  in  French Canada  and   to  a  less extent  in  English Canada during the pre­ ceding  year. The range  and  good scholar­  ship  of  the  first  issue suggest  that it  will
 contribute  a  great   deal   to  the  field  of studies  in  Canadian literature.
We  have   also  received   the  ninth  col­
lection   of   Ecrits   du   Canada   Frant;ais ( 480 ouest,  rue  Lagauchetiere, Montreal, I), a substantial occasional periodical whose latest  goo pages contain two novel­ las,   by   Gilles   Delauniere and   Andre­ Pierre   Voucher,  an   excellent   essay  on Saint-John  Perse  by  Louis-Marcel Ray­  mond,  and   a  lengthy  study  of  the  crisis in   American   trade   unionism  by  Pierre Vadeboncoeur.
G.W.





The Oxford Library of Italian Classics












OXFORD
 This new  series  provides English   translations of  works-some of  them hardly known   to  readers of  English today-from  the  rich  and   varied literature of  the  past.   While  the  emphasis is on  works  of  wide  interest which   have   never   been   translated into  English, or  translations  which have   long  been  out  of  print, there will  also  be  room  for  new  transla­ tions  of  familiar works  when   the  opportunity  occurs of  including one  of  exceptional quality.
The first  five volumes are:
DANTE: THE INFERNO, translated by WARWICK CHIPMAN.  This translation in terza rima probably comes  closer  than any  previous trans­ lation to capturing the  essence  of the  original.   $2.50.

ALFIERI:  MEMOIRS. The anonymous translation of   I8IO  complete­
ly revised  and  introduced by E. R.  VINCENT.      $3.50.

MACHIAVELLI:  THE  LITERARY WORKS. 'Mandragola' and
'Clizia', 'Belfagor', 'A  Dialogue on  Language', and  the  'Letters', trans­
lated and  introduced by J. R.  HALE.     $3.50.

GOLDONI:  THREE COMEDIES. 'La Locandiera', translated by CLIFFORD BAX; 'I  rusteghi', translated by I. M.   RAWSON;   'Il ventiglio', translated by ELEANOR and  HERBERT FARJEON, with  an  introduction  by
GABRIELE  BALDINI.     $3.50.

ITALIAN REGIONAL TALES OF THE  19TH CENTURY. Edited by ARCHIBALD COLQUHOUN  and  NEVILLE  ROGERS.     $3.50.


79


MJILCOLM LOWRY (1909-1957) Jl  BIBLIOGIUIPHY
Part II: Works about Malcolm  Lowry


Prepared by Earle  Birney  and Margerie Lowry



A: CRITICAL
i.  REVIEWS OF  Ultramarine (IBI) :
1.  Anon. Front  inside   jacket   of  IBI; 200  w.
2.  -. Life  & Letters  9:369-370, Sep   I933;
300  w.
3. -. Times  Literary   Supplement   I3   Jul
1933, p 481; 300  w.
4.  ARROWSMITH, J.  E.   S.  London   Mercury
28:363, Aug  1933; 200 w.
S.  BINDER, FRANK. Bookman 84:221,   juJ
1933; 300  w.
6.  PRITCHETT, v. s. New  Statesman  & Nation
s:8so, 24 Jun 1933; 300  w.
7.  VERSCHOYLE,  DEREK. Spectator    IS0:920,
23 Jun 1933; ISO w.
8.  w.,   s.  Manchester Guardian   Weekly 29: IS,  7 Jul  1933; ISO w.

11.  REVIEWS AND CRITIQUES OF  Under the
Volcano, NEW  YORK EDITION  (m2):
l. AIKEN, CONRAD.  Back   of  Jacket   (IA2  &
10); I2S  w.
2.  ALDRIDGE,  JOHN  w.  In  Search  of Heresy.
N.Y.,  McGraw-Hill, I9S6,   p.  198-I99.
3.  ANON. Augusta  Chronicle  9   Mar  I947;
2SO w.
4.  -. Book of the Month Club  News  (N.Y.) Mar 1947,  p  I9,  100  w.
S. -. Bulletin    for  Virginia   Kirkus  Book
Shop   (N.Y.)  14:6o8,  I Dec  1946; I8o  w.
6.  Madison  Times I6  Mar 1947; soo w.
7.  -. New   Orleans   Picayune   S  Oct    1947;
'100 w.
8.  -.Newsweek   29:98-99, 24   Mar  I947;
2SO w.
9. -.New Yorker  23:97,  22   Feb    I947;
100  w.
10.  -. New   York    World-Telegram  24   Feb
I947;3SOW.

8o
 11.  -. Retail   Bookseller    (N.Y.)  Feb    I947;
sow.
12.  -. Seattle   Times 19  Oct    I947;  100   w.
13.  -.Time 49:II4, 24   Feb    1947; so:IIO, IS Dec  I947; 700  w. & 30 w. resp.
14.  -.Tomorrow May  1948; 30 w.
1S.  -. Virginia Quarterly Review  23:  lxxviii, Summer I 947; 200  w.
16.  -. Winnipeg Tribune  30   Mar  I947; I2S   w.
17.  BARTLETT, PAUL. Dallas News 9 Mar 1947;
3SO w.
18.  BARZUN, JACQUES.  Harpers  Magazine May
1947; 200  w.
19.  BOND,  ALICE  DIXON.  Boston  Herald  26 Feb
1947; 6oo  w.
20.  BOUTELL, CLIP. Syndicated rev.  appearing under  title   "Turgid   Novel  of    Self­ Destruction" in  N.Y. Evening  Post, 19 Feb
1947; 3SO w.  Reprinted in  whole  or  part, with   or  without  byline, or  with   byline   or initials  of   local    reviewer,   in   numerous
newspapers across  Canada &  U.S.-e.g.  in Washington (D.C.)  Post,  attributed  to "M.M." & with  new  title.
21.  CARMODY,   JAY.  Washington (D.C.)   Star
23  Mar I947; soo w.
22.  CLAR.K, ELEANOR.  Nation   I 64: 33S-336,  22
Mar 1947; rsoo w.
23.  CONNOLLY, FRANCIS X. Best Sellers  (Scran­
ton,  Pa.)  rs Jun I947; soo w.
24.  DEACON,  w. A. Toronto Globe  & Mail  22
Mar 1947; 1300  w.
2S. DEAN, MARY   SCOTT. El  Paso  Herald-Post
8 Aug  I947; 6oo  w.
26.  DE  J [oNe],  D.  c. Providence   Journal   9
Mar I947; sso w.
27. FLINT, R. w.  Kenyon Review  9:474-477, Summer 1947; ISOO w.

BIBLIOGRAPHY



28.  FRIEDMAN,  MELVIN.  Stream  of  Conscious­ ness;    a  Study  in   Literary  Method.  New Haven, Yale  Univ. P.,  I955, p  262.
29.  GANNET, LEWIS. N.Y.  Herald-Tribune I9
Feb  I947; 700  w.
30.  GAROFFOLO, VINCENT.  New Mexico  Quart­
terly    I7:264-5,  Summer I947;  200   w.
31.  HARDWICK, ELIZ. Partisan Review  I 4: I 98-
200,  Mar-Apr I947; 450  w.
32.  HARROP, MONA. Cincinnati Times-Star 28
Apr  1947; ISOO w.
33.   HAYs, H.  R. N.Y. Times Book   Review   23
Feb  I947, p s; I700  w.
34.   HEILMAN,  ROBERT B. Sewanee Review 55:
483-92, Summer I947; 3000  w.
35.  -. The  Possessed   Artist  and   the   Ailing Soul.   [Retrospective rev.] Canadian  Liter­ ature  8:7-I6, Spring I96I; 3500  w.
36.   HIRSCHFELD,   MARY.  Cleveland   Plain
Dealer  23  Feb   I947; goo  w.
37.  HUMBOLDT, CHAS. "The novel  of  action,"
Mainstream  (N.Y.)   1:392-3,  Fall   I947·
38.  JACKSON, JOSEPH  HENRY. San   Francisco Chronicle 25  Feb   1947,  p  I4; 700  w. See also  28  Dec   1947,  supp. p  12.
39.   JELINEK, JAS. J. World in  Books  (Boston) Apr  1947; 300  w.
40.   JENKINS,   ARTHUR E.  Hartford  (Conn.)
Courant 2 Mar 1947; 350  w.
41.   JOHNSON, ELIZ. Commonweal 45:523-524,
7 Mar 1947; 350  w.
42.  KAZIN,  ALFRED. Back   of   jacket  (IA2  &
10) ;  125  w. Source is a  letter from  Kazin
to  Albert  Erskine, dated  6  Jan  1947,   in
UBCC.
43.   KERR, EILEEN. Montreal  Gazette  22  Mar
'947; 250  w.
44.  KIRK,  BETTY. St.   Louis   Post-Dispatch   7
Aug  1947; roo  w.
45.  L[IVESAY?], n[oROTHY?]. Vancouver  Pro­
vince   16  Aug   1947,   p  4; 6oo   w.
46.   L., E. A. Boston Globe  19 Feb  1947; 300  w.
47.  LIPSCOMB, WM. Chicago Sun  Book  Week
16 Mar 1947, p 3, 300  w.
48.  MAYBERRY,  GEO. New  Republic   116:  35-
36,  24  Feb  1947; 1000  w.
49.  MCCORMICK, JOHN. Catastrophe and  Ima­ gination I An   interpretation of  the  recent  English &  American novel. N.Y.   &   To­ ronto, Longmans, Green, I957,  pp  6s-66,
85-89.
50.   MCFEE, WM. N.Y. Sun 21  Feb  1947; 1000 w.   Reprinted,  in    part,  in    Youngstown (Ohio)  Vindicator 4 May  1947.
 51.   MCKOWN,   ROBIN.   E/    Monte  (Calif.)
Herald   27  Jun  1947; 200  w.
52.  MERLIN, MILTON. Los   Angeles Times  [ ?] Mar  1947; 75 w.
53.  MOIR, MYRA.  Vancouver  Province 19  Apr
I947; 250  w.
54.  NEWTON,  NORMAN. "Canadian   Writing and  the  Great Theme," Impression  (Win­ nipeg) 1:  esp.  77-78,  Spring  1952.
55.  NIMS, JOHN  FREDERICK. Chicago Tribune
23 Feb  1947; sao w.
56.  ORTS, ELEANOR. Dallas   Times-Herald   16
Mar  1947; soo w.
57.   PATTERSON,  HENRY W.  Vancouver  News­ Herald  9 Jul  1947; 400  w.
58.  PIDGEON, L.  v.   Santa   Barbara  News  30
Mar  1947; soo w.
59.  POWELL, DAWN. PM  23 Feb  1947,  p m-14;
1100  w.
60.  PRESCOTT, ORVILLE. N.Y.  Times 19  Feb
'947; Boo  w.
61.  -. Yale  Review   n.s.    36:767,   Summer
1947; 6oo  w.
62.  ROGERS,  JOSEPH  W. Library journal 72:
320,  15 Feb  1947; roo  w.
63.  ROGER,  w.  G. Associated  Press   review   for week   ending  19  Feb    '947;  350   w.   Ap­ peared   in   various  newspapers,  e.g.  Phila­  delphia Bulletin 16  Feb  1947.
64.  SANDWELL, B.   K.   Saturday  Night    (To­
ronto)  1 Nov  1947,  pIS; 1000  w.
65.  SCHLEGEL,  MARTHA. Philadelphia Inquirer
2  Mar    1947;  1 ooo   w.  Reprinted, under
new  title,  in  Cleveland News 8  Mar   '947·
66.  SCHORER, MARK. N.Y.  Herald-Tribune
Book  Review  23  Feb   1947,   p  2;  1000  w.
67.  -. "Essential Books  of  the   Year," Vogue III:153,  196-197,Jan 1948;   briefmen­ tion.
68.  SEAVER,  EDWIN. Book  of  the  Month  Club
News  Apr  1947,  p  rs; 450  w.
69.  SIMPSON, R. G. Northern  Review   (Mont­
real)    1:37-38, Aug-Sep 1947; 1000  w.
70.  SPENDER,  STEPHEN.  Back   of  jacket   (JA2
&  10); 20 w.
71.  SPILLER,  ROBERT E.   "American   Litera­ ture,"  Encyclopedia  Britannica   Book    of the  Year, 1948  [for  events in  1947], p 49;
30 w.
72.  TINDALL, WM. YORK. "Many-leveled   Fic­ tion:  Virginia Woolf   to  Ross  Lockridge," College  English 10:68-69,  Nov  1948.
73.  WARREN, ROBERT PENN.  Back   of   jacket
(IA2 &   ro);  so w.

81

BIBLIOGRAPHY



74.  WASHBURN, BEATRICE.  Miami   Herald    I3
Apr  1g47; 400  w.
75.  WEEKS,  EDWARD.  Atlantic    I 7g: 144,   146, May  1g47; 400  w.
76.  WEST, RAY  B., JR. Western  Review  12:58-
5g,  Autumn 1g47; 320  w.
77.  WOODBURN, JOHN.   Saturday    Review    of
Literature 3o:g-1o,  22  Feb  rg47; 1300  w.
78.  WOODCOCK, GEORGE. "Malcolm   Lowry's
'Under  the    Volcano',"  Modern    Fiction
Studies (Purdue  U.)  4:151-156, Summer
Ig48.
79.  -. "On the  Day  of  the  Dead,"  Northern
Review  6:15-21, Dec-Jan rg53-54.
80.   YOUNG,  VERNON  A. Arizona  Quarterly 3:
281-283, Autumn  rg47; goo  w.

m.  REVIEWS   OF   Under the   Volcano,
LONDON EDITION  (m3) :
1.  AGEE, JAMES. A  French tr.  of  an  English review    by   this   author  appears  in   Liens n.3o: 7,   r    Nov   r g4g; 700  w.  Source not indicated.
2.  ALLEN, WALTER. New  Statesman  & Nation
34:455-456,6 Dec  1g47; Boo w.
3.  ANON. Inside front  jacket   of  IB3; 200  w.
4.  -. Doncaster  Gazette  6 Nov  1g47; 100  w.
5. -. Johannesburg    (S.A.)   Sunday    Times
12 Oct rg47; 250  w.
6.  -.John O'London's Weekly  31  Oct  1g47;
100   w.
7.  -. London  Daily   Herald   7  Oct  1g47;
200  w.
8.  -. Our   Time  (London)  Oct  1g47;
100  w.
9.  -. Times Literary    Supplement   20   Sep rg47, p  477; 350  w.
10.   HALE,  LIONEL.  Observer   21   Sep    rg47;
250  w.
11.   JOHN,  K.  Illustrated   London   News  21 r:
356,  27 Sep   rg47; 550  w.
12.  MARRIOTT, CHAS. Manchester  Guardian  I2
Sep  1g47,  p 3; 300  w.
13.  -. Manchester Guardian  Weekly 18  Sep
1g47,  P 10; 350 W.
 LV.  FOREIGN LANGUAGES REVIEWS  AND CRI· TIQUES  OF  Under the  Volcano.
1.  ANON.  Critique  in   Danish   on   back    of jacket of IB4; 250  w.
2. -. Critique in  German on  flaps  of  jacket of IBg; 350  w.
3.  -. Rev.   of  IBII, Liens  Mar  1g5g,   p  2,
4-5 ; 10oo  w.
4.  -. Rev.   of   IB8.   Republique  du   Centre
rg5o[?]; 2oo  w.
5.  -. Rev.   of   IBB.   Roman   Jan-Feb rg5r, p  g5-g7; 700  w.
6.  -. Rev.   of   IBg.    Spektrum  des   Geistes
1g53,  P go-gr.
7.  -. Rev.  of  IBg.   Spiegel   (Hanover)  n.I:
2g-31, 6  Jun  1g52.
8. ASTRE, GEORGES-ALBERT. Rev.  of  IBB, Cri­
tique, Mar 1g51 ; 1000  w.
9.  BAUR,  JOSEPH.   Rev.    of   IBg.    Welt   und
Wort   (Munich) 6:441, 1g51; 350  w.
10.  BELLANGER, CLAUDE. Rev.  of  IBB, Parisien
Libere, 12 Sep  1g5o; 200  w.
11.  BLANCHOT,   MAURICE.  Rev.  of  IB8,  L'Ob­
servateur  n.13,  6 Jul  1g5o; roo  w.
12. BONNEFOI, GENEVIEVE. "Souvenir de Quauhnahuac."  Les    Lettres  Nouvelles ( lA 1 7), p  g4-108. Comparison of  the  real Cuernavaca with   Lowry's Quauhnahuac.
13.  CACOUALT, JEAN.   Rev.    of   IAJ7.  Ecole
Liberatrice   23  Sep   1g6o; 400   w.
14.  CARROY, JEAN-ROGER.   "Obscur  present, Je feu   ..."  Les  Lettres   Nouvelles  (IAr7) p 83-88.
15.  CASTELNAu, MARIE-PIERRE.  Rev.   of  IAI7
&   IBr2.   L'Information  11   Feb     rg6I;
Boo w.
16.  CHAVARDES,   MAURICE. Rev.   of   JB12.   Le
Monde  rB Jan  rg61, p 6; 1000  w.
17.  D'ASTORG,  BERTRAND.  Rev.  of  IB8.   Esprit
r8:7o2-707, Nov.  rg5o; 28oo  w.
18.  ELSTIR, PIERRE. Rev.  of IB8. (?)  (Brussels)
25:3, Sep  1g5o; 650  w. Information from a  newspaper clipping which  omits name of journal.
19.  ESTANG, LUC.  Rev.   of   IB12.  Figaro  Lit­
teraire  14Jan  rg6r,p  I4; 12oow.

14.  NEWBY,  P.   H.   Listener    30    Oct     Ig47,	20.  FOUCHET, MAX-POL. "Postface" to  IB7,  8,

p  788; 500  w.
 11,  12  (see  IB7).

15.  s.,  G. A. Birmingham  Post  r 1  Sep   lg47;	21.  -. "No se  puede." Les  Lettres  Nouvelles

100   w.
16.  SAVAGE,   D(EREK]   s. Spectator    10   Oct
 (IAr7) p 21-25. [Reprinted  Canadian Lit­
erature  8:25-28, Spring 1g6 r.]

Ig47, p 474,  476; 300  w. 	22.  FREDERIQUE, A.-J. Rev.  of IB7.  Liens  n.33:

17.  SCOTT-JAMES, MARIE. Time &  Tide 25
 r,12,  Feb  1g5o; I4oo w.

Oct 1g47,  pI 146; 6oo  w. 	23.  GADENNE,  PAUL. Rev. of  IBB,  Cahiers  du

82

BIBLIOGRAPHY



Sud   (Marseilles)  32 :s19-522, Feb   1951;
1500   w.
24.  HOEL, SIGURD. "Forord"  [Norweg.] to IBs,
4  unnumbered  pages.
25.  HUMBOURG,   PIERRE.    Rev.    of   IB8.   Le
Rouge  et  le  Noir,  22  Aug  1950; 1000  w.
26.  JANNOUD,  CLAUDE. Rev.  of  IA17 &  IB12.
Vigie  Marocaine (Casablanca)  11  Sep
196o; Boo  w.
27.  JUIN,    HUBERT.  Rev.    of   IA17  &   IB12.
Combat  15 Sep  1960.
28.  KOEPPEN, w.  "Ein  Schriftsteller-portrat."
Kultur (Stuttgart)  n.46: 13,  3 Jan  I955·
29. LENNARTZ, FRANZ. "Malcolm Lowry." Ausliindische   Dichter  u.  Schriftsteller  un­ serer Zeit. Stuttgart,  1955·
30.  "Lowry, Malcolm." Preface to  IB7,  8,  11,
12,  dated Sep   1948  &  ascribed to  Lowry, via   French  tr.   by  CLARISSE FRANCILLON. According  to   latter,  no   English  original exists; preface  written  by  her   from   notes of  conversations with   Lowry.
31.   MACKWORTH,  CECILY. Rev.   of  IB8.   Paru
n.62:40-41, Jul  1950; sso w.
32.  MATHIAs, PIERRE. Rev.  of  IB8.  Cahiers  du
Paris, Spring 1951; 1400  w.
33.  MYRER, ANTON.  "Le  monde au-dessous du volcan." IAI7,  p  59-66. Tr. from   English by  Clarisse Francillon. Rev.  of  LB1o   plus personal &  general comment.
34.   NADEAU, MAURICE. "Avant-propos" to IB11
&  12.
35.  -. "Lowry."  IA17, p  3-7.   Also  contains some  general Lowry comment.
36.  PARis,   ROBERT. Rev.    of   IA17  &   IB12.
L'Express 11 Aug  196o; 1100  w.
37.  REDA, JACQUEs.  Rev.    of   IA17  &   IB12.
Cahier   du   Sud    (Marseilles)  Dec    1960- Jan 1961,  p 476-477; 1000  w.
38.  RUBY, ERICH.  Rev.   of   IB9.   Siiddeutsche
Zeitung (Miinchen),  [ 1952  ?].
39.  SIGAux, GILBERT. Rev.  of  IB7.  Gazette  des
Lettres  Apr  1950; 700  w.
40.  -. Rev. of  IB12. La  Table   Ronde  n.31:
136-g,  Jul 1g6o; 1500  w.
41.  -. Rev. of  IA17  & IB1 1. Figaro Litteraire
27 Aug  196o; 18oo  w.
42.  SPRIEL, STEPHEN. "Le crytogramme Low­
ry."  IAI7, p 67-81.
43.  VENAISSIN,  GABRIEL. Rev. of  IB8.  Vie  In­
tellectuelle Apr  1951; 6oo  w.
44.  VILLELAUR,  ANNE. Rev.   of  IA17 &  IB12.
Les   Lettres  Franfaises  18   Jan   1961;
2300   w.
 V.    NOTICES OF CBC   ADAPTATION OF   Under the  Volcano  (IFI)  CONTAINING   COM­ MENT OF THE  NOVEL:
1.  CARSON,  SAUL. New  Republic 116:38,  12
May  1947; 150  w.
2.  CROSBY, JOHN.  N.Y.  Herald-Tribune,   13
May  1947; 200 w.
3.  ROSE,  [G.  v.   ?].  Variety  May   [?]   1947, p 52;  6oo  w.

Vl.    RADIO COMMENTARY, CANADIAN  BROAD­ CASTING CORPORATION(MSS  IN  UBCC):
1.  BIRNEY, EARLE. Rev.    of   IB2.    Pacific. & Mountain networks, 2 Mar   1949,  "Mainly about  Books,"  15 mins.
2.  -. Obituary. Transcanada  network, Sep
1957,  15  mins.
3.  CATHELIN,  JEAN. Lowry. French  network, Montreal, "Arts et  Lettres," 15  Dec  1 g6o,
15  mins.

Vll.  NOTES AND COMMENTS ON THE POETRY:
1.  BIRNEY,  EARLE. Malcolm Lowry's Poetry;
a  note.   Contact   (San Francisco) n.7:81-
82, Feb  1961; soo  w.
2.  -. The  Unknown Poetry  of   Malcolm Lowry.  British Columbia Library  Quarter­ ly 24:33-40, Apr  1961; 2000  w.
3.  -.Preface  [to a  group of  poems].  Cana­ dian   Literature, 8:17-19,   Spring   1961: goo   w.   (See   also   IC1g, notes,   &   IIB13, passim.)
4.  sMITH,  A.  J.  M.   [Headnote],  see   ICII, p  37 I.

Vlll.  GENERAL CRITICISM   (SEE  ALSO IIA,
iv 12, 14, 20, 25, 56, 33, 34, 35, 36,
40, 41, 43):
1.  AIKEN, CONRAD.  Malcolm Lowry;  a  note.
Canadian Literature 8:29-30,  Spring
1961; 400  W.
2.  ANON. The  Fate  of   the   Consul.  Times
Literary    Supplement  (Leader)    28   Oct
1g6o  p 6g3; 11oo  w.
3.  KIRK, DOWNIE. More than music: Glimpses of  Malcolm  Lowry.  Canadian   Literature
8:31-38, Spring 1961; 2500  w.
4. WOODCOCK, GEORGE. French Thoughts on Lowry. Canadian Literature 6:79-80, Autumn 1960.  Mainly a  rev.  of  IA17.
5.  -. Malcolm  Lowry  as   Novelist.  British Columbia Library Quarterly 24:25-32, Apr  1961; 3000  w.

BIBLIOGRAPHY



6.  -. Under  Seymour Mountain. Canadian
Literature 8: 3-6,  Spring I 961; 1000  w.


B: BIOGRAPHICAL
1.  AIKEN, CONRAD.   Ushant/An  Essay.  N.Y., Duell,  Sloan,  I952,  esp.  p  225-226,  229,
239-240, 249-250, 288,  291-297, 322-326,
338-340, 348-361. In  this  semi-autobiog­
raphy,  two   characters,  Hambo  &   Black­
stone,  bear   evident  relation  to   Malcolm
Lowry.
2.  ANON. Canadian  Who's Who  5:6o6,  I949-
1951; IOO w.
3.  -. [Note]  "Above the  Crowd." Harper's
Bazaar  I29: 104,  Jun 1947.  Portrait p  I05.
4.  -. [Note].  Les   Lettres   Nouvelles   n.9:
222,  Dec  I96o; 50  w.
5.  -. [Notes].  Liens   n.29: I,6,    Oct   1949;
500  w.;  n.33:12, Feb  I95o; 400  w.;  n.7I:
4-5,  Mar   I959; I500  w.
6.  -. The  adventuresome story  of  a  manu­ script.  N.Y.  Herald-Tribune 6  Feb   I947; IOO w.
7.  -. [News   item].  N.Y. Times Book   Re­
view 7 Dec  I947; 6o  w.
8. -. [Note  &   Portrait].  Quill   & Quire
(Toronto)  47:20, Nov   I949; 50  w.
9.  -. [Note &  cover  portrait]. Saturday  Re­
view   of   Literature   22   Feb    I947,  p   9;
400   w.
10.  -. [News item].  Vancouver Province  27
Feb   I96I; I 50  w.
11.  -. [News items].  Vancouver Sun   I  Aug I947    (with  photos of  Lowrys   and   beach home   at Dollarton); 9  Jul   I952; 27  Feb I96I; 500,  35,  200  w.
12.  BEATTIE, TODDY. [News-interview  with Margerie Lowry]. Vancouver Sun  I 7 Apr I947·
13.  BIRNEY, EARLE.  Glimpses into   the  Life  of Malcolm Lowry. Tamarack   Review  (Tor­ onto) n.I9, Spring I96I; 2500  w.
14. BREIT,  HARVEY. Obituary.   N.Y.   Times
Book  Review  14 Jul  I957, p 8; 750  w,
15.  -. Malcolm  Lowry. Paris  Review   n.23:
84-85, Spring I96o.
16.  BURNETT, WHIT. [Contributor Note]. Story
26:92, Sep  I934· (See  IA4).
17.  CERF, BENNETT. [Note]. "Trade Winds" column. Saturday   Review   of Literature 5
Apr   I947, p 6; 200 w.
 18.   [DEACON,  w.  A. ?]   [Note on  Lowry's  citi­ zenship].  Toronto Globe  & Mail  10  May  I947; 50  w.
19.  FRANCILLON, CLARISSE. Souvenirs sur  Mal­
colm  Lowry. Les  Lettres Nouvelles  5:588-
603,  Nov   I957·
20.  -. Malcolm, mon   ami.   Les  Lettres   N ou­
velles  (IAI7), p 8-19.
21.  KUNITZ, STANLEY J. ed.   Twentieth  Cen­ tury   Authors. N.Y.,   Wilson,  I955·  Supp. I, p  6oi-6o2.
22.  LOWRY,  MARGERIE.   [Letter to  the  editor],
Les   Lettres Nouvelles 8:200,   Oct    I96o;
300   w.
23.  MCCONNELL, WILLIAM. Recollections   of
Malcolm  Lowry.  Canadian Literature 6:
24-3I, Autumn  I96o.
24.  MONICELLI, GIORGIO. [Note] IAio, p  274•
25.  PURDY, ALFRED  w.  About Pablum,  Teach­ ers,   and    Malcolm   Lowry    [Poem].  The Crafte  so Longe  to  Lerne. Toronto, Ryer­ son,  I959, p  7-8.
26.  SCOTT, JACK. [Three  articles on  Lowry   & acquisition of UBCC]. Jack  Scott Column. Vancouver  Sun   Mar  I3,    I4,    I5,    I96I; Boo  w. each.
27.  SCOTT, JAMES. Sound a Sennet. [Item in] Book  Talk column. Toronto Evening Tele­ gram 26 Feb  1949; 200  w.
28.  WILD, ROLAND. Hollywood seeks Hit Novel.
Vancouver  News-Herald   I 5   Mar   I 948, p  2, 350  w.
29.  -. Dollarton  had   a  Wild   Genius. Point of  View   column.  Vancouver Province  30
Sep   I96o, p 4·

C: BIBLIOGRAPHICAL
1.  ANON. Vancouver Sun   27  Feb   I96I;  I25 w.  On   UBCC.
2.  -. UBC   Reports   (Vancouver)  Mar-Apr
I96I, p 3-4; 500  w. On  UBCC.
3.  BIRNEY,  EARLE It LOWRY, MARGERIE.  Mal­ colm   Lowry  (I909-I957)/ ... A  Bibliog­ raphy   . . . Part I I Works    by   Malcolm Lowry.  Canadian Literature   8:8I-88, Spring I 961.
4. CATHELIN, JEAN. Un   romancier  dechiffre les  inedits de  Malcolm Lowry. Arts  I 2-18
Apr   196I; 700   w.  Interview  with   Birney on  UBCC.
5.  NICHOLS, LEWIS.  New   York   Times  Book Review   9  Apr    1961; 250  w.  On   UBCC. (See  also  IIB10 &  26).
